A VINDICATION OF PAINE'S "AGE OF REASON."

Price 2 s. 6 d.

A VINDICATION OF THE AGE OF REASON, BY THOMAS PAIN: BEING An Answer to the
Strictures OF MR. GILBERT WAKEFIELD AND DR. PRIESTLEY, ON THIS CELEBRATED
PERFORMANCE.

BY THOMAS DUTTON.

AMICUS SOCRATES; AMICUS PLATO; SED MAGIS AMICA VERITAS.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR GRIFFITHS AND CO. NO. 169, STRAND.

1795.

A VINDICATION OF THE AGE OF REASON, etc.
MANY and virulent are the Replies which have appeared to Mr. Paine's Age of
Reason. It was not, indeed, to be expected that a work of this description,
which struck immediately at the very root of priestcraft, should remain long
unanswered. No sooner was the challenge given, than a "whole host of witnesses"
started up in defense of that system, from whence (as Demetrius in a similar
case observed to his colleagues at Ephesus) they derive their wealth. Men who
had long been in the habit of fattening in luxurious ease upon the spoils and
contributions of credulity, bigotry, and superstition, were justly
apprehensive, lest the investigation of truth should at length open the eyes of
the community at large, and discover in all its nakedness the fallacy of that
system, by virtue of which they domineered over the souls and consciences of
mankind, and which "brought no small gain unto the craftsmen."

Hence the Age of Reason no sooner made its appearance, than the toosin of
alarm was sounded throughout the whole Hierarchy. Religion was now declared to
be threatened with as great, and even greater dangers than those which were
supposed at a former period to menace the state, in consequence of the
publication of the Rights of Man. Every disgraceful epithet of abuse was
conferred with liberal hand upon the author: the titles of Deist, Atheist,
Infidel, the Apostle of Beelzebub, the Agent of Lucifer, with an infinite
variety of the like opprobrious terms, now succeeded to the appellations of
Jacobin, Leveller, Anarchist, Revolutionist, Rebel, etc. which had formerly
been given to Mr. Pain on the score of his politics. Not only the clergy of
the established church, but the leading men of every religious sect, had equal
interest at stake, and were equally concerned in providing an antidote against
the baneful influence of this deleterious poison: for the moment the way to God
was laid open to every man alike; the moment neither masters of the ceremonies,
nor court etiquette -- neither priests, nor religious forms -- were necessary
to introduce man to his Maker; that moment, they readily foresaw, must
inevitably put an end to their lucrative traffic, and totally annihilate the
vast revenues they received for acting as ambassadors of Christ, and instilling
into the minds of the people spiritual knowledge and heavenly comfort. Replies,
Answers, and Refutations of the Age of Reason, and its diabolical doctrines,
were therefore published in abundance; many of which, however, by their
futility, and total want of argument, have produced the very reverse of that
effect, which their respective writers hoped to bring about; inasmuch as their
incapacity to refute the doctrines they attacked, served at once to show their
own imbecility, and the impregnable strength of the fortress against which
their puny efforts were directed.

It cannot be expected, nor indeed will the limits I have prescribed to the
present work permit it, that I should enter into a minute, elaborate,
examination of every petty Reply to which the Age of Reason has given birth.
Their name may truly be denominated Legion, "for they are many;" and a serious
refutation of some of them is, perhaps, a moral impossibility. The wild,
incomprehensible ravings of a Huntington, and other mystical writers, are
beneath the dignity of Criticism; and to cope with such men with the weapons of
sound argument and plain reason, would be, to adopt the language of their
favorite Apostle, "fighting like one that beats the air."

For these reasons I shall confine my strictures chiefly to what I conceive the
two most respectable publications that have appeared in our language on this
interesting subject. These are -- 1. AN EXAMINATION OF THE AGE OF REASON, by
Gilbert Wakefield; and, 2. AN ANSWER TO MR. PAINE'S AGE OF REASON, by the
celebrated Dr. Priestley.

Both these gentlemen appear to agree nearly in their religious as well as in
their political sentiments; and yet the manner in which they conduct their
attack upon the Age of Reason furnishes a striking contrast. Mr. Wakefield but
too often indulges himself in a spirit of acrimony, which, if not downright
illiberality, borders, I am sorry to say, immediately upon it. He acknowledges,
in the very outset of his career, that the Work which he has undertaken to
examine (see page 2) is entitled to particular respect, not only from the
genius of the Author, but also from the singular circumstances of its
composition: but he soon loses sight of this respect, and descends to invective
and abuse See pages 45, 51, 60, 61, 66. But I shall have occasion to remark
more largely upon this topic in the course of the work.
, which are quite unworthy of the high literary reputation Mr. Wakefield
deservedly enjoys. The field of literary dispute, we apprehend, lies open to
every man; but let him wield none but lawful weapons, even truth and sound
argument, and not turn the sacred Academic Grove into the sanguine Field of
Mars!

Another objection I have to the general character of Mr. Wakefield's Work, is
the strong vein of egotism which pervades many parts of it. Mr. Wakefield,
contemplating himself as a delicate bird, delighting in strawberries and the
choicest fruits, (see page 66) may bridle his neck, and survey with fond
self-complacency his gay plumage -- may hold in sovereign contempt Thomas
Pain, and every other author, who, by differing from him in opinion, manifests
himself to be a crow, who prefers carrion and putrescence, and finds a feast in
a rotten carcass; but surely he might have modestly left his readers an
opportunity of drawing this flattering comparison in his favor.

"Ad populum phaleras" -- to imitate Mr. Wakefield's constant practice of
introducing quotations from Latin and Greek authors on the most trifling
occasions In justification of this remark, the reader is referred to the
following pages of Mr. Wakefield's work, where he will find quotations heaped
upon quotations, with all the pomposity and affectation of a schoolboy. See
pages 2, 10, 13, 21, 22, 34, 42, 50, 51, 54, 59, 64, 66. In many of these
passages Greek and Latin authorities are brought forward in support of the most
palpable, the most plain, trite, and (if I may be allowed the expression) the
most every-day observations imaginable. I am far from objecting to classical
quotations, introduced with judgment and with a sparing hand; but, when dealt
out with extravagant profusion, when they stare you in the face at every turn,
where neither the subject nor the pointedness of the allusion, justify their
insertion, they certainly betray a pedantic disposition, unworthy any gentleman
of established character in the republic of letters. And this remark I make the
rather, as the general outcry raised against Mr. Pain, on the score of his
being unversed in what are generally styled the learned languages, seems to
have led several of his opponents into this error; and I am convinced, that
many an author has thereby acquired credit with uninformed minds, for a greater
portion of learning than he was justly entitled to.
; a practice which, though it may serve to impress the common class of readers
with a stupendous idea of the Author's learning, has, in the eyes of men of
sense, an air of pedantry, that more than any thing else has contributed to
bring the name of scholar into disrepute.

Quite the reverse is Dr. Priestley's mode of proceeding in this literary
warfare. He conducts himself with becoming dignity; argues in a fair, candid,
and manly manner; never descends to personalities, but confines himself
strictly to the subject of dispute, which he treats with great ingenuity, and
at the same time with a plainness, which forms, as I before observed, a
striking contrast to the ostentatious display of learning exhibited by Mr.
Wakefield.

One observation more I must beg leave to premise before I enter upon my
intended Vindication of the Age of Reason in the aggregate; to wit, that I do
not set out (and I hope I shall not fall into this error in the course of my
disquisitions) with a predetermination to defend my author at all events,
whether right or wrong; or to vindicate indiscriminately every position laid
down by Mr. Pain, because I have once been induced to take up the cudgels in
his defense; or as though I deemed every assertion advanced by Mr. Pain
infallible. On the contrary, I propose to treat the subject with due candor;
and, much as I admire the general purport of the work under consideration,
shall readily subscribe to the justice and validity of any censure bestowed
upon particular passages, (and such passages I am well aware there are,) where
hardy assertion and specious sophistry supply the place of sound argument and
knowledge. It is not the personal cause of Mr. Pain, but the cause of what I
conceive to be the Truth, that I wish to espouse: from the free discussion and
investigation of which no consideration upon earth ought to deter a rational
being. To investigate, and boldly avow, the Truth, as far as the measure of
reason wherewith we are endowed by the all-wise Author of Nature enables us to
ascertain it, is a duty which man owes both to himself, and to society at
large; and whoever shrinks back from the task, whoever neglects to discharge
this part of his moral obligations, is either a traitor or a coward.

I proceed now to an examination of the work I have undertaken to defend.

After briefly stating the reason which induced him to anticipate the time he
had originally proposed to himself for the publication of his religious
sentiments, Mr. Pain proceeds to a summary recapitulation, or confession of
his creed. This may be said to consist of two parts -- the one positive; the
other negative. To the former part the staunchest advocate of Christianity, I
apprehend, cannot have the smallest objection to make: it accords with the
^enets of every religious denomination in the ^^^sent Christian world that has
come within my knowledge: it professes a belief in one God; a hope of happiness
beyond this life; inculcates the natural equality of man, which, in the sense
^^re implied, the proudest upstart of aristocra^^ will not, I flatter myself,
take upon him to deny; and concludes with a definition of religious duties,
which may be considered as a concise, but energetic comment upon the golden
rule, Do unto others as ye would that others should do unto you.

With the second or negative part, the case is widely different. Here Mr. Pain
attacks, with one bold decisive blow, the whole order of Priesthood, of every
religious system, from the times of Moses to the present day; and not only the
Priesthood, but the followers and disciples of every religion and sect, that
does, or ever did exist in the whole world. His words are these:

I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish church, by the Roman
church, by the Greek church, by the Turkish church, by the Protestant church,
nor by any other church that I know of -- My own mind is my own church.

All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian, or Turkish,
appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to terrify and enslave
mankind, and monopolize power and profit.

This may be considered as a general challenge to the zealous sticklers of
every church establishment. From such, therefore, we must not look for a ready
assent to this part of our Author's creed. The doctrines of faith, whatever the
religion may be in which we are educated, whether the Jewish, Christian,
Turkish, or Pagan systems, forming, generally speaking, the first lesson
instilled into the infant mind, at a time when the reasoning faculties may be
almost said to lie dormant, naturally make a deep impression; and, being
familiarised to us by constant repetition, we adopt them without examination;
we receive them upon trust; subscribe to them as a matter of course; and if,
afterward, as we advance in years, and our reason attains to its proper
growth, we are led to weigh, to prove, and examine, the religion we profess,
which, by the bye, is not done, upon a very moderate calculation, by one in ten
thousand, we have unfortunately, exclusive of the task, the arduous task, of
separating Truth from Error, a powerful host of prejudices and assumptions to
combat with. For my own part, I am free to confess, that this blind
acquiescence in the opinions of others, this easy indifference with which
mankind in general sit down contented with the religion of their ancestors,
whether Jews, Christians, Turks, or Pagans, furnishes, in my mind, no mean
argument against the truth of any of them; or, in other words, against their
divine origin. A religion, professing to be derived immediately from the
Almighty, and written by divine inspiration, ought to flash conviction in the
face of every one who hears or reads it. But this we do not find to be the case
with any known religion in the world. Add to this, that I do not see, that
peace, morals, social order, and the rights of humanity, are better respected
and maintained under governments professing the Christian faith, than where the
blindest Idolatry prevails. Nay, I am bold to assert, that the remote and Pagan
empire of Japan, might, in this respect, furnish a pattern for the most
enlightened and religious state (if a religious state there be) in Christendom
See some excellent remarks upon this subject, in the fourth Volume of the
Chevalier Thunberg's Travels, published this year by Messrs. Rivingtons, of St.
Paul's Churchyard.
. But this is a topic which I propose to discuss more fully when I come to
treat of the intimate connection between religion and morals; on which occasion
I shall not omit to say a few words on the stale, but just maxim, as Mr.
Wakefield very properly terms it, and which he accuses Mr. Pain of having most
egregiously violated -- ab abusu ad usum non valet consequentia.

Meanwhile, I cannot but remark upon the ready acquiescence with which Mr.
Wakefield subscribes to every part of our Author's creed, that makes in favor,
and I might emphatically add, as far too as it makes in favor, of his own
political creed.

"All national institutions of churches," writes Mr. Pain, -- whether Jewish,
Christian, or Turkish, appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to
terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit.

How eagerly does Mr. Wakefield, who probably, in consequence of his
unfortunate schism from the doctrines of the established Church of England,
sees no prospect of obtaining the mitre, subscribe his Yea and Amen, to this
just remark concisely and pregnantly expressed! He immediately becomes more
violent in his reprobation than our Author himself; and launches out into a
general invective against national churches, without the smallest
discrimination or exception.

National Churches (see page 10) are that hay and stubble, which might be
removed without any difficulty or even danger of confusion (this ipse dixit
assertion of Mr. Wakefield, by the bye, will, I fear, by the venerable bench of
bishops be pronounced equally hardy with any with which he taxes Mr. Pain See
page 37 of Mr. Wakefield's Work.
) from the fabric of religion by the gentle hand of Reformation, but which the
infatuation of ecclesiastics will leave to be destroyed by fire. National
Churches are that impure incrustation, which has envelloped, by gradual
concretion, the diamond of Christianity; nor can, I fear, for the reason just
now stated, the genuine luster be recovered, but by such violent effort of
restitution, as the separation of substances, so long and closely connected,
must inevitably require.

The happy simile of hay and stubble in this beautiful conglomeration of
metaphors we find is taken from the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians,
where the apostle speaks of a building to be raised; and from his boast of
having himself wrought, as a wise master builder, upon the foundation, it
should seem that the erection of this building was a work of use and necessity.
Now, if the words of the apostle have any reference at all to national
establishments, we apprehend, that the hay and stubble must apply to corrupt
establishments that will not stand the test; such, for instance, as the Church
of Rome, in the eyes of the Protestant clergy, and which therefore are
threatened with destruction by fire; whilst the gold, the silver, and the
precious stones, (as for the wood, I do not insist upon that, but will give it
to Mr. Wakefield, to share the fate of his hay and stubble) by a parallel chain
of reasoning may be supposed to designate and point out a pure, uncorrupted
establishment, cleared from the errors and superstitions of the Church of Rome,
such as our divines pronounce the present national Church of England to be. And
as by the fire, which, the apostle tells us, is doomed to try every man's work,
the awful phenomenon and awards of the day of judgment are generally understood
to be meant, in which day the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth
also, and the works that are therein, (of course the hay and the stubble) shall
be burnt up 2 Pet. iii. v. 10.
, we are very sorry to think that Mr. Wakefield has no nearer prospect of
getting rid of this self-same worthless hay and stubble, and substituting his
gold and silver and precious stones in their stead, than at the very moment
when the end of all things shall take place.

Were I as ready to lay hold of every opportunity of finding fault with Mr.
Wakefield's expressions, as this gentleman appears to be in the case of Mr.
Pain, I might possibly discover a flaw in his Diamond of Christianity, which,
to quote his own words, the impure incrustation of National Churches has, by
gradual concretion, enveloped to that degree, that the genuine luster cannot
(he fears) be recovered, but by such violent effort of restitution, as the
separation of substances, so long and closely connected, must inevitably
require.

Now, if we compare the religion founded by Christ to a Diamond (and I take it
for granted that every sincere believer and professor of it must regard it in
this light as a jewel of the first water, as the pearl of great price, more
precious than the golden wedge of Ophir) it seems no more than fair to
conclude, that this Diamond was not put into our hands by the Almighty in its
rough incrusted state, for man to cut and hack at pleasure (such an idea would
indeed fall little short of blasphemy), but rather in a state of the utmost
purity, polished to the highest degree of perfection, and, like the God from
whom it professes to originate, without spot or blemish. A diamond in this
state, once separated from its incrustation, and properly polished, might, we
apprehend, venture to defy all the impurities in nature, and could, perhaps,
never be incrusted over again, either by sudden or gradual concretion; inasmuch
as the hardness of its substance, added to the finished polish of its
superficies, would resist the impression of every foreign body that had a
tendency to sully and debase it. And therefore, as Mr. Wakefield's Diamond of
Christianity has, according to his own confession, lost its purity and polish
by the impure incrustation of National Churches, we cannot class it among the
genuine productions of Golconda's mine, but rather conceive it to be a kind of
factitious or mock diamond; a kind of composition-work, like the faux
brillants, or Temple Diamonds, which crafty and interested jewellers so well
know how to palm upon their credulous customers for the genuine produce of
Golconda or Peru.

Again, let me put the question to Mr. Wakefield, how he can, consistently with
this general and furious invective against all national establishments, speak
so highly of the Jewish Dispensation See page 16, where Mr. Wakefield says:
Though we concede to Mr. Pain, that the way to God was open to every man
alike, we affirm of the Jewish and Christian dispensations, that they only were
this way to any man desirous of entertaining rational notions of God and human
duty.
, which, we apprehend, was to all intents and purposes a national church in the
strictest sense of the word; -- a church dressed out with far more " trumpery
Let any unprejudiced reader peruse the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy; let him peruse the description of the Jewish Festivals -- the
feast of trumpets; the feast of tabernacles; the feast of the new moon; the
feast of passover; the feast of the Sabbatical year; the feast of jubilee; the
feast of atonement, etc. etc. etc. with all their concomitant pomp and
pageantry: let him read the description of the ark of covenant; the altar of
incense; the table of shewbread; the golden candlestick; the dresses of the
priests; the ceremonies and formalities to be observed in the various
offerings, rites, etc. ordained by the Levitical law; together with the severe
penalties annexed to neglect or disobedience: -- and if, after a candid perusal
of all this, he does not find as much trumpery in the Jewish worship, as in
that of the established church of England, or of Rome, or of the Greek church,
or of any other church I know of, I will acknowledge myself guilty of the most
unpardonable error and injustice, in the character I have just given of the
Jewish dispensation. --
," to make use of Mr. Wakefield's own expression in allusion to the church of
England; and a hundred times more oppressive and despotic, than any national
Church we know of in the Christian world? If Mr. Wakefield thinks it a sore and
grievous hardship, that a difference in certain points of doctrine, termed
Articles of Faith, from the tenets of the established church of England, should
debar a man from the privileges of preaching in the pale of that particular
church; must it not appear much more arbitrary and unjust, that a man,
assenting in every respect to the religious tenets of the Church, should be
incapacitated from exercising the sacred functions of the priesthood, on no
other score than some personal deformity, or casual defect, under which he
unhappily labors: such, for instance, as a Leviticus xxi. 18 -- 22.
flat nose; an unfortunate lameness in the hands or feet Admitting that the
Gout, under the Mosaic dispensation, would have furnished sufficient ground for
disqualifying a man from the discharge of the priestly function; and supposing
these inhibitions to be in force under the present system of things; it is
lamentable to think what an irreparable loss the poor sheep of Christ's flock
must inevitably sustain, through the disqualification of such numbers of their
most valuable and eminent pastors, whose faithful care and tending the wretched
sheep would of course be deprived of, by the persevering spite of a disorder
which seems to take a kind of cruel pleasure in attacking the votaries of
luxury and sloth; insomuch, that it is now generally considered as the certain
appendage of indolence and high living; and to which, therefore, the higher
orders of the clergy, that is to say, the chief shepherds and pastors of the
flock, the bishops, deans, etc. are, in consequence of their large revenues,
the most exposed!
; a crooked or hump back; a diminutive stature; a squint, or cast in the eye;
an impure habit of the blood; or a scrophulous eruption; or, lastly, a certain
misfortune to which the priests of the present day are, perhaps, ten times more
exposed, in consequence of the prevalence of a certain fashionable disorder,
than they seem to have been in the times of Moses? Must not, I say, misfortunes
and calamities like these furnish, in the eye of every sensible and
dispassionate enquirer, a far weaker argument for excluding a man from the
sacred function, than an avowed schism from the religious tenets of the church,
whose minister he desires to be? Unless, indeed, as probably may be the case,
Mr. Wakefield has an eye to the loaves and fishes, and provided he is indulged
the privilege of eating of the shewbread Levit. xxi. 22.
, and partaking of the Holy and Most Holy, will readily consent to turn the
sacred office into a sinecure!

But lest the above remarks, which have only in view to point out the
inconsistency of Mr. Wakefield's arguments, and the readiness with which he
attempts to throw the blame of all the corruptions, which, according to his own
confession, have crept into religion, upon the shoulders of the established
church, instead of tracing them back to their true source, the very principles
of Christianity itself, as we shall in the sequel endeavor to show; lest, I
say, the above remarks should lead to misconception, and render me suspected of
being the secret or avowed advocate of any one particular church-establishment
whatever; I take this opportunity of testifying my full and hearty execration
of them all, in the concluding words of Mr. Paine's creed:

All national institutions of churches appear to me no other than human
inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and
profit.

In proof of which assertion, if a self-evident axiom like this, plain as the
sun in its meridian splendor, can require any proof, I need only refer my
reader to the uniform practice of priests through all ages and in all
countries; from the sons of Eli, who could not keep their three-pronged
flesh-books out of the seething-pot, while the meat was boiling, to the good
shepherds of the present day, who, if the unfortunate sheep are already so
closely shorn, that they cannot yield wool sufficient to discharge the fees of
office, make no scruple (for their mouth is always open, and their heart
enlarged 2 Cor. vi. 11.
) of excommunicating them at once from the pale of the church, and the benefits
of salvation! I need only refer them to the page of history for the vast
estates taken from the church under our pious Defender of the Faith, Henry
VIII. of England; to the more recent events of the French Revolution, and the
immense treasures which the church has been made to refund in a neighboring
nation; I need only refer them, lastly, to the eagerness with which people of
all descriptions strive to get into sacred orders, an eagerness which in some
countries, and especially in Spain, is carried to such an incredible excess,
that the number of pastors and shepherds seems to be in a fair way of rising to
par with the sheep of the flock over whom they are, by divine grace, and the
express calling of God, appointed to preside.

Leaving, however, the clergy for the present at least, in the full exercise
and enjoyment of their sacerdotal privileges, that we may not "muzzle the mouth
of the ox that treads out the corn:" 1 Cor. ix. 9. and sqq.
(and certainly, as long as we contemplate ourselves as Christ's Vineyard, it
is no more than just, that these Husbandmen should " have power to eat and to
drink," for " pruning and lopping us: or, viewing ourselves in the light of
God's husbandry (1. Cor. iii. 9.) we must allow the labourer that ploweth and
thresheth us in hope (1. Cor. ix. 10) to be worthy of his hire) -- leaving, I
say, the "Clergy, and those that wait at the altar, to be partakers of the
altar; to reap of our carnal things, in return for the spiritual things which
they have sown unto us; and to fatten on the things of the temple, I recur to
the text of my author.

Every national Church or religion has established itself by pretending some
special mission from God, communicated to certain individuals. The Jews have
their Moses; the Christians their Jesus Christ, their Apostles, and Saints; and
the Turks their Mahomet; as if the way to God was not open to every man alike.

It is at this passage, that Mr. Wakefield may be said to commence his attack
upon our author. Hitherto we have beheld him subscribing with the readiest
acquiescence to every position advanced by Mr. Pain: but he now takes up the
cudgels with a vengeance, and boldly declares Mr. Paine's statement to be not
only vague and frivolous, but nonsensical and erroneous in the extreme.

In support of this assertion, Mr. Wakefield presents us with a species of
argument, which I have not the smallest hesitation to pronounce infinitely more
vague, and frivolous, and erroneous, than one half of the statements in Mr.
Paine's book, which his antagonist, without any show of reason, declares to be
not only the essence but the very quintessence of all weakness and absurdity.

The system of Jesus Christ, (Mr. Wakefield writes, page 14) proceeds upon the
very supposition, here instituted as in direct contradiction to it, that the
way to God is open to every man alike; which might be proved, as every body
knows, by many passages of most explicit purport in the Christian scriptures.

Nothing can well be more vague and inconclusive than this mode of reasoning.
Mr. Pain says, and says truly, (for all historical evidence is decidedly on
his side) that every national religion has established itself by pretending
some special mission from God, communicated to certain individuals; and this
palpable assertion Mr. Pain supports by instancing the examples of the
founders of the Jewish, Christian and Turkish religions, who certainly did, for
we have their own words for it, (if any faith may be placed in the written
biographies of these heavenly messengers) lay claim to divine delegation.
Surely Mr. Wakefield cannot mean to call facts of such historical notoriety in
question, when he pronounces our author's statement to be "frivolous,
nosensical, and erroneous?" Hi^ censure, therefore, if it have any weight at
all, must apply to the inference our author draws from this statement, that the
very act of granting a divine mission to any favored individual, or admitting
such a mission to be granted, is in itself a plain, though tacit
acknowledgment, that the way to God is not open to every man alike," but that
we stand in need of mediators, plenipotentiaries, advocates, and ambassadors,
to transact our business, and arrange preliminaries for us; and that God is
really a consuming fire, (Deuteronomy. iv. 24. Heb. xii. 29.) dwelling in the light,
which no man can approach unto, (1 Timothy vi. 16,) but only through the medium
"And all the people saw the thunderings and the lightnings, and the noise of
the trumpet and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed,
and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will
hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die." Exodus xx. 18, 19. So
likewise in Deuteronomy. v. 25. et sqq. The Israelites are represented addressing
themselves to Moses to act as their agent and plenipotentiary with God: "Now,
therefore, why should we die? for this great fire will consume us. If we hear
the voice of the Lord our God any more, then shall we die. Go thou near, and
hear all that the Lord our God shall say; and speak thou unto us all that the
Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it."
of these privileged agents or proxies, who are empowered to treat and act for
us on all occasions by procuration.

To the divine mission of Moses and Jesus Christ Mr. Wakefield himself bears
testimony in the most unequivocal terms:

Our inference from these indubitable positions (see page 17) is clearly some
degree of supernatural communication, which we style Revelation, to the
founders of Judaism and Christianity, Moses and Jesus.

Moses, we are assured (and it is allowed by the Jews themselves) was but a
man, as we are, however highly favored and distinguished by the Almighty,
according to scriptural account. So was Jesus Christ likewise, according to Mr.
Wakefield's creed That Creed of Christian churches (writes Mr. Wakefield, page
5,) which acknowledges Jesus Christ to be God, (one, by his own confession,
like ourselves, and subject to all the constitutional weaknesses of mortality,
to pain and death) that creed, I say, is a fundamental violation of all
theology, a most gross and hideous doctrine, alike unknown to the Heathens
(here Mr. Wakefield is guilty of a most gross and palpable error, as any one in
the least degree conversant with the Heathen mythology will immediately
perceive) and the Jews, and contemplated with abhorrence by the followers of
Moses from its first propagation to this very day; a doctrine inconsistent with
the plainest repeated declarations of Christ himself and his apostles; a
doctrine which no human testimony whatever could render credible for a moment,
because a contradiction to divine; a doctrine which must ever shock and disgust
unprejudiced and disinterested examination; and which therefore will happily
prove a millstone on the neck of all political establishments of Christianity,
and whelm them in perdition. And this denial of the divinity of Christ Mr.
Wakefield further enforces by one of the most pointed and elegant quotations we
ever remember to have seen brought forward; the insertion of which bears
unquestionable evidence to the delicacy of Mr. Wakefield's taste; though our
"delicate bird" seems in the present instance, it must be owned, to have lost
sight of his "strawberries and choicest fruits," and to be roving near the sink
of rottenness and putrescence!
; and yet he boldly charges Mr. Pain with error and absurdity, and asserts
that the Christian system presupposes that the way to God is open to every man
alike; whereas the very reverse may easily be proved by many passages of most
explicit purport in the Christian scriptures, and by the express declarations
of Christ himself. If the way to God be actually, and of a truth, open to every
man alike, (which it no doubt is, though priests would fain persuade us to the
contrary) why does Christ (who himself, according to Mr. Wakefield's doctrine
was but a mere man) arrogate to himself the exclusive right and power of
granting passports to mankind to walk in this way? No man comes unto the
Father but by me. (John xiv. 6.) Why does he, in the same chapter and verse,
declare himself to be this way? Why does he roundly assert, that man can have
no knowledge of the Deity, but through his revelation? No man knows the
Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. (Matt. xi.
27.) Wherefore are we directed by his apostles, to look up to Christ as the
mediator of the new covenant, (Heb. xii. 24.) through whose blood a new and
living way has been opened unto us into the holiest of all? (Heb. x. 19, 20.)
Through whom we have access unto the Father. (Ephesians. ii. 18, and iii. 12. Romans v.
2.) who is our "advocate" with God, (1 John, ii. 1.) and who ever lives to
make intercession for us? (Heb. vii. 25.) To what purpose can all these
admonitions, all these exhortations tend, if the system of Jesus Christ
proceeds (as Mr. Wakefield assures us it positively does proceed) upon the
supposition that the way to God is open to every man alike? Why are we then
directed to look up to Christ, or to any other man, as our only hope of eternal
life and happiness, with the denouncement of a terrible curse, an everlasting
Anathema Maranatha against us if we do not believe in this author and finisher
of our faith, as Christ is emphatically styled? (Heb. xii. 2.) Can this, let me
put the question to every candid and impartial enquirer, can this be reconciled
with Mr. Wakefield's hardy assertion, that the way to God, by the Christian
system, is thrown open to every man alike? Certainly it cannot; and therefore
the charge of error, inconsistency, and absurdity recoils, in the present
instance, from Mr. Pain upon his antagonist.

Mr. Wakefield next attacks our author's definition of the word Revelation, in
its scriptural or religious sense; but his attack is so impotent, and, at the
same time, so ill-conducted, that I cannot possibly characterize it more aptly,
than by asking, in Mr. Wakefield's own words, Can any thing in reality be more
feeble and inefficient, than this objection? It would amply justify the
insertion of the Latin quotation, which Mr. Wakefield has so successfully
introduced on this occasion, were I ambitious of enriching my page with
classical allusions. Mr. Pain observes:

As it is necessary to affix right ideas to words, I will, before I proceed
further into the subject, offer some observations on the word Revelation.
Revelation, when applied to religion, (and it is in this sense solely that Mr.
Pain considers it; and therefore Mr. Wakefield's attempt at sarcasm, in his
case of the Village Dame and her horn-book (see page 51), is totally
irrevalent, and at best but a conceited quibble) "means something communicated
immediately from God to man."

"No one will deny or dispute" (can any thing be more candid than this
concession?) the power of the Almighty to make such a communication, if he
pleases. But, admiting, for the sake of a case, that something has been
revealed to a certain person, and not revealed to any other person, it is
revelation to that person only. When he tells it to a second person, a second
to a third, a third to a fourth, and so on, it ceases to be revelation to all
those persons. It is revelation to the first person only, and hearsay to every
other, and consequently they are not obliged to believe it.

"This statement also," exclaims Mr. Wakefield, with all the self-sufficiency
of a Pedagogue, -- is inaccurate, fallacious, and inconclusive. That I deny;
and till Mr. Wakefield can produce me some more satisfactory proof than mere
assertion, I shall not abide by his ipse dixit. Indeed, in all what Mr.
Wakefield has advanced upon this subject, I cannot trace so much as the shadow
of an argument. He jumbles together a few crude, superficial observations on
the mission of Moses, and his credentials, which, however, unhappily make
directly against his own cause. The miracles said to have been wrought by Moses
in proof of his mission, supposing them to be authentic, (a circumstance, by
the bye, which Mr. Wakefield does not take upon himself to warrant Mr.
Wakefield's language on this occasion is so very extraordinary, that I cannot
refrain from quoting it: Whether such display of supernatural agency (he writes
page 19) were in reality made in the case before us by Moses to the Israelites,
is not now the question. I am only attempting to exhibit the proposition in its
proper form, and stating the fact as it exists, whether authentically or
otherwise, in the Mosaic history.
) cannot be looked upon as competent and satisfactory evidence; inasmuch, as
many of them were performed with equal success by the Egyptian Sorcerers of
Pharaoh's court: whence it should seem, that if any inference is to be drawn
from this display of supernatural agency, it amounts to no more than this, that
Moses, who is expressly said to have been learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, This quotation I purposely introduce, notwithstanding the "palpable
untruth" implied in it, according to Mr. Wakefield's assertion. I shall,
however, decline vindicating it in the present instance, as I reserve my
remarks upon this subject, till I come to Mr. Paine's Strictures on the Mosaic
account of the Creation.
(Acts vii. 22) had excelled his masters, and was become a greater adept in
magic than themselves. As to those mischievous miracles which Moses was
empowered to perform, and which the magicians of Pharaoh's court in vain
essayed to imitate; such, for instance, as the plague of lice; the murrain of
beasts; the sore and grievous plague of blains and blisters; the plague of
hail; of locusts; of palpable darkness; but more particularly the destruction
of all the firstborn in Egypt, both of man and beast; I reserve my remarks
upon this plaguey subject to a future opportunity; only observing in this place,
that it appears very extraordinary, that Moses should be commissioned to
preface his first introduction to Pharaoh with a palpable falsehood. The Lord
God of the Hebrews has met with us; and now let us go, we beseech thee, three
days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord, our God;
(Exodus iii. 18) when it is evident from the 8th verse of the same chapter, I am
come down to deliver my people out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring
them up out of that land unto a good land flowing with milk and honey; unto the
place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites; (which places were certainly
more than "three day's journey" distant from the abode of the Israelites); when
it is evident, I say, that it was never intended they should stop in the
wilderness; much less return back to the land of Goshen. Hence it should seem,
that falsehood and prevarication are to be reckoned among the credentials of
the mission of Moses! But to proceed.

"It is a contradiction in terms and ideas," (continues Mr. Pain) to call any
thing a revelation, that comes to us at second hand, either verbally or in
writing. Revelation is necessarily limited to the first communication. After
this, it is only an account of something which that person says was a
revelation made to him: and though he may find himself obliged to believe it,
it cannot be incumbent on me to believe it in the same manner; for it was no
revelation made to me; and I have only his word for it that it was made to him.

These, together with Mr. Paine's former remarks on the subject of Revelation,
in the religious acceptance of the word, appear to me to contain such a clear,
just, and masterly definition of the term, that, had I not positive evidence to
the contrary before my eyes, I should hardly believe it possible for any man to
dissent from him. And yet we find, that this, as little as other passages of
Mr. Paine's book, can escape censure, and even misrepresentation.

Dr. Priestly, after pronouncing his arguments to be truly curious, and as he
believes quite original, (see page 44.) gives us a very unfair and partial
statement of the case.

On this principle, it is not incumbent on Mr. Pain to believe what any person
may tell him, and he may give credit to nothing but what he sees himself; in
which case his faith will be reduced to a very small compass indeed. His
pretense to a contradiction in terms is a mere quibble. We do not say, that the
revelation made immediately to Moses or to Christ is strictly speaking a
revelation to us; but if we see sufficient reason to believe that the
revelation was made to them, are, properly speaking, believers in revelation;
and if the revelation, whatever it be, relate to the whole human race, as well
as to the person to whom it was immediately made, all mankind, Mr. Pain
himself included, will find themselves under an equal obligation to respect it.

In this exemplification the Doctor allows himself a greater latitude of
construction than we conceive ourselves bound to concede to him. Had Mr. Pain,
in stating his own individual rejection of revelation, attached any degree of
blame to those of an opposite opinion, he would have been guilty of
uncharitableness and injustice, by usurping that control over the opinion of
others, which he very properly refuses to submit to himself. But this is far
from being the case; Mr. Pain does not betray the remotest disposition or
desire to aim at such despotic sway over the souls and consciences of men I do
not mean (writes our author, page 2) to condemn those who believe otherwise.
They have the same right to their belief, as I have to mine.
. He contents himself with assigning his reasons for not believing certain
recorded facts and tenets, without insinuating the slightest degree of censure
against those who, viewing things in a different light, deem themselves bound
to place implicit faith and confidence therein. He very modestly says: I did
not see the angel, and therefore I have a right not to believe his appearance.
The revelation was not made to me, and therefore it cannot be incumbent upon me
to believe it. And, speaking of mankind in general, he does not say, they act
wrong in believing it, but merely, they are not obliged to believe it.

As the liberty of thought is not, and indeed, cannot be, obnoxious to that
restraint which arbitrary power frequently imposes upon our words and actions,
every man, we apprehend, has a right to the most unlimited freedom of opinion
in his own individual capacity. It is, indeed, his birthright, and perhaps of
all his just and numerous rights, the only one which the lawless hand of
despotism cannot invade. On this principle, therefore, instead of deeming Dr.
Priestley's statement of the case any argument against the justice of Mr.
Paine's remarks, we are clearly of opinion, that it is not incumbent on Mr.
Pain, nor upon any other man, to believe what any person may tell him, if he
has, or conceives himself to have, good and grounded reason for withholding his
faith. And, though by refusing to credit any transaction which he does not see
with his own eyes (here the Doctor, by the bye, carries his proposition to a
much greater length than Mr. Paine's The very reverse of this insinuation is
abundantly apparent in many passages of Mr. Paine's book. Speaking of Jesus
Christ, he says: That such a person as Jesus Christ existed, and that he was
crucified, which was the mode of execution at that day, are historical
relations strictly within the limits of probability. So neither does he call in
question the existence of Moses or of David, nor the historical transactions of
the kings of Judah and Israel; all he combats is the absurdity of bestowing the
title of God's word upon a miscellaneous collection of Chronicles, Registers,
Genealogies, Anecdotes, Ethics, Poetry, Rhapsody, Epistles, etc. etc.
statements will warrant; as our author only refuses his faith to supernatural
and miraculous events, which militate directly against the ordinary and
established course of nature) though by refusing to credit any transaction
which he does not see with his own eyes, a man no doubt will reduce his faith
and knowledge to a very small compass indeed; still we cannot conceive such a
refusal, however unreasonable, to be culpable, immoral, and criminal to that
degree as to merit the punishment of eternal perdition, which however, by the
Christian system, is flatly denounced against every one who disbelieves a
single word, or even an iota of the scriptures Matthew, v. 18. xxiv. 35. Mark,
xvi. 16. Luke, xvi. 17. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10. Rev. xxii. 18, 19.
.

Mr. Pain is further accused of quibbling, because he styles it a
contradiction in terms to call any thing a revelation that comes to us at
second-hand; but I apprehend that the charge of quibbling will be found in the
present instance to fall with greater weight and justice upon the party who
brings this crimination against him. "We do not (argues Dr. Priestley) say,
that the revelation made immediately to Moses or to Christ is, strictly
speaking, a revelation to us; and yet he immediately subjoins -- If we see
sufficient reason to believe, that the revelation was made to them, we are,
properly speaking, believers in revelation: and if the revelation, whatever it
be, relate to the whole human race, as well as to the person to whom it was
immediately made, all mankind, Mr. Pain himself included, will find themselves
under an equal obligation to respect it. Can any thing, let me appeal to the
reader's candor, favor more strongly of quibble and subterfuge than this? By
a parallel argument, I might prove the obligation the whole English nation, and
let me add, the whole human race at large, is under to respect and believe in
the wonderful revelations lately made to that enlightened Prince of modern
prophets, Mr. Richard Brothers!

Mr. Wakefield has been at some pains, with the superaddition of a formidable
trio of Latin quotations, to show us the justice of the Mosaic doctrine of
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children Exclusive of the glaring
impiety of this doctrine, which Mr. Pain justly observes is contrary to every
principle of moral justice, it stands in direct, irreconcilable contradiction
to the most explicit declarations in several other parts of the Bible Thus it
is expressly commanded in Deuteronomy. xxiv. 16. The father shall not be put to death
for the children; neither shall the children be put to death for the father:
every man shall be put to death for his own sin. So likewise Amaziah's conduct
is highly applauded, (2 Kings, xiv. 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. xxv. 4.) because, in
avenging the death of his father, he flew not the children of the murderers,
according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, etc. Here
likewise may be referred the following passage in Jeremiah, xxxi. 29. In those
days they shall say no more -- The fathers have eaten a four grape, and the
children's teeth are set on edge. And Ezekiel, xviii. 2, 3, 4. What say ye,
that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers
have eaten four grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge? As I live,
faith the Lord God, ye shall no more use this proverb in Israel. The soul that
sins, it shall die. And again in the 20th verse of the same chapter -- The
soul that sins it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father; neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him. Can any thing be more decisive and explicit? and yet
Mr. Wakefield is such a staunch, determined advocate and admirer of the
visiting system, unto the third and fourth generation, that he overlooks these
and innumerable other passages in scripture of similar import, and enters into
a serious defense of the diabolical doctrine of punishing the innocent with the
guilty, though he has both Moses and the prophets decidedly against him!
, even unto the third and fourth generation, (and it is a mercy the vengeance
stops there!) which forms such a prominent feature in the two tables of the
commandments, written, we are told, by the express singer of God. Now we cannot
but lament, when we peruse Mr. Wakefield's arguments on this subject, that any
capacity, not constitutionally defective, should be capable of forming such
derogatory ideas of that great Almighty Being, who is emphatically styled the
Fountain of all Goodness, and the Father of Mercies; whom John, by the
happinest personification, calls Love itself; we cannot but lament, that any
capacity, not "constitutionally defective," should entertain such unworthy, I
had almost said blasphemous, notions of the benevolent Author of Nature, as to
ascribe to the Deity attributes and propensities which the most lawless tyrant
would blush to own to. The God whose omnipotence is competent to punish sin in
its remotest ramifications, has mercy to nip the growing evil in the bud; or
shall we boast the wisdom and humanity of modern civilized legislature, which
professes to aim rather at the prevention than punishment of crimes, and
impiously suppose, that Eternal Justice and Unerring Wisdom should act upon a
plan diametrically opposite; upon a principle which fiends must contemplate
with execration? Reason revolts at the horrid diabolical idea!

I have before had occasion to remark upon the illiberality of Mr. Wakefield's
attack, which displays itself in a very conspicuous manner in various passages
of his work; and I cannot dismiss the present subject without observing, that
his application of the visiting system to the late rigorous and unmerited
sufferings of Mr. Pain, (see page 22) seems to carry with it, notwithstanding
his boasted sympathy and regret, an air of triumph and exultation, that calls
to my mind in lively colors the treatment which Job received in his affliction
from his three pretended friends and comforters: Remember, I pray thee, who
ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? (Job, iv.
7.)

Mr. Paine's strictures on the miraculous The writer of a certain virulent
attack upon our author, entitled, Christianity the only true Theology, who very
properly styles himself a Churchman, for he is evidently the tool of party,
accuses Mr. Pain of the most dissolute and impudent buffoonery; and with that
charitableness which characterizes most of Mr. Paine's antagonists, compares
him to "the sow at its vomit." (page 58) Now I appeal to every candid examiner,
whether Mr. Pain has not treated the subject of the immaculate conception of
Jesus Christ (a subject which, had he really merited the character so
charitably bestowed upon him, might have afforded ample scope for the display
of his talents) with a degree of delicacy and forbearance which gives the lie
direct to such impudent, unsupported aspersions?
and immaculate conception of Christ, as they have an obvious tendency to
promote the cause of Unitarianism, meet with little or no animadversion from
our two Unitarian divines. Mr. Wakefield expressly acknowledges, that the
immaculate conception of Jesus Christ by the Holy Spirit constitutes no
essential article of his creed, and therefore he leaves the vindication of it
to the orthodox sons of the establishment. Doctor Priestley follows him nearly
on the same ground; and as it is their common interest to reason the divinity
of Christ fairly out of the Bible, they both of them have recourse to supposed
errata, and spurious interpolations to invalidate the plain and positive
testimonies which we find on record in the scriptures in favor of the Godhead
of Jesus Christ. The two first chapters of the Gospel of St. Matthew are
peremptorily rejected, because there is no possibility of softening down their
evidence, which makes immediately against the Unitarian system: The same fate,
for the same reason, is awarded against the two first chapters of the Gospel of
St. Luke, and thus they hope at once to get over a difficulty which must
otherwise prove an insurmountable stumbling block and rock of offense in their
way. But their hopes are far too sanguine; and they have no alternative, but
either totally to reject all faith in the revelation, or concede this point.
The miraculous birth of Christ does not depend upon the single testimony of St.
Matthew, or St. Luke, as its only vouchers; it stands plainly predicted (I am
arguing on the principle of a belief in revelation) in the prophecies of
Isaiah, where it is expressly said, and mentioned emphatically as a sign or
miracle, a sign which the Lord himself should give after it had been submitted
to Ahab, to ask a sign of the Lord God, either in the depth beneath, or in the
height above: Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Immanuel. (Isaih, viii. 14.) So likewise in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, we find Christ declared to be a High Priest, after the Order of
Melchisedec; as being without father, without mother, (in as far as he was not
engendered after the ordinary course of nature) without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life.

It would be endless to animadvert upon all the absurdities and inconsistencies
to which a partial belief in the word of God, as the Scriptures are styled,
must necessarily and invariably lead. The man who subscribes to the
adulteration or interpolation of a part, by that very concession invalidates my
faith in the whole. The same right by which he presumes to reject any obnoxious
passages that militate against the system which he has been led to adopt,
authorizes me to do the same by any part which does not accord with my ideas;
and this right of rejection and discrimination being once admitted and
established, it becomes a very easy task, such and so various are the tastes
and opinions of men, to argue and fritter away the whole. And although "one
defect of demonstration" (as Mr. Wakefield observes) has not impaired the
general truth of the Newtonian philosophy, the application of this proposition
to Religion and the word of God will not hold good. Newton, and every other
philosopher, however enlightened and intelligent, as men, are liable to error;
and therefore claim, as such, our indulgence: but the writings which we
emphatically honor with the name of God's Word; and which we profess to
believe in, as given by divine inspiration, All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the Man of God may be
perfect. 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
, for our rule of faith and conduct: these, we apprehend, ought to bear the
stamp of divinity in every page, in every line, in every word; ought by their
purity and perfection to distinguish themselves from the works of man, of which
imperfection ever remains the prominent characteristic. And therefore, wherever
this infallible criterion of perfection is wanting, I am certainly justified in
not receiving such a mass of incongruity and imperfection as the transcript of
the omniscient mind. Or, shall charges of interpolation and perversion, which,
in judicial proceedings, in the case of a will or covenant for instance, would,
if proved, totally abrogate and disannul the validity of the instrument; --
shall, I say, charges such as these, in a case of far greater magnitude and
moment, in a case which concerns at once the honor of the Deity, and the
happiness of the whole human race, be disregarded as nugatory, futile, and
irrevalent?

Viewing things in this light, it will perhaps be asked, why I should make
choice of two Unitarian publications for the subject of my disquisitions, in
preference to so many Treatises written on the same topic, by the zealous and
avowed partisans of the Established Church? To this demand I make answer, that
as the Unitarian Creed appears to admit of much greater latitude of
construction, together with an almost unlimited freedom of rejection, with
respect to whatever militates against its own system in the Scriptures, I
conceived that any conviction brought home against the professors and advocates
of this faith, must infallibly carry with it double weight and authority, and
ultimately conduce more to the Cause of Truth, and the Triumph of Reason, than
my labors would have done, had I attacked the followers and disciples of the
good old way, who, from their implicit assent to that monstrous farrago of
absurdities and contradictions, concentrated with most ingenious and
comprehensive brevity in the Creeds denominated the Athanasian and Nicene, --
(I quote Mr. Wakefield's own emphatic words) are infinitely more vulnerable.
Besides, as we are expressly told by Mr. Wakefield, in the Introduction to his
Work, that Christianity cannot be vindicated adequately and consistently
against Deism, by any votary of systems and establishments, it should seem
unmanly to direct our assault against that quarter from which the least
resistance is to be expected. I enter now upon the most serious part of my
Defense.

As the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is made by the Apostles themselves the
grand test and criterion of his divine mission, and of the truth of the
Christian religion; for, if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain,
and your Faith is vain also; (1 Cor. xv. 14.) it will naturally be expected,
that our Champions of the Faith should reserve their most formidable batteries
for the bold aggressor who dares to lift his impious hand against this strong
hold of their hope. Hence I was led to apprehend a redoubtable display of heavy
artillery and weighty arguments in answer to Mr. Paine's bold attack upon the
authenticity of this important and fundamental article of the Christian creed;
but not a little was I disappointed!

"I shall confine myself (writes Mr. Wakefield, page 26) to one only argument,
which appears to my mind incapable of confutation upon any principles of
philosophy or experience; and will indeed, admit of no dispute, but upon
positions subversive of all historical testimony whatsoever, and introductory
of universal skepticism.

The numerous circumstances interspersed through the Gospel narratives and in
the Acts of the Apostles, appertaining to the geography of countries, the
positions of rivers, towns, and cities; public transactions of much notoriety
and account in those days; the dress, customs, manners, languages of nations
and individuals; political characters of eminence, and their conduct, in
connection with a most potent and enlightened empire, with a vast multiplicity
of detached occurrences and facts not necessary to be specified at large; all
these circumstances, I say, probable in themselves, and of fidelity
unimpeached, challenge (to speak with moderation) as large a portion of
credibility to these books, considered in the simple character of historical
This position, we apprehend, was never called, nor intended to be called in
question by Mr. Pain, whose animadversions upon the scriptures, if we conceive
aright, do not attach to them in their historical capacity, as chronicles, and
records of human transactions and events, (in which light they certainly claim
an equal portion of credibility, as long as they steer clear of the mavelous
and supernatural, with the writings of any other historian of received
veracity) but are solely directed against their claim to revelation, and the
unwarrantable requisition they make upon our faith, to tales of most monstrous
prodigy, which militate directly against the established order of nature, and
which the reader therefore has an equal right to reject in the Chranicles of
the Jews, and in the Gospel Narratives, as he has in the Greek or Roman
historians, Few, it is presumed, who have read Plutarch's Lives, entertain any
doubts as to the general authenticity of the transactions recorded in that
valuable work, and yet many, perhaps, might be found who cannot reconcile their
notions of probabilities to a belief in the apparition of the phantom, supposed
to be Coesar's ghost, to his murderer, Brutus, at Abydos. The inference is
obvious, and renders all comments upon the case unnecessary.
testimonials, as can be claimed for any writings whatever, received as
genuine, and equally ancient and multifarious. Now, no mean presumption arises
in favor of the most extraordinary transactions also, blended in the same
texture of narrative, by historians of so credible a character with respect to
the rest of their relations; but when those extraordinary facts are found to
have so intimate an incorporation with the common and unsuspicious occurrences
of these histories, as to admit of no detachment, but to stand or fall with the
main body of the compositions, so that one part depends upon another for
consistency and support, I cannot see how any historical probability of the
authenticity of these extraordinary events can rise higher than in such an
instance.

When I find such lame subterfuge and sophistry usurp the place of sound
argument, I cannot but congratulate Mr. Pain on his triumph. If the
resurrection of Christ stands upon no better basis than this, rotten is its
support, and it must inevitably fall to the ground. Mr. Wakefield, we
apprehend, will not refuse to the books of Livy, the same internal symptoms of
genuineness and authenticity which he ascribes to the Gospel narratives as far
as appertains to the geography of countries, the positions of rivers, towns,
and cities; public transactions of much notoriety and account; the dress,
customs, manners, languages of nations, individuals, etc. which he expatiates
upon so ably, as challenging as large a portion of credibility to the Gospel
narratives as can be claimed for any writings whatever, received as genuine,
and equally ancient and multifarious, and yet were I to argue upon the
principle laid down in this proposition by Mr. Wakefield himself, and from the
credibility of the common and unsuspicious occurrences of this history to infer
no mean presumption in favor of the most extraordinary transactions also,
recorded by the historian, I might undertake to prove the authenticity of all
the prodigies and mavelous events related by Livy; such, for instance, as the
prophetic denunciation of the ox See Livy, book xxxv. chap. 21.
belonging to the Consul Cn. Domitius, "ROMA CAVE TIBI," which furnishes indeed
no unworthy counterpart to the story of Balaam's Ass, or the tears shed by the
image of the goddess Juno Sospita Ibidem, book xl. chap. 19.
at Lanuvium, which not improbably may have furnished many a serviceable hint
to the wonder-workers The ingenious compiler of the Characteristic Anecdotes of
the Russian Emperor, Peter the Great, published by royal authority at
Petersburgh, gives a very remarkable instance of this monarch's sagacity, and
at the same time of the villainy of the crafty sons of Loyola. Peter, having
given offense to the clergy by some of his innovations, the priesthood, among
other attempts to baffle his designs, had recourse to a miracle. Suddenly it
was reported, that the image of the Virgin Mary, in one of their churches, had
been observed to weep; nor was the cause of these heavenly tears pointed out in
very ambiguous terms. Multitudes flocked to the sacred shrine to convince
themselves by ocular demonstration of the truth of this portentous prodigy, for
such the priests unanimously pronounced it to be, and returned back, like the
apostles of old, fully satisfied of the fact, having heard, and seen, and
handled, and for aught I know, tasted of these tears, which many, from a
principle of devotion, had caught in handkerchiefs, and even vials, as they
fell. At length the monarch, who easily penetrated into the true motives of
this miracle, was induced to pay the weeping saint a visit. Several of the
superior clergy accompanied him by his order, in whose presence he proceeded to
examine into the mystery. A ladder being procured, Peter ascended the steps,
and pulling off the golden crown that encompassed the Virgin's head, made a
complete discovery of the whole plot. The blessed Mother of Christ, it seems,
had undergone the trepan; which having laid her scull open, a silver vessel,
containing about a pint and a half of water, was introduced, which by means of
small punctures, was very dexterously made to distill through the eyes in the
form of tears!
of the Greek and Romish churches; or lastly, the foaling of a mule Livy, book
xxxvii. chap. 4.
, at Reate, which, perhaps, is not more repugnant to the ordinary course of
nature, than the immaculate conception and delivery of a virgin in Bethlehem!

As little can Mr. Wakefield hope to establish the truth of the Resurrection of
Christ by instancing the unconquered perseverance with which the apostles
persisted in professing and preaching this doctrine, in spite of ridicule,
contempt, persecution, poverty; bodily chastisements, imprisonment, and death
-- Mr. Wakefield is not aware how strongly and directly this argument makes
against himself. Reasoning upon the very same principle, I will easily prove
that monstrous farrago of absurdities and contradictions, concentrated, with
most ingenious and comprehensive brevity in the creeds denominated the
Athanasian and Nicene, and which is so tough of digestion to Mr. Wakefield's
stomach; all this I will easily prove to be the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus,
(Ephesians. iv. 21) inasmuch as many thousands of sincere professors, and among
these bishops themselves, have suffered the most cruel and ignominious death,
rather than renounce their faith in these creeds. Indeed, I am fearful, that in
matters of religion there cannot possibly be a more fallacious criterion to
ascertain the truth, than the stubborn pertinacity with which men adhere to
their opinion.

But by far the weakest place in Mr. Wakefield's defense of the resurrection is
the following passage, in which he attempts to invalidate the force of the
objections raised by Mr. Pain, on the plea of this miracle not being
accompanied with that degree of publicity, which the nature of the case so well
admitted of, and which the magnitude of the fact, if true, demanded.

The resurrection of a dead person from the grave, (writes Mr. Pain) and his
ascension through the air, is a thing very different, as to the evidence it
admits of, from the invisible conception of a child in the womb. The
resurrection and ascension, supposing them to have taken place, admitted of
public and ocular demonstration, like that of the ascension of a balloon, or
the sun at noonday to all Jerusalem at least. A thing, which every body is
required to believe, requires that the proof and evidence of it should be equal
to all, and universal: and as the public visibility of this last related act
was the only evidence that could give sanction to the former part, the whole of
it falls to the ground, because that evidence never was given. Instead of this,
a small number of persons, not more than Here Mr. Pain, as his antagonist
justly observes, has fallen into an error, with respect to the number of
persons said to have been witnesses of Christ's resurrection and ascension. The
strength of the argument, however, sustains no detriment by it; and furthermore
it must be remembered, that our author is refuted only by the single evidence
of Paul, (1 Cor. xv. 6.) and that only in one solitary instance; and who knows
but this passage, only that it makes against the Author of the Age of Reason,
might have been one of Mr. Wakefield's occasional interpolations? (see page 23.)
eight or nine, are introduced, as proxies for the whole world, to say, they
saw it, and all the rest of the world are called upon to believe it. But it
appears that Thomas did not believe the resurrection; and, as they say, would
not believe, without having ocular and manual demonstration himself. So neither
will I: and the reason holds equally good for me, and every other person, as
for Thomas.

In this statement of our author, whatever Mr. Wakefield may affect to think or
say to the contrary, I discern nothing but just and manly argument. It is an
established rule in the moral as well as physical world, that the means should
be adequate to the end, and it is upon this principle that Mr. Pain reasons in
the present instance. The resurrection of Christ, as I before observed, forming
the grand test of the truth of Christianity: to substantiate and blazon abroad
the fact beyond the power of controversy, becomes an object of the first
magnitude. As the belief required in it extends to all, Mr. Pain stands
justified in requiring that the evidence of it should be accompanied with a
competent degree of publicity. The nature of the fact admitted of such public
demonstration; the magnitude of the object demanded it; and yet -- this public
demonstration is withheld: -- the only evidence, which would at once have
rendered all the eternal wranglings since maintained upon the subject
unnecessary; which would have completely baffled all the alleged machinations
of the enemies of Christ to suppress the truth and invalidate its force; and
which would have procured Christianity a decisive triumph over skepticism and
infidelity; this only full, satisfactory, incontrovertible, irrefragable
evidence is not granted. And why not granted? Because, forsooth, its place in
the eyes of Mr. Wakefield, is better supplied by corroborating coincidencies,
collateral circumstances, by probabilities of the highest kind, by indissoluble
connexions, et hoc genus omne; all of which, by the bye, notwithstanding the
inconceivable magnitude of the object; notwithstanding the incalculable
interest at stake, do not amount to the same degree of positive conviction,
which impresses on the mind of the geometer the equality of the three angles of
a triangle to two right angles. See page 35 of Mr. Wakefield's work.


We concede, indeed, to Mr. Wakefield, that in occurrences of common life the
concurring testimony of credible and disinterested witness may be considered as
competent evidence in matters of plain fact, which do not militate against the
established order of things. Thus, for instance, to pursue Mr. Wakefield's own
argument, when I first heard of the ascension of Lunardi from the Artillery
ground, in a balloon, I felt myself no more disposed to call in question the
truth of the report, (notwithstanding, from the circumstance of my being abroad
at the time, I did not enjoy the advantage of being an eyewitness of the
fact,) than Mr. Wakefield could possibly do, who, we find, was present on that
memorable occasion. But, had I been ignorant of the principle on which balloons
are constructed; had I never heard or read of the properties of air; had the
experiment been made in some remote, far distant part of the globe, before only
a few select friends, and in only one or two solitary instances, and never
afterward repeated or attempted; had this, I say, been the case, and any one
had told me, under such circumstances, that a man had been seen to ascend to a
prodigious height in the air, and to pursue his aerial excursion for a
considerable number of miles with incredible velocity; in that case, the faith
of the relator of this mavelous account, supposing him to have been at the
same time an eyewitness of the fact, would, I fancy, exceed mine by many an
"evanescent infinitesimal of efficacy." See page 32 or Mr. Wakefield's work
-- And, though no lapse of time will probably, with respect to the former
case, (the actual ascension of Lunardi, in a balloon, from the Artillery
ground) destroy a credibility so well founded and established, with reasonable
men; nothing, I apprehend, short of actual inspection and ocular demonstration,
would attach faith with thinking minds to the latter. Neither would, I presume,
any man's refusal to credit such an ascension, under the above circumstances,
without positive and ocular proof, draw down upon him the stigma of universal
skepticism, though Mr. Wakefield is pleased to insinuate this charge against
Mr. Pain, when he talks of the man, who is resolved to believe no transaction,
but upon ocular and manual demonstration, and who, therefore, is compelled to
belly his own theory in every movement of his life.

Before I dismiss the subject of the resurrection, as far as concerns Mr.
Wakefield's strictures in favor of it, I must slightly remark upon a most
curious and extraordinary argument, indeed, (see page 33) which he brings
forward, to justify our being left, in this, confessedly highly momentous and
interesting, affair, to trust to degrees of probability infinitely diversified
(or, in other words, being left in the dark!), instead of having positive
certainty for our guide.

I might advance also, in aid of these remarks, (to give the whole of Mr.
Wakefield's arguments) that mankind are most evidently placed here in a state
of probationary imperfection: that, instead of certainty for our guide, we are
compelled to trust, on most occasions, to a degree of probability infinitely
diversified; and that some of our noblest and most refined excellencies both
moral and intellectual, spring from a forbearance and candor, from a
diffidence, and docility, and lowliness of understanding, which disputable
evidence is best calculated to generate and foster. Besides, that exercise and
agitation of our mental powers, which is invariably produced by the delays and
difficulties intervening propositions of this nature, and the attainment of
moral certainty, in a painful disquisition of evidence and a long deduction of
particulars, contribute essentially to the quickness, the clearness, the vigor
and general salubrity of our understandings; just as the water of a river is
meliorated and refined by a winding obstructed passage over sand and gravel.

Of all the wretched sophistry I ever remember to have met with, on this, or, I
might add, on any other subject, the present furnishes the most conspicuous,
and I think, the most contemptible instance! Are there not matters enough of
"disputable evidence" to generate and foster our candor and forbearance, our
diffidence and docility, in the Book of Nature, without borrowing from the
sacred pages of Revelation? Or, if we stand in need of exercise and agitation
of our mental powers, to contribute to the quickness, the clearness, the
vigor, and general salubrity of our understandings; might not the time and
talents which have been spent in the painful disquisition of evidence and a
long deduction of particulars, to ascertain the truth of the resurrection, have
been far more profitably employed, upon researches which have a more immediate
reference to the happiness and improvement of man in his present state? We
verily think they might; and maugre the profound knowledge and deep
metaphysical reasoning contained in Mr. Wakefield's remarks, they appear to us
in reality designed for little more, than to serve as a vehicle to the author
to display his extensive reading and ready acquaintance with the Poets of the
Augustan age.

The remarks (for I cannot call them arguments) advanced by Doctor Priestley,
concerning the evidence of the resurrection, carry with them still less weight
and conviction than Mr. Wakefield's strictures. He notices the error into which
Mr. Pain has fallen with respect to the number of persons who are said to have
been witnesses of Christ's ascension, and which error I have already had
occasion to remark upon. But we do not find any thing new or striking in his
observations. A general challenge, indeed, is thrown out to all, who entertain
any doubts upon the subject, to propose any other circumstances that would have
made the Resurrection more credible than it now is at this distance of time;
but, as this challenge has been anticipated by Mr. Pain himself, and the
proposal or requisition made, which would have rendered its evidence
incontrovertible, and of course have established its credibility beyond the
reach of suspicion or doubt, we deem it unnecessary to tread over again the
beaten track.

As my design is, not so much to write a panegyric upon Mr. Paine's work, as to
examine, and, if I can, refute the objections which have been made to it, I
pass over most of his propositions which I do not find attacked by his
opponents. Hence I shall not dwell upon the masterly picture he has drawn of
his Satanic Majesty, who, I am happy to perceive, from the readiness with which
Mr. Wakefield gives him up, (and I congratulate my readers upon the pleasing
prospect) seems to be in a fair way of bidding us Adieu, and returning once
more to the bottomless pit, where I sincerely hope the Angel with the key and
the great chain in his hand (Rev. xx. 1. sqq.) will take good care of him, and
bind and fasten him up or down, it matters little which, at least a thousand
years In case, that is to say, our good Churchmen, our old Dames and Nurses,
for whose behoof, it seems (see Mr. Wakefield, p. 44) these "monstrous
doctrines" have been tagged to the word of God, can any wise do without him.
.

The account given us by Mr. Pain of the Origin of Christianity has been
severely censured and attacked by Dr. Priestley, who pronounces it to be the
most curious romance he ever met with. With all deference to superior
abilities, I cannot but conceive Doctor Priestley to be too hasty in this
judgment; and though he particularly prides himself on his dates, in opposition
to Mr. Paine's practice, who, he tells us, does not deal in dates, any more
than in quotations, writing wholly from memory, (see page 63) it should seem
that Mr. Pain, without the help of a book, has even with respect to his dates,
not erred so widely from the truth, as Dr. Priestley's strictures would at
first sight tempt us to imagine.

The writings ascribed to the men called Apostles, (Mr. Pain observes) are
chiefly controversial; and the gloominess of the subject they dwell upon, that
of a man dying in agony on the cross, is better suited to the gloomy genius of
a monk in his cell, by whom it is not impossible they were written, than to any
man breathing the open air of the creation.

This latter remark of Mr. Pain furnishes his formidable antagonist with a
most desirable opportunity of triumph, as he apprehends; but, unfortunately,
his triumph is premature, as I shall endeavor to prove from his own statement
of the case.

"As these books, written by Apostles, or Apostolical men," (does Dr.
Priestley, by this distinction, mean to signify his assent to the doubt started
by our How much, or what part of the Books, called the New Testament, were
written by the persons whose name they bear, is what we know nothing of. Thus
writes Mr. Pain; and Mr. Wakefield does not appear to class this among the
hardy assertions he complains of in our Author; for he does not contravene the
opinion. If the books (see page 37 of Mr. Wakefield's work) should not be
written in reality by those identical persons whose names are affixed, which is
no essential circumstance, etc.
Author, relative to the certainty of the books of the New Testament being
written by the persons whose names are prefixed to them?) were appealed to in
decision of controversies, it was thought proper to have a standard collection;
and the Bishops met in council at Laodicea, Anno Domini 373, did as well as
they could, but by no means to the satisfaction of all.

Doctor Priestley allows therefore, that it was nearly four hundred years after
the birth of Christ, and at least three hundred years after the writing of the
major part of the books called the New Testament, according to the common
received chronology, before a standard collection of these books was made.

That interpolations and spurious readings, (allowing the Books themselves to
have been actually written at the early date I have just specified, and by the
writers whose names they bear,) might, in such a long course of time, have
crept into the text; especially when we consider that the art of printing was
not known in those days, but that every copy required to be individually
transcribed by an amanuensis; is a possibility, and, let me add, a probability,
which I think will be readily conceded by every candid examiner. That some of
them might have undergone material alterations, or have been new-modelled, or
even fresh vamped up, to suit particular purposes, between the time of their
original composition, and their subsequent incorporation in the standard
collection, is likewise no impossibility; and on this supposition Mr. Pain
stands amply justified in the inference he draws from the dismal complexion of
many of those writings (the controversial parts especially), that it is not
impossible (and he mentions the circumstance merely as a possibility, and by no
means as a matter of positive fact), but they may have been written by some
gloomy Ascetic or Monk; a conjecture which receives additional weight and
plausibility, when we reflect that The celebrated August Ludwig Schloezer,
Professor of Statistics at the University of Goettingen, informs us in his Welt
Geschichte, or Universal History, that the number of Monks and Nuns in the
principal convents of Egypt alone, amounted, toward the end of the fourth
century, to upwards of 96,000 persons! The first regular Convent of Christian
Monks was founded at Tabenna, Anno Domini 325, by Pachomius, a disbanded
soldier.

See Schloezer's Universal History, Part I. p. 173.


Monks and Convents had established themselves nearly half a century before the
Bishops met in council at Laodicea, to determine by vote which of the books out
of the collection they had made, should be the Word of God. I see therefore no
ground for supposing Mr. Pain to have written his Age of Reason without the
least knowledge of the Scriptures, or indeed of history." Such is the express
charge brought against him by Dr. Priestley, (see page 66) who from thence
argues, that his Work is only calculated to make an impression on those who are
as ignorant as himself. Conceding this "point to the Doctor (though I see no
argument to extort this concession from us, but rather the very reverse, yet
conceding the point for the sake of a case), I apprehend, that Mr. Paine's
Work, allowing it to make impression upon only one third, instead of all his
readers, who are not more intelligent than himself, bids fair to make ten times
the number of proselytes that Mr. Priestley has any reason to expect.


Mr. Priestley further, in the exultation of his triumph, throws out a
challenge to Mr. Pain, and of course to all those that join with him in
opinion, to point out any one passage in the New Testament, that, in the most
distant manner, intimates that God is pleased by the mortifications men inflict
upon themselves; or that it is their duty, or at all acceptable to God, that
they should shut themselves up from the world, and decline the active duties of
life.

Instead of being at a loss to discover one, I could instantly refer to a host
of passages, a "whole cloud of witnesses," and those of the New Testament
dispensation, to answer this challenge; which as it seems to have originated
from Mr. Paine's allusion to monks, where he says, that the gloominess of the
subject on which the writers of the New Testament expatiate is better suited to
the gloomy senses of a monk in his cell, (by whom it is not impossible those
books were written) than to any man breathing the open air of creation. I shall
begin my reply with the grand leading characteristic of the monkish system,
celibacy.

I have already remarked upon the rise and rapid increase of these gloomy
fanatics in the early ages of the Christian church. That such characters
actually existed, and were not unknown to the New Testament writers, and among
the rest to the author of the Epistles to Timothy, is evident from the fourth
chapter of the first of these epistles -- The Spirit speaks expressly, that
in the latter From the frequent recurrence of the term, latter times, last
days, last time, evil days, etc. ((...), 1 Timothy iv. 1. (...), 2 Timothy iii. 1.
(...), 2 Pet. iii. 3. (...), Jude, v. 18. (...), Ephesians. v. 16. (...)1 Cor. x.
11,) in the New Testament, which expressions bear an obvious allusion not only
to an alarming degeneracy, both doctrinal and practical, in the church, but
likewise to a considerable interstice between the first foundation of
Christianity, and the times in which the writers of these Epistles lived, it
should seem that no mean argument might be inferred against the chronological
order in which the books of the New Testament are generally supposed to have
been written, unless, indeed, we are willing to argue away the force of this
objection, on the presumption of these disputable passages being
interpolations. St. John, in his first Epistle, ii. 18. even goes a step
farther, and affirms it to be "the last time," or as it ought to be rendered,
the last hour!
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their consciences
seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, etc. which words, I apprehend, allude, in most unequivocal terms to the
monkish doctrines of celibacy and fasting. Now bearing this in remembrance, let
us recur to Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, and take up our parable at
the seventh chapter: It is good for a man not to touch a woman. ( ver. 1) I
would that all men were even as I myself. ( ver. 7) How soon would a general
compliance with this unnatural, and let me add, irreligious requisition, (for
it militates directly against the first grand commandment given to man by the
Almighty, Increase and multiply, and therefore would be a case of positive
disobedience; or (to quote Dr. Priestley's own words) would be declining the
active duties of life) terminate in the total extinction of the human race! it
would be shutting ourselves not only up from the world, but would soon lead to
shutting the whole species out of the world!

The Apostle continues: I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good
for them if they abide even as I. What reason does he assign for this strange,
preposterous doctrine? Why, forsooth, because he that is unmarried, and she
that is unmarried, (the monks and the nuns) care for the things that belong to
the Lord, how they may please the Lord: whereas he that is married, and she
that is married, care for the things that are of the world, how they may please
each other, in the relative stations of husband and wife.

Does not this, let me put the question to Mr. Priestley's own candid
reflection, does not this incongruous doctrine savor strongly of the ascetic
and the monk? Does it not, as I before observed, militate, point blank, against
one of the most active duties, if not the most active of all the duties of
life? Does it not? but I shall drop the subject, only observing, that the
apostle had better have counseled us at once, as the surest way to put and end
to the war in our members, to make eunuchs Matthew, xix. 12.
of ourselves for the kingdom of heaven's sake! which we find some of the
primitive Christians actually did, and among others, the celebrated Origin,
having, it is said, this very saying of Christ, with Paul's enlightened
commentary upon it in view!

And here let no man object, in extenuation of the absurdity of these doctrines
and tenets, that the apostle is not speaking by commandment, but by permission.
(1 Cor. vii. 6.) The greater is his presumption, in daring to broach such vile
and dangerous principles, which I am sure threaten more immediately the welfare
of a state, than any principle, however pregnant and full fraught with danger
-- in the Rights of Man, and which aim with one decisive blow, at the very
extinction of the human species; the greater, I say, is Paul's presumption, the
greater his guilt in daring to palm such infamous nonsense upon us, under the
sanction and authority of an apostle, without even the smallest pretense to
divine commandment, in apology for his detestable conduct!

In the second place, to say a few words upon the monkish system of
mortification, penance and abstemiousness (in commendation of which Mr.
Priestley challenges our author to produce a single instance,) I again recur,
with full confidence of success, to the fruitful writings of Paul.

If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: (spiritually speaking, I suppose)
but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
(Romans viii. 13.) They that are Christ's, have crucified Does the apostle mean,
after the example of Origin?
the flesh, with the affections and lusts, (Galat. v. 24) I keep under my body,
and bring it into subjection. (1 Cor. ix. 27. the apostle speaks, as the
context shows, of corporal abstemiousness, see verse 25.) Mortify your members,
which are upon the earth (Col. iii. 5. and from what immediately follows
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, etc. etc.
it is abundantly evident what particular members the apostle alludes to) I am
crucified unto the world, and the world unto me. (Gal. vi. 14.) Make not
provision for the flesh (Romans xiii. 14.) Give yourselves to fasting and prayer,
that satan tempt you not for your incontinency. I am well aware, that this
quotation begins abruptly in the middle of a comma; but the reader's own good
sense will satisfy him with respect to the suppression of the former part of
the sentence, without any comment being necessary on my side.
(1 Cor. vii. 5.)

Can any thing be more explicit? Or, will Mr. Priestley, with these plain and
positive declarations before his eyes, (which, however, are only brought
forward as a specimen of the "vast cloud of witnesses" that are kept in
reserve) still persist in maintaining, that there is not one single passage in
the whole of the New Testament, which, in the most distant manner, intimates,
that God is pleased by self-denial and mortification? The man, who, at the very
time, that he charges his antagonist with ignorance and error, which he
charitably pretends to account for on the plea of his having written from
memory and without book, (page 63) can commit still greater errors and blunders
himself, with book, may not unaptly be compared to the proud pharisee in the
gospel, who was lynxeyed enough to discern a moat in his brother's eye, though
not conscious of the beam that lodged in his own.

That Mr. Pain may have carried his proposition too far, when he ascribes the
great change that took place in the whole system of learning, after the
introduction of Christianity, to a deep, preconcerted scheme on the part of the
setters-up and advocates of that religion, I shall not affect to dissemble nor
deny. But that the Christian religion was virtually and in reality the cause of
that change, I am clearly convinced; and Mr. Priestley may boast of the
preservation of literature, by the Christian monks of the western and eastern
Roman empire, as much as he pleases, it remains an incontrovertible fact, that
the eternal wranglings about points of faith, and the nonsensical jargon of
priests, gave a new turn to the state of learning, which was now made to center
almost entirely in polemical divinity, and of course rendered the acquisition
of those languages, in which the books of the Bible were originally written,
the most important, if not the only, branch of education.

Without the smallest design to depreciate the value of The most valuable
philology is beyond dispute, a general and extensive acquaintance with the most
useful of the modern living languages.
philology, in its application to the learned languages, (and experience has
too well taught me their proper value and estimation, to hold their acquirement
in contempt,) I cannot but subscribe, with the fullest energy of conviction, to
the justice of Mr. Paine's remark, that it would be advantageous to the general
state of learning to lay less stress in the system of education upon the dead
languages than is generally done. Learning and knowledge, though commonly
reputed synonimous terms are far from being so in reality. The one constitutes
the shell, the other the kernel, and certainly it must be acknowledged the
height of folly and absurdity to set greater store upon the husk than upon the
fruit it envelops. However, to return from this digression.

As we happen to be discussing the subject of dead languages, it may not be
amiss to notice in this place a very just and sagacious argument (urged with
great propriety by our author, but rejected and condemned with wonted
superciliousness and injustice by his opponents) respecting the insufficiency
of human language to be the vehicle of the word of God. Mr. Pain observes,

If we permit ourselves to conceive right ideas of things, we must necessarily
affix the idea, not only of unchangeableness, but of the utter impossibility of
any change taking place, by any means or accident whatever, in that which we
would honor with the name of the word of God: and therefore the word of God
cannot exist in any written or human language.

The continually progressive change to which the meaning of words is subject;
the want of a universal language, which renders translations necessary; the
errors to which translations are again subject; the mistakes of copyists and
printers; together with the possibility of wilful alteration; are of themselves
evidences, that human language, whether in speech or in print, cannot be the
vehicle of the word of God.

"Trite! and little to the purpose!" exclaims Dr. Priestley, in reply to these
truly ingenious remarks. Frivolous! and unworthy of a man of sense! cries Mr.
Wakefield: and both our learned Polemics immediately launch out into a long
string of declamation, which has hardly the shadow of an argument to
countenance it. Instead of bearing in mind, that the Bible, as far as it
professes to be a lanthorn to our feet; a light unto our path; our law,
counselor, and guide, relates chiefly to matters of opinion, and to matters of
faith, and that it therefore is the more liable to suffer from the defects of
translations, the mistakes of copyists, and wilful or accidental alterations,
they are continually harping upon its historical credibility (which our Author
does not attempt to invalidate), and comparing it in this point of view to
Livy's Roman History, or Caesar's Commentaries.

"The truths of Revelation," (writes Mr. Priestley, page 45) do not depend upon
niceties of ideas. A few mistakes of copyists and printers make no alteration
in the general effect, says Mr. Wakefield. As a proof, however, how sadly both
these learned gentlemen are deceived and mistaken in the position they so
obstinately maintain, I shall just adduce one instance, amongst a number that
might be urged; which said instance, as it adds a fresh laurel to their triumph
over Trinitarianism, entitles me, I think, to some claim on their
acknowledgments.

Few texts in the Bible, perhaps, are more frequently referred to by the
orthodox Sons of the Church, to prove the divinity of Christ, than the
following passage from St. Paul's first Epistle to Timothy: And, without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; GOD was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory. (1 Timothy iii. 16.) Now would it be
believed, and yet the fact is well ascertained, that the word God, in which the
whole stress of the sentence centres, is not to be met with in the original?
Would it be believed, that the singular circumstance of the middle stroke of
the E, in (...), having sunk through the parchment, so as to appear on the
opposite side, should exactly occupy the center of the omicron in the relative
OC, which by that means being taken for a (...), caused the word to pass for
(...), which is the abreviation of (...)? Would it be believed, that the
Divinity of Christ should rest upon such a slender foundation as this? And yet
such is the actual state of the case, as the Sea Wetstenii Proleg. in N. T.
page 54 et sqq. Edit. Halens.
Alexandrine Codex plainly proves. Mr. Priestley, I hope, will no longer take
upon him to deny, that the truths of Revelation may depend upon very great
niceties!

Another instance of gross error and mistake occurs in Mr. Wakefield's reply to
our Author's strictures on the history of the creation.

Why it has been called the Mosaic Account of the creation, (writes Mr. Pain)
I am at a loss to conceive. Moses, I believe, was too good a judge of such
subjects, to put his name to that account. He had been educated among the
Egyptians, who were a people as well skilled in science, and particularly in
astronomy, as any people in their day.

To this true and modest statement, Mr. Wakefield replies, with all the haughty
selfsufficiency of a Dictator in the Republic of Letters:

All this may be literally true (see page 54) but a palpable untruth is implied
in it, that the Egyptians were really a learned and scientific people, whereas
their science and their astronomy was just nothing at all The learned and
justly celebrated professor Schloezer whose authority (and the testimony of
such a man I deem sufficient authority,) I have already, in a former instance,
had occasion to refer to, bears evidence to the wisdom and science of the
Egyptians, in the most honorable and unequivocal terms. As German Literature is
not known adequately to its merits, in this country, I subjoin a translation of
one or two extracts from this valuable work. " Egypt, he writes, (see his
Universal History, first part, page 151) was probably the most ancient
post-diluvian state in the world. Moses, who was a pupil of the Egyptians, was
himself unacquainted with its origin; otherwise he would, no doubt, have
informed us of it, as he has done of the origin of Babylon. As early as the
times of Abraham, we find a regular court, with court-sycophants in abundance,
who neglect not to give his majesty timely notice the moment a beautiful lady,
from foreign parts, sets foot in his dominions. (Genesis xii. 15.) At Joseph's
time we find this court greatly increased in splendour, with suitable appendages
of grandeur and officers of state: and furthermore a numerous priesthood,
invested with hereditary revenues; and a standing army at the time of Moses.
And all this in Lower-Egypt only: though it is highly probable that Upper Egypt
was cultivated much earlier."

And in page 168 he writes.

"That the Egyptians were the most ancient of all cultivated nations, is
established beyond a doubt: they were the wisest nation upon earth, even
according to the testimony of the Oracle at Delphi: they were the instructors
of the Hebrews and the Greeks: and powerful and highly-cultivated even at the
time when Greece and all Europe was overrun with forests, in whose shades
individual groups of savages fed upon acorns. The young Greeks were not
acquainted with them till in the wane of their glory. Herodotus found Thebes a
heap of ruins, and could procure no certain intelligence concerning the age of
the Pyramids. He saw statues, which had tumbled down with age, notwithstanding
they were, probably, like the unperishable cases of their mummies, made of
sycamore wood. To the Egyptians the Greeks stand indebted (page 172) for the
whole of their wisdom and cultivation, as do the Hebrews likewise for the
greatest part of theirs. Their architectural ruins, surpass all the relics we
have of Grecian, Persian, and Roman architecture, and will endure longer in
their present condition, than the most modern of our palaces, for neither
earthquakes nor rain (casualties to which they are not exposed) cause them to
decay. To their astronomers the world stands indebted for the true Solar year.
(within eleven minutes, five seconds, at least) -- This learned people (page
178) wrote both in hieroglyphics and with letters, upon stones, hermetical
columns ((...)) and obelisks, and afterward upon the Papyrus, or Egyptian
bullrush, which is of greater antiquity than Numa."


.

It requires no great portion of penetration to discover Mr. Wakefield's true
motives for refusing to allow the Egyptians their just tribute of scientific
praise. He is well aware, that the concession of this point would detract from
the high encomiums he has passed upon the Jews, (see page 15) as the first
founders and cultivators (it should seem) of science; and which he obliquely
urges as a proof of the revelations and supernatural communications (page 17)
said to have been vouchsafed to Moses. But Mr. Wakefield may romance upon this
subject as long as he pleases, he cannot invalidate those incontrovertible
evidences to Egyptian science and cultivation, which the writings of Moses
himself afford, and of which I might easily produce convincing specimens in
abundance, did I see any further need of witnesses, after the respectable
voucher I have already brought forward in support of the claims of the
Egyptians.

Indeed the whole of the Mosaic account of the creation appears to have been
borrowed from documents of still greater This is not merely my own individual
opinion: it is entertained, and most ably vindicated likewise, by commentators
of the first erudition and celebrity. Eichhorn's Einleitung in das Alte
Testament. ( Eichhorn's Introduction to the Study of the Old Testament.) Part
II. p. 294.
antiquity, which he found ready prepared to his hand, and of which it is
certainly more reasonable to suppose that Moses availed himself, than to
pretend that he received his knowledge of the subject immediately from divine
communication. His famous history of the Fall of Man carries with it
unquestionable evidence of the obligation he lies under to the decried,
depreciated learning of the Egyptians. It is obviously a transcript of a
hieroglyphical representation of some traditional account respecting the
deterioration of human nature, which Moses, if it was not previously done by
some other writer, seems to have translated from the language of emblem, into
that of words See Rosemmuller's Erklaerung der Geschichte vom Sunden Fall, (
Rosemmullers Illustration of the Mosaic History of the Fall of Man) in the
Repertory of Biblical and Oriental Literature, part v. page 158-185.
.

Endless would be the task (and, indeed, what I have already advanced
considerably exceeds the limits I had originally prescribed to the present
undertaking) were I to attempt a reply to every impertinent cavil raised by
these two redoubtable Champions of Revelation, against the Age of Reason. I
shall therefore curtail my strictures as much as propriety will admit, and,
heartily tired with examining into the inconsistencies of Mr. Wakefield and his
learned coadjutor, through which I have already fought my way, hasten to the
conclusion of my disquisitions, without stopping to answer objections which are
beneath the notice of criticism; such, for instance, as Mr. Wakefield's silly
triumph over Mr. Pain, (see page 59) because our author, forsooth, has
interpreted the term Testament in its common acceptance, as implying a will,
(and I will not take upon me to affirm, when the context is properly attended
to, that Mr. Pain is not perfectly justified in giving the name of will to a
covenant, of which the apostle expressly declares, that it is of no force
during the lifetime of the testator. (Heb. ix. 10, 11.) Be that, however, as
it may, the objection started by Mr. Wakefield is perfectly puerile,
irrevalent, and absurd, as the force of Mr. Paine's argument is not in the
slightest degree affected, much less invalidated by it. The presumption and
blasphemy of the charge, which ascribes fickleness of mind to the Creator, and
makes him abrogate the covenant into which he had formerly entered with his
creatures, remains the same; remains equally impious and daring, whether we
distinguish this compact by the appellation of a covenant, or by that of will.
To change or amend this covenant, implies a defect or incongruity in his former
compact, which Omniscience was not competent to foresee, till experience
pointed out the error; for if that first covenant Heb. viii. 7.
had been fau^tless, then should no place have been found for the second; but
now he takes away the first, that he may establish the second. Heb. x. 9.


With respect to our author's excellent animadversions on prophets and
prophecy, it is a matter of very little consequence, in my apprehension,
whether the term, taken in its scriptural use and acceptance, signify a poet,
as Mr. Pain explains it, or a teacher, as Mr. Wakefield maintains. I am
satisfied that Mr. Paine's strictures contain abundance of truth Justice,
however, requires that I should notice in this place two very palpable errors
into which Mr. Pain has fallen, and which are very properly animadverted upon
by Dr. Priestley, though they seem to have escaped the lynx-eyed criticism of
Mr. Wakefield. The first of these errors refers to Mr. Paine's attempt to prove
that the prophetical writings were written in poetical measure, by quoting
passages from the English version. The truth of the proposition itself, at
least with respect to a part, is not designed to be called in question; but the
argument upon which Mr. Pain grounds his proof is altogether nugatory and
fallacious.

In the second instance, Mr. Pain lays himself still more open to
animadversion. His hypothesis, that there must be degrees in prophesying,
because the prophets are distinguished by the appellations of the greater and
the minor, is really calculated to raise a smile, as Mr. Priestley very justly
observes; the term having no reference whatever to the quality, but only to the
quantity of what these prophets wrote. In both cases Mr. Pain is vulnerable,
and I cannot defend him.


, and perhaps too much to go down palatably in this age of prophecy and
revelation. The axe (to quote our author's own energetic language) strikes
immediately at the root; it attacks the very fundamentals of Christianity, the
testimony of Jesus being the spirit of prophecy. -- (Rev. xix. 10.)

Such being the state of the case, it should seem well worth our while to
bestow a little attention and enquiry upon the subject.

"The supposed prophet (writes our author) was the supposed historian of times
to come; and if he happened, in shooting with a long bow of a thousand years,
to strike within a thousand miles of the mark, the ingenuity of posterity could
make it point blank; and if he happened to be directly wrong, it was only to
suppose, as in the case of Jonah and Nineveh, that God had repented himself,
and changed his mind.

Let us next examine Dr. Priestley's statement. Some parts of the book of
Daniel, and also of the Revelation, are written in such a manner, that it is
probable we shall not understand them completely, till we can compare them with
the events to which they correspond.

Here then let me put the question to Dr. Priestley -- Of what service can
these prophecies be, allowing them even to merit the title, if they are so
obscure that they are not to be understood, till explained and elucidated by
fulfillment? And as by the term prophecy, a prediction, we apprehend, is meant,
of certain specified events to be verified or accomplished at some future
period; how are we to know that the writings in question have any claim to the
title, if they be so darkly worded that we cannot even ascertain what
transactions or events they are predictive of? We may on this plea wait till
the end of days, and still honor them with the title of prophecies, in daily
hopes of some event or other turning up, to which our ingenuity can make these
luminous and universal predictions refer; for it seems they are prophetical of
the first plausible event that shall befall!

But it seems, the moment this fortunate and long expected chance turns up, it
is very possible we may then be satisfied, that only He who can see the end
from the beginning, could have described them, even in that obscure manner, so
long before. Good bye, then, to prophecy, if even the original Revealer of it
can scarcely see his way through the dark himself!

Yet still is our determined champion of the faith, (and it requires great
faith, indeed, almost enough to remove mountains, to believe on such weak,
unsatisfactory grounds) still is he not a whit cast down, nor discomfited! He
continues:

The reason of the obscurity of those particular prophecies, concerning events
which are yet to come, is pretty obvious Obvious, indeed! for as the fortunate
chance of an antitype to these mystical allusions has not yet turned up, the
believers in them are still groping about in the dark, and, like the priests of
Baal, calling upon their God to know whether he be sleeping; or busily engaged
in granting audience to some of his newly-commissioned delegates and prophets;
or whether, peradventure, he is on a journey in quest of fortunate chances, to
verify his predictions, and render them intelligible, that he hears not, nor
yet sends one spark of fire, one ray of light, to enable them to see their
way through the prophetical fog in which their senses are lost and bewildered!
. For as these prophecies are now in the hands of those who respect them, it
might have been said, that they contributed to their own fulfillment by the
friends of revelation endeavoring so bring about the events predicted.

A curious mode of reasoning, indeed! What a pity these prophecies were not
written in hieroglyphics, in which case they might, possibly, have been more
obscure and darker still than they are in their present state! However, as it
is, I believe there is very little danger of the believers in them destroying
the credit of the prophecies after fulfillment, by incurring the suspicion of
having, from their clear apprehension of them, contributed to their
verification.

But not yet, even, is our doughty champion to be dispirited. He has followed
the advice given by the spirit to the angel of the church of Laodicea, (Rev.
iii. 18.) and has wisely provided himself with eye salve, that he may see,
where others are fain to shut their eyes, and give up all hopes of extricating
themselves.

"Though some intermediate steps" (by the bye I am sadly apprehensive that all
the steps in the prophetical ladder are broken down, since none of the admirers
and advocates of the system are able to get to the top of it, in order, from
the elevated station it would afford them, to take a nearer peep into futurity,
and tell us when we may reasonably expect to see the fulfillment of some one or
other of these glorious predictions, Mr. Halhed's Millenium, for instance!)
though some intermediate steps in the great train of events be thus obscure,
both the great outline of the whole, and the catastrophe are most clearly
expressed. Obscure, as is, (I wonder Mr. Priestley should be perpetually
harping upon this string; he should, methinks, have rather imitated the dutiful
example of the sons of Noah, and have thrown a mantle over the nakedness of his
prophets, unless, indeed, as not improbably may be the case, this charitable
action is already performed by the prophets themselves in consequence of the
thick mantle of obscurity, and "darkness palpable," in which they have wisely
taken care to wrap themselves up) Obscure as is the language of these
prophecies, they plainly enough indicate a long period of great corruption in
Christianity, (methinks there is no need of either priest or prophet, apostle
nor commentator, to tell us that. Unless, indeed, it be for our comfort, that
we are foretold this happy system of things, which has already continued in
force a considerable length of time, is likely to continue so a great deal
longer: the prophets, in this respect, seem to have taken pattern from the
comforters of poor, afflicted Job!) A long period of great corruption in
Christianity is indicated; especially by the rise of a My advice to the unhappy
victims of this persecuting power may be seen in Matthew. xxiv. 16. And
positively, if things do not shortly appear to mend, which, from the favorable
circumstance of their being nearly, if not quite so, at the worst already, is
reasonably to be expected, I believe I shall even find expedient, to put this
advice in practice myself, as the doctor has done before me.
persecuting power within itself; but that this power, together with all the
Here I cannot but congratulate the author of the Rights of Man, that there is a
chance, (provided he does but live long enough for the fulfillment of the
prophecy, twice the age of Methuselah, or thereabouts) of his being no longer
the object of ministerial persecution, obloquy and revenge. I cannot help
congratulating him that there is a chance (let us all pray fervently to God,
and Mr. Pain, I make no doubt, notwithstanding his general objection to
prayer, will readily join us on this votive occasion, let us pray for the
speedy realization of this chance, lest, happily, we, both ourselves and our
little ones, should all be mouldering in our graves, "ages of hopeless years,"
before the accomplishment of this prophecy) there is a chance, however, and I
glory in the pleasing, however distant prospect, that the long proscribed
Rights of Man shall at length triumph over every adversary; when thrones, and
dominions, principalities, and powers, shall bow their proud necks under the
footstool of Reason and Philosophy; when they shall be led captive and a show
made of them openly (I am talking scripture on this occasion, and not treason,
be it known to the Accusing Spirit, to the Dragon and his Angels, Mr. REEVES
and Co. for whose further information, and to save them the trouble of
consulting the bishops I herewith subjoin chapter and verse Col. ii. 15.) and
man no longer be the slave of man! but all unite, under the happy banners of
LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY, (I hope I may be allowed to repeat the words
of Christ, Matthew. xxiii. 8, 10.) in one grand social compact of confederation,
as the offspring of one God, and children of one common parent. Amen! so be it;
yea let the time come quickly!
temporal powers of this world in league with it, is to be overthrown; and that
this will be a season of great calamity.

As far as respects the latter part of the prediction, I readily grant, that
the prophecy is, and has long been, (perhaps from the time of its first
delivery, if not before) and I fear will continue so to be a long, long time
still to come, in a state of actual fulfillment. But neither was the Vision of
the Four Beasts, nor yet of the Ram and He-Goat, nor yet the Vision of the Four
great Monarchies (see Daniel), nor yet the Visions granted to the visionary
writer of the Apocalypse, (which, according to Mr. Wakefield's statement bears
such strong, incontrovertible, internal symptoms of genuineness, and strong,
and incontrovertible, and genuine those symptoms are of the highest pitch of
enthusiasm wound up almost to madness); neither, I say, were Daniel's Visions,
nor St. John's Visions; neither the Vision of the Seven Stars and Seven golden
Candlesticks; of the Man in the midst of these Candlesticks with feet like
brass, and a sharp, two-edged sword in his mouth, clothed with a garment down
to the feet, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle; nor the second
edition of the Vision of the Four Beasts, with its glorious apendages; nor the
Vision of the Seven Angels with the Seven Trumpets; nor the Vision of the Woman
in the Sun (who was then and there delivered of a male child, from whence, I
suppose, our modern Jerusalem Sols!); nor yet the Vision of the Beast with
Seven Heads (which, allowing each head to have had two eyes, or even only one
eye to each head, would have made a most excellent spy; and as the Beast had
moreover ten horns, he might have acted in the double capacity of Informer and
Alarmist!) nor yet the Vision of the Beast with two horns, coming up out of the
earth (or from the dunghill of corruption, as some interpreters render it, and
which is therefore, by many learned commentators, supposed to be typical and
illustrative of our incomparable PRIME MINISTER, for as much as this Beast, as
well as the one that preceded him, is said to have had a mouth vaunting great
things; for though he had but two horns, and those, it is presumed, of no great
significancy or native power, being like unto the horns of a lamb, and
therefore not calculated for warlike enterprises, yet he spoke as a dragon, and
deceived them that dwell on the earth I have in most serious contemplation, and
indeed I have already arranged the plan of my work, to give a comprehensive
Commentary on the true and mystical meaning of this part of St. John's Vision;
its tropes, similies, types, allusions, references, etc. in which I shall not
fail to expatiate largely, and I hope satisfactorily, on all and several the
characteristics of this mavelous Beast. I shall treat of the fire which he
makes to come down from heaven, -- of the miracles which he has power to do in
the sight (but no longer than in the sight) of the other Beast; to whom he
seems to look up as to his master; and who is said to have received a deadly
wound; which deadly wound, however, was notwithstanding, to the great
admiration of all who knew him, healed. I shall moreover comment upon the image
set up by order of my Beast to the other Beast, after his recovery from the
deadly wound; of the power he has to give life to the image of this Beast,
which image he causes to serve his own purposes as effectually as the Beast
itself; of his arbitrary stretch of prerogative, in causing all men, both small
and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive a mark in their right hand,
or in their forcheads, whence some would infer the true origin of Whig and
Tory, Jacobin and Alarmist; though others, from what immediately follows, that
no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast
or the number of his name, suppose it to allude to the system of taxation,
Excise-laws, licenses, etc. but the beauty of my commentary is, that it proves
it to be typical and demonstrative of all and every one of these opinions.
Lastly, (and here it is I propose to display my wisdom) I shall give the only
true, full, genuine and satisfactory comment, elucidation, interpretation,
mystical meaning, and real explication, that ever was, or ever will be given of
the number of this beast. As this work promises to prove a very expensive
undertaking, I propose to publish it by subscription, and hope to get it ready
for delivery against the First of April next!
); nor yet the Vision of the GREAT WHORE (which is the most beautiful and
sublime of all the Visions, and on which thefore I mean to publish a small
Treatise, dedicated to the Maids of Honor, to appear on the Festival of the
Blessed Virgin); nor the Vision of the Seven last Plagues (which I devoutly
pray the Almighty to ward off from us, as we have had plagues enough already);
nor yet the Vision of Satan's capture and incarceration (who seems to have
given his keeper the slip, and to have got among the herd of swine again); nor
yet the Vision of the battle of GOG and MAGOG, which has been a long while
determining, and in the contest has cost us millions of lives and treasure);
nor yet the Vision of the new Heaven and new Earth (which Mr. Halhed and Mr.
Brothers are in daily expectation of); nor yet the Vision of the Water and Tree
of Life (both of which I wish to my heart I could transplant and distribute
among our troops in the West Indies); nor yet the Vision of Visions (which has
made Visionaries of us all; but which I forbear to expatiate upon; and indeed
after having successfully run through such an almost unprecedented length of
sentence, it is proper I should be indulged a little respite to fetch breath):
neither, I say, was this Vision, nor all these Visions, nor any of them,
necessary to prove and point out to us the alarming state of things, and the
general depravity of the age; which consideration leads me to treat of the last
subject I propose to discuss in the present work -- the radical Defects of our
Religion; from whence all the numberless abuses which both Mr. Priestley and
Mr. Wakefield complain of, flow, and must flow, whilst we continue to believe
such monstrous doctrines, and impiously honor them with the title of God's
Word.

However, before I finally dismiss the topic of Prophecy, I must remark, that
there are in the Bible Prophecies of a peculiar stamp, which seem to refer to
no particular event, but depend for accomplishment solely upon the heated state
of the imagination. To this class belong the major part of those pretty,
melting, lovesick allegories, which commentators generally refer to the
mystical union between Christ and his Church. Nothing can, indeed, be more
completely ridiculous, or serve to impress us with a more contemptible idea of
the Word of God, as the Bible professes to be, than when we contemplate the
vast pains which have been taken to hammer out of these prophetic writings,
always in a " train of fulfillment, This has ever been the cant-phrase with the
pious advocates of these pious frauds; who, by their happy dexterity in
refering every notable event or revolution, whether in the moral or political
world, to some favorite prophecy, till they fulfill it and unfulfil it again a
hundred times over, make Prophecy the scarlet-colored Beast with seven heads
and ten horns, which John saw in the wilderness, that "was, and is not, and yet
is." Doctor Priestley seems to have got astride on this Beast, when he discants
on the Prophecies of Moses now in a state of fulfillment (see p. 94); together
with the predictions of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and others. It is
amazing what striking analogies what strong relations, and palpable references
these secondsighted sons of the prophets can discover between types, and
prototypes, and antitypes, and archetypes, where plain simple reason can
discover no manner of resemblance whatever. It was with great truth, though
from a different conviction, that Werenfels wrote on the cover of his Bible:
"Hic liber est, in quo quaerit sua dogmata quisque;
"Invenit et pariter dogmata quisque sua."

" but never accomplished, any kind of sense or meaning whatever! What
numberless folios of learned commentaries have been written to trace out Christ
under the various types of Angel, Man, Bird, Beast, Fish, Insect; nay, even
under the type of a stumbling stone and shin-breaker Behold, I lay in Sion a
stumbling-stone and rock of offense. (Romans ix. 33) Whosoever shall fall on this
stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
pieces. (Math. xxi. 44.)
. And have not equal pains been taken to discover his Bride, the Church, under
the mask of a Harlot, a Strumpet, a Prostitute, a Whore, and Adultress; one
moment reclaimed, and the next as arrant a jilt as ever! And then again, by
happy metamorphosis, she is a sweet little innocent, a true and perfect maid,
without spot or blemish; a little sister with no breasts, or a Prince's
daughter with two breasts, like two young roes that are twins, and with a navel
like a round goblet! In short, the Bridegroom and the Bride are much of a piece
-- are any thing and every thing, as suits the convenience of the Prophet and
his commentator. To call such a farrago of nonsense and absurdity the Word of
God, is a downright profanation of the sacred name Let it not be imagined that
I indulge in this ludicrous strain from a wantonness of disposition. The
revival of the claim to prophetic inspiration, renders it necessary to oppose a
barrier to the rapid progress of delusion. These pious frauds are in their
consequences productive of very unholy mischiefs, and of greater evil than many
would at first sight imagine. Argument and remonstrance have been in vain
applied to expose the Cheat in all its nakedness; let us try what the lighter
shafts of ridicule may be able to effect.
.

Where then, it will be demanded, are we to look for God's word? Or, has he
left himself wholly without witness? Mr. Paine's reply to this interesting
question is truly admirable.

It is only in the creation that all our ideas and conceptions of a word of God
can unite. The creation speaks a universal language, independently of human
speech or human language, multiplied and various as they are. It is an
ever-existing original, which The truth of this position is in fact admitted by
Paul himself. The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead. And in the preceding verse he says, That which may be known
of God is manifest in them: for God has shown it unto them; so that they are
without excuse: because, that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, Romans i. 19, 20, 21. And I might add, that the happy change which has taken
place, to speak in general terms, in our pulpit-harangues, is of itself no mean
corroboration of the truth of the principles contained in the Age of Reason, in
as much as our pious orators of the church, except it be on a day of particular
celebrity, such as a holiday, a day of fast or thanksgiving, or a day
appropriated for the discussion of certain crabbed knotty points of the
Christian faith, such, for instance, as Trinity Sunday, chiefly confine their
weekly lectures to the principles of morality, which certainly must edify their
congregations infinitely more than nonsensical wranglings upon
incomprehensibilities, which have not the smallest tendency to reform and
meliorate the heart.
every man can read. It cannot be forged; it cannot be counterfeited; it cannot
be lost; it cannot be altered; it cannot be suppressed. It does not depend upon
the will of man whether it shall be published or not; it publishes itself from
one end of the earth to the other. It preaches to all nations and to all
worlds: and this word of God reveals to man all that is necessary for man to
know of God?

Were it my design to turn panegyrist to Mr. Pain, I might find ample scope
for my talents in this one single beautiful and comprehensive sentence. It
contains every thing that can be said either in savor of the real word of God,
or in detraction of the counterfeit. The comparatively small part of the
terraqueous globe, which, even at this day, after a lapse of more than three
thousand years, has any knowledge of the written word of God, as professed to
be contained either in the Jewish or Christian scriptures must, in the eye of
reason, furnish a strong and insurmountable objection to the divinity of these
books, in as much as a revelation of the Creator's will undoubtedly ought to
extend to all his creatures, and not depend upon chance and circumstances for
promulagtion. An earthly sovereign who issues an edict, or makes known his
pleasure, to his subjects, is particularly careful that his proclamation shall
be promulgated as universally as possible, in order that disobedience may have
no shadow of excuse. If he be a king over many nations, and people of different
tongues and languages bow down before him, he gives orders to have his
proclamation translated into all those languages, that every one may read it in
his vernacular tongue. These are measures of precaution and expediency which
justice demands; and the application of this proposition to revelation, or the
word of God holds strictly good. How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preaches? and how shall
parsons preach except they be sent? (Romans x. 14, 15.) Universality, therefore,
as the laws of God extend equally to the whole human race, becomes an
indispensible requisite in whatever lays claim to the title of God's word, and
as the scriptures cannot boast this indispensible requisite, they must
relinquish their pretensions.

The oldest religion (I proceed now to the last object of my discussions, as
specified above) of which we have any authentic and credible accounts, is
Judaism. Not that I suppose mankind were entirely devoid of all religious
notions (the reverse is evident from scripture itself) till Moses received a
divine commission to be the Founder of Judaism: but whatever their religion
was, considered in the light of a system, it is now impossible for us to
ascertain. They worshipped idols, and probably the heavenly bodies,
particularly the sun and moon, as from these they derived the blessings of heat
and light.

Moses, whose views appear to have been no less than the establishment of
Universal Hierarchy, formed a system most admirably adapted to promote his
ambitious views. He was originally the son of an obscure Israelite, saved by
stealth, as the book of Exodus informs us, from being put to death in his
infancy, in pursuance of the edict of the king of Egypt, to which country the
ancestors of Moses had emigrated to escape Such was the amazing fertility of
Egypt, that it was styled by way of eminence the Granary of the Romans.
Agriculture did not require more than one ninth of the labor, which it calls
for in England: nothing more was necessary than to sow and water: the land
yielded in incredible abundance, insomuch that it supplied Italy, under
Justinian, with nearly forty millions of quarterns annually!
starvation at a time of general scarcity and famine. At the age of three
months, his mother being no longer able to conceal him at home with safety, he
is put into an ark of bullrushes, and set adrift in the Nile. In this
deplorable situation he is discovered by Pharaoh's daughter, whose compassion
induces her to take care of him, and Moses is educated at Pharaoh's court,
where he is initiated into all the wisdom of the Egyptians.

When advanced to manhood, he discovers a turbulent disposition Here I hold
myself prepared and ready for attack. The man Moses we are told, and told by
himself into the bargain, (and surely he ought to have been the best judge of
his own feelings) was a very meek man, above all the men which were upon the
face of the earth. (Numbers, xii. 3) Greatly am I led to doubt the justice of
the character which Moses here gives us of himself, and strong and cogent are
my reasons for doubting it. They may however, be expressed in very few words. I
call in doubt his written character of himself, because it is flatly
contradicted by his actions. He sees an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, and
straitway his spirit waxes hot, and he falls upon, and stays the Egyptian.
Heroic as this action might otherwise appear, were it not for two untoward
circumstances, the odds against the Egyptian, and the looking of Moses this way
and that way, (Exodus ii. 12.) to assure himself that he was safe; I greatly
doubt whether it can be construed, by any polemical ambidexterity whatever,
into a proof of extraordinary meekness. Again, when the seven daughters of the
priest of Midian are rudely driven away from the watering troughs by the
shepherds, (men seem to have entertained very strange notions of gallantry in
those days) Moses, as every gentlemen ought to have done in such a case, feels
his blood begin to boil; he stands up, takes the part of the distressed
damsels, and delivers them out of the hands of the shepherds. (Exodus ii. 16,
19.) I am not finding fault with this action, on the contrary, I greatly admire
it; it evinces much more true heroism (for here we see one engaged against
many) than the former instance. All I contend for is, that it does not satisfy
me as to the meekness of the man. Neither can his meekness, I apprehend, be
argued from the circumstance of his dashing in pieces, in the intemperance of
his zeal, the two tables of the commandments, which God himself, according to
his account, had been at the trouble of engraving for him: nor yet from the
history of Korah's rebellion, when Moses is said to have been very wroth,
(Numbers, xvi. 15.) and indeed he had reason to be wroth, for Korah seems to
have aimed at nothing less than supplanting him; wherefore Moses very
charitably prays the Lord to have no respect unto their offerings; and puts an
end to the rebellion by undermining those who were plotting to undermine him.
(Numbers xvi. 31, 33) Nor yet can we prove his meekness from his smiting the
rock in a passion, instead of entreating it kindly (Numbers xx. 11, 12), for
which extraordinary proof of meekness he was doomed to perish in the
wilderness, without entering the land of Promise; nor yet from the order he
gave unto the Judges "to slay every man his neighbor;" (Numbers xxv. 5) nor
yet from his being wroth with the officers of the host, because they had saved
the women and children alive, whom Moses, very humanely commands them to
butcher, reserving, however, the females who had not parted with their
virginity for themselves (Numbers xxxi. 13, 18), Moses being greatly incensed
against the Midianites, because they had seat a deputation to Balaam, the man
with the wonderful ass, under the supposition of his being a greater prophet
than Moses himself. (Numbers xxii) Neither, I say, can this last instance, nor
any of the former instances I have enumerated, satisfy me of the meekness of
Moses. The fact is, Moses (supposing the writings in question to be actually
his own) was no more a novice in the art of writing Commentaries than Julius
Caesar, or the most enlightened writer of his own memoirs among the moderns:
but I am ever apt to distrust the praises which people bestow upon themselves.
; interferes in the quarrels between his countrymen and the Egyptians; kills
one of the latter in a fray; and to avoid the punishment of his crime, (for the
laws of the Egyptians relative to murder were exceedingly severe So severe
indeed, that not only the actual perpetration of murder, but the non-prevention
likewise of the crime, were punishable with death.
) he escapes into the land of Midian.

Here, after marrying the daughter of the shepherd whose flocks he tended, he
grows dissatisfied with his humble condition, and plans schemes of future
aggrandizement. Being born to no dominions, he must either acquire them by
conquest, or be content to continue shepherd. Conquests are not made without
armies, and as Moses has no troops, he must study the means of raising them. He
had observed the hatred which the Israelites entertained against the Egyptians,
to whom they were vassals; he forms the plan of inciting them to revolt, and
making them the instruments of his ambition.

For this purpose he pretends a divine mission from God, accompanied with a
grant of certain lands, the situation of which he deemed eligible. With these
credentials he returns to Egypt; encourages his countrymen to emancipate
themselves; and having prepared them for his purpose, endeavors to circumvent
Pharaoh, by preferring an insidious request for leave of absence for the
Israelites, that they may go three days journey into the wilderness, and Thus
we see the practice of making religion the tool of politics is not of modern
invention.
sacrifice to their God. Pharaoh, however, had, it seems, reason to mistrust
the sincerity of his zeal, having perhaps received secret intimation of his
real design; and therefore not only flatly refuses to grant his request, but
gives orders moreover to keep a stricter hand over the Israelites than before.
The consequence is, the Israelites, finding themselves treated with aggravated
rigor, remonstrate with Moses, and seem willing to relinquish the design of
recovering their liberty. Moses, however, succeeds in dissuading them, and
having sufficiently confirmed their wavering resolution, repeats his crafty
request to Pharaoh, but with no better success than before.

A long series of plots and insidious machinations The length to which this
publieation has already swelled, prevents me from entering into the merits of
the reputed miracles wrought by Moses. It is not, however, improbable but I may
be induced to give a criticism of the history of the emigration of the Jews, in
some future publication, of which I have already collected the chief materials,
now ensues, with some feats of legerdemain, which Moses being more expert at
than the magicians of Pharaoh's court, he at length imposes upon the king, who
grants the Israelites permission to decamp. No sooner, however, are the latter
upon the march, (which they took care not to enter upon till they had very
genteelly picked the pockets of their late acquaintance -- Exodus xii. 35, 36.)
than Pharaoh, receiving positive information, that Moses, and the Israelites
under his command, had no intention of returning back to vassallage, but that
their pretended pilgrimage to serve the Lord their God in the wilderness was a
mere stratagem to effect their escape, determines to pursue the fugitives, and
coming up with them toward evening This seems to be the true pillar of the
Cloud which stood between the Israelites and the Egyptians (Exodus xiv. 19, 20.)
, is either drowned in attempting to ford the Red Sea at the place where the
Israelites passed through it, but which was now no longer fordable, (the waters
having returned) or else he sounds a retreat, and orders his troops home again,
leaving the Israelites to pursue their route unmolested.

Our adventurer has now got a considerable number of subjects, for whom he has
nothing to do but provide a place to settle in. As it was necessary to violate
all the laws of of justice and humanity, in seizing upon the territories of
other states, (for none were willing to resign their lands up to him) he
pretends that the grant he had received from God of certain pleasant lands
which suited his purpose, not only authorized the invasion of those lands, but
moreover enjoined him to butcher and totally extirpate the original
inhabitants, sparing neither men, women, nor children. Thus, by an alleged
commandment from the Almighty, are the hearts of the Israelites steeled to all
the cruelties and enormities which they afterward perpetrated.

Seeing himself at the head of a numerous, and of course powerful nation, Moses
turns his thoughts to secure the continuance of that power which he had so
successfully and artfully usurped. For this purpose he gives a code of laws to
the Israelites, which, like those of Draco, may be said to be written in blood!
throws all the power into the hands of the priesthood, which he makes
hereditary in his own tribe of Levi, because their progenitor was a
blood-thirsty ruffian and cutthroat! (Genesis xxiv. 25, 30.) consecrates his
brother Aaron high priest! and confirms the despotism of his hierarchy by
making the priests keepers of the oracles and interpreters of the law to the
people. As for himself, he fills no one particular office, but is the all in
all of the system.

That a religion founded upon such principles as these must inevitably tend to
brutalize the heart, and lead to the most diabolical actions is self-apparent.
Nothing can be closer than the intimate connection between religion and morals.
The Jewish history furnishes a striking proof of the justice of this maxim. It
exhibits little else to our view than a black catalogue of the most atrocious
crimes that ever disgraced human nanature. Murders, rapes, enormities of every
kind, at the bare mention of which humanity recoils with horror, appear on
every page. A captive king is cut in pieces in cool blood before the Lord in
Gilgal, by the reputed prophet of the Almighty, and the Conqueror whose
humanity induced him to spare the life of his unhappy prisoner, is declared to
have forfeited his crown, and to be rejected of the Lord, because he obeyed not
the word of his prophet, who commanded him to smite Amalek, and utterly destroy
all that they had, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and
suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass! (1 Samuel xv. 3.) Such was the blessed
spirit of the Jewish dispensation, so highly valued in Mr. Wakefield's eyes,
under which the simple act of gathering sticks to light a fire on the
Sabbath Day, was punished with a torturing death. (Numbers, xv. 32 -- 36.)

Let us now turn our eye to the Christian System:

The leading feature of this scheme is Redemption. The Christian Scriptures
concur with the Jewish Chronicles in informing us, that man, deviating from the
line of rectitude, by listening to the seductions of wayward appetite I state
the proposition in Mr. Wakefield's own words (see page 62) to give it in its
most unexceptionable form.
, entailed death and misery upon all his numerous posterity, not one of whom
(Enoch and Elijah excepted, and why they should be excepted we see no reason)
escape the punishment due to Adam's disobedience, though not one of them
accessory to his crime.

Nearly four thousand years elapse, man continuing all that time to suffer the
punishment of a guilt he had not incurred, when a Savior is born in Bethlehem;
whether by divine conception or not, is nothing to the present question. This
illustrious personage is held up as the escape goat of the whole human race, who
is to expiate the guilt incurred by the original transgressor.

Both these doctrines therefore proceed upon one and the same principle. The
one damns all mankind for a guilt in which (one only pair excepted) they had no
participation; and the other professes to save these wretched victims for the
merit of another, in which they were equally neuter. Thus injustice forms the
grand characteristic of them both.

The glaring absurdity, and, as I said before, injustice, of this scheme, are
so ably pointed out by Mr. Pain (whose notion of Redemption I conceive to be a
very just one, though possibly derived from his father's See Mr. Wakefield, p.
61.
instruction), that I forbear to go over the ground he has already so
successfully trodden However, to state one argument which I do not find urged
by our Author, I object to Redemption, exclusive of every other consideration,
on the plea that justice is not done by it to man.

Adam transgresses, and his whole posterity is doomed to die. This doom is
carried into most rigorous execution, for not one (our two Old Testament
worthies excepted) escape its force. As Here I am well aware of a whole host of
quibblers, that will not fail to fall foul upon me with their ridiculous
distinction between natural death and spiritual death; but, to give them their
fullest swing, they must allow that natural death, if it did not constitute the
whole of Adam's punishment, forms however, a part; and this concession granted
(and grant it they must) my argument holds equally good.
death therefore was the punishment denounced against sin, it was impossible
for any Redemption to take place, after the punishment had once been actually
inflicted. Unless, indeed, as soon as the proxy-expiation was effected, those
who had already paid the forfeit, that is to say, all the persons who have died
from Adam to Christ, had been restored to life; for, if I am arrested for a
debt, and a friend is generous enough to discharge it for me, I am no longer
detained in prison.

Again, allowing even the possibility of Redemption; nay I will go a step
further, and suppose it to have actually taken place; still I maintain, that
justice is not done to man by it. Adam's transgression damns me, ipso facto,
without any act of mine. I have a right, therefore, when Redemption is held out
to my view, to expect that I shall benefit by it upon the same terms. I have a
right to stand neuter in the business; and as I am damned by Adam's Fall,
whether I profess to believe in it or not, I have a right to benefit by
Christ's Redemption, whether I make it my creed of faith or not. Upon any other
terms this Redemption becomes partial and unjust.

Having thus stated the inconsistency of the scheme in theory, I proceed to try
its merits by the touchstone of practice.

It is by the fruit that we judge of the tree; and even the Christian scheme
allows the justice of this principle. I have already shown the intimate
connection between Morals and Religion in the case of Judaism; I shall now
discuss the same topic with reference to Christianity.

Deeds constituted the merit of the Jewish system; Faith constitutes the merit
of the Christian. The b^st Jew was the man that conformed most scrupulously to
the outward ceremonies of the Levitical law; the best Christian is the man who
has the strongest faith. The sinner, who transgressed against any ordinance of
the Mosaic dispensation, not punishable with death was made to smart for his
crime, by the forfeit he had to pay under the name of an offering. Under the
Christian dispensation the most damnable sins (provided they do not offend
against the statute) may be committed one moment, and repented of the next, and
pardoned to boot, without costing the sinner one farthing, unless he has the
misfortune (for such I must consider it in this light) to belong to the Romish
church; in which case he will have to pay (but I believe the terms are pretty
moderate) for absolution.

Whether he pays, however, or not; whether he be a disciple of the Church of
Rome, or a disciple of the church of England, it makes no difference as to his
conduct. In the former case, he can buy a license to sin on with impunity, for
three, or four, or a dozen years together, according as his purse holds out; in
the latter he may sin and pay nothing: but then the Protestant who does not
pay, must be at the trouble of repenting, which the Catholic, who pays, has no
need to do. Thus they stand both nearly upon a level. Now let us see what good
effects this blessed Religion produces in their practice.

The Christians, long persecuted by the Jews and Pagans, no sooner get out of
the fire themselves, than they begin to thrust others into it. They retaliate
upon the Jews, they retaliate upon the Pagans, and when they have no common
enemies to persecute, they fall out among themselves, and begin to worry each
other. Their religion at length branches out into two distinct ramisications;
which is not to be wondered at, as I have already demonstrated Christianity to
be theoretical; whereas Judaism was practical. These two branches, though
originating from the same stem, harbor greater hatred to each other, than if
they were rival trees. Persecution rages hotter now than ever; the elder
branch, being the most powerful, as matured and invigorated by age, carries it
awhile with a high and daring hand. At length the younger branch attains to
sufficient growth and vigor to dispute the day, and retaliates in its turn
upon the elder branch. Thus they continue worrying each other, till their
mutual interests compel them to live more neighbourly together: but neither
should a single leaf on the Protestant branch enjoy one visit from the genial
beams of the sun, if the Catholics could prevent it; nor the same blessing be
allowed to the leaves of the Catholic branch, if the Protestants had it in
their power to cast a shade upon them. The disqualification of the Catholics
and Dissenters to hold places under our government; sit in cur senate; pass
their degrees in our Universities; with various other illiberal restrictions,
bear ample evidence to the truth of my assertion.


Religion being thus made to consist in faith, or in other words, in opinion;
and opinions being as various as there are heads to harbor those opinions, the
most absurd and monstrous doctrines are engrafted upon it. Hence we hear talk
of standing up for our religion; (which is, or ought to be, well able to stand
up for itself) of I am grieved to think, that we are at the very moment that I
write these pages sighting for religion in our crusade against the French.
fighting for our religion; (though the founder of it would not permit the
sword to be drawn in his own defense) of dying for our religion; (which is
nearly as absurd as fighting for it, religion being intended for the happiness
of man, and not for an ignis fatuus to lead him into destruction) of making
Proselytes to our religion; (which, if possible, is more absurd still, as
religion should be left to beat up recruits for itself) of reforming our
religion; (which, if it stands in need of reform, is better totally rejected)
of establishing our religion; (which God has taken care to do himself when he
first laid down the immutable laws of nature) of proving our religion; (which
if it be not the religion of nature will be found not worth the proof) of
bringing our religion to the test; (which none but natural religion can ever
stand) of supporting our religion (which if it wants support from man should be
left to fall to the ground). Hence likewise in practice we are guilty of the
most ridiculous absurdities, and whilst we style our God the Prince of peace,
at whose birth the angels rent the air with loud acclaims of Tidings of great
joy; peace upon earth, and good will to men: -- we call upon him to bless our
slaughtering arms, and hang up the shattered standards and blooddistained
trophies of our enemies in his consecrated temples!

But here steps in Mr. Wakefield with his famous plea, Ab abusu ad usum non
valet consequentia. -- I admit the proposition in its fullest extent. But
first, let him demonstrate to me the use of the thing for which we are
contending. I defy him to do it. But should he even succeed in discovering and
substantiating some degree of use; it still remains to be ascertained, whether
the use atones for the abuse; whether it preponderates in the scale. When I see
nothing but abuse from first to last; nothing but corruption throughout; when I
see nothing but fraud and deception; I fear that his "Abusus non tollit usum,"
will stand him in little stead. Let him prove to me that we have less
uncharitableness, less unmercifulness, less vindictiveness in the world (I am
speaking in general terms of mankind at large, and not arguing from
individuals) since the introduction of the Christian system: let him prove that
we have fewer animosities, fewer wars, less bloodshed, less butchering of our
fellow creatures, and that often under the mask of religion; How many millions
of lives have been saorificed at the shrine of Christianity in the holy wars
against the Saracens! in the crusades against the Hussites, Hugonots, etc.
let him prove and establish these important points, and I shall readily
acknowledge myself his convert. Till then, however, I must make bold to believe
with Mr. Pain, that the CREATION IS THE ONLY TRUE AND REAL WORD OF GOD, that
ever did or will exist, and that every thing else called the Word of God, is
fable and imposition.

London, October 10, 1795.

