A DISSERTATION CONCERNING MISLETOE: A most Wonderful SPECIFIC REMEDY for the
Cure of Convulsive Distempers.

Calculated for the Benefit of the Poor as well as the Rich, and heartily
recommended for the Common Good of Mankind.

By Sir JOHN COLBATCH, a Member of the College of Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM CHURCHILL at the Black-Swan in Paternoster-Row.
1719.

THE PREFACE.
I Have been many Years a Debtor to the World, and since I have not as yet been
able to pay off my old Scores, to my own Satisfaction, the following
Dissertation comes out by way of Composition: which I hope will be accepted in
part of Payment, till the original Debt can be discharged.

That this comes out alone, is from an Impression that I have had upon my
Spirits for some Weeks past, that it would be highly criminal in me to let
another Misletoe Season pass, without informing the World what a Treasure God
Almighty has every Year presented to their View; and that no body, at least
very few, have received any Benefit from it.

The Article of Convulsions in the Bills of Mortality of this great City, is by
much the largest of any, very commonly amounting to about a fifth Part of the
Whole; and, as I have been credibly informed, happens principally amongst
Infant Children: from whence it seems plain, that a Generous Anti-Convulsive
Remedy is wanting. I have published the Noble Qualities of this Wonderful
Medicine, in the most plain and familiar manner, that thereby it may be rendered
of more public Use; and I am not without the greatest Hopes that People of all
Ranks will receive Benefit from it.

I hope I shall not be blamed for the Earnestness of my Recommendation of this
Neglected, but Extraordinary Plant; because my only Aim in so doing, is to
press People to the Use of that, which every Family may one time or other
receive Advantage from.

The Performance is rough and unpolished; but I have chosen rather to suffer
Reproach upon that account, than let another Season slip, which I am satisfied
would be to the Detriment of many.

A DISSERTATION CONCERNING MISLETOE.
HAVING some Years since had a very terrible Instance of an Epileptical Case in
one that was most near and dear unto me, and which baffled all Endeavors that
were used for his Recovery; it occasioned me many sad and serious Reflections
upon the Subject. As he was daily before my Eyes, so his Distress made the more
sensible Impressions upon me. I had recourse to the most Celebrated Remedies
recommended in all Ages, and the Assistance of my Friends most Eminent in their
Profession.

Four or five Years were spent in fruitless Attempts, he every Year growing
worse and worse, till at last he became Cataleptick: he would be seized as he
was standing, and continue in that posture like a lifeless Statue, without
Sense or Motion. When he was so seized, he was constantly laid upon a Bed or
Couch; his Fit would last some Hours: but I am confident, that had he been let
alone, he would have continued in the same posture in which he was seized,
during the whole time of the Fit.

Being one day upon a Journey, I saw some Hazle-Trees plentifully stocked with
Misletoe. It immediately entered into my Mind, that there must be something
extraordinary in that uncommon beautiful Plant; that the Almighty had designed
it for farther and more noble Uses, than barely to feed Thrushes, or to be hung
up superstitiously in Houses to drive away evil Spirits; and that the Misletoe
that grew upon other Trees, was capable of being as serviceable to Mankind, as
that which grew upon the Oak.

Amongst many other Authors that have wrote concerning the Epilepsy, I had
lately read Marcus Marci, his Liturgia Mentis; the most satisfactory Treatise
upon the Subject, as to Theory, that I have met with, and indeed to lay a
Foundation for a Physician to practice rationally in the Cure of all Convulsive
Distempers.

Having made the most strict Inquiry into the Nature of Misletoe that I was
capable of, I concluded, a priori, That it was a Medicine very likely to subdue
not only the Epilepsy, but all other Convulsive Disorders, upon the foot of
Marcus Marci's Hypothesis. I mean the ordinary and common Misletoe. The Praises
of Misletoe of the Oak had been proclaimed for many Ages past, and none else
esteemed or regarded, as to any Medicinal Virtue.

The Youth before mentioned had indeed taken Misletoe in small quantities in
the Pulvis de Gutteta, and other Compound Remedies recommended in Epileptical
Cases; but when I reflected that Misletoe was but one Ingredient amongst a
Farrago of others, there was no determining from the Effects of those
Medicines, whether Misletoe were capable of doing any thing toward the
conquering of so Herculean a Distemper.

In reading the scattered and imperfect Accounts of the Druids, formerly
Priests and Philosophers in this Island and other neighboring Countries, who
were had in the highest Veneration by People of all Ranks; I conjectured that
this Veneration in great measure proceeded from the Wonderful Cures they
wrought by means of the Misletoe of the Oak: this Tree being sacred to them,
but none so, that had not Misletoe upon them; which Consideration also further
prompted me to try common Misletoe in its utmost extent. After I had seen some
of its amazing Effects, I conclude that it was from this Divine Remedy that
they had almost Divine Honors paid them.

But Misletoe of the Oak being the only Misletoe recommended as good for any
thing, I was in great Straits how to procure a quantity of it; for I did not
remember in all my Travels to have seen any of it: so amongst all my
Acquaintance, from that time to this, I do not know that I have met with above
two that have.

This put me upon considering whether or no the Misletoe received any Advantage
from the Tree upon which it grew, or whether all Misletoe were not the same.

After my Thoughts had been some time employed upon this Subject, I concluded
that the Misletoe of the Crab, the Lime, the Pear, or any other Tree, were of
equal Virtue with that of the Oak, for the following Reasons; and which has
been confirmed to me since by large Experience, which is beyond every thing
else.

Now suppose that the Misletoe of the Oak does surpass that of all other Trees;
yet from ten Years large Experience I find the ordinary Misletoe to be the most
Noble Medicine I ever knew: and since it is every where to be had, at least in
this Island, it ought to be esteemed as a great Blessing; and if the other
excel it, those that are capable of procuring it, ought to esteem it
accordingly.

But if the Misletoe were in any manner produced from the Tree upon which it
grows, as the Gaul is from the Oak; then it might reasonably be expected that
it should partake of the Quality of the Tree that produces it, as the Gaul
does, having the same stiptick Qualities with the Acorn, or the Bark of the
Tree. But as it is propagated by the way of Inoculating, or Grafting, it is quite
otherwise.

An Apricock or a Peach grafted upon a Plumb-Stock, or a fine Apple or Pear
upon a Crab-Tree one, will not produce Plumbs or Crabs, but Apricocks and
Peaches, and fine Pears and Apples.

As far as I can learn, Misletoe is commonly propagated after the following
manner: There is a Bird generally known by the Name of the Misletoe Thrush;
which Name, I suppose, it derives from its feeding upon Misletoe-Berries during
the Winter Season. From the Pulp of the Berries it is nourished, but the Seeds
are discharged with the Excrement undigested. Now the Excrement being of a
slimy nature, sticks fast to the Branches of the Trees upon which it falls; and
if there be any Crack in the Bark, there the Seed lodges itself, and produces a
Plant the next Year. The Excrement being of the nature of Birdlime, and
Birdlime, as it is said, being to be made of the Berries of the Plant; I suppose
gave rise to that very old Saying, That Turdus cacat in sui Excidium.

It has been often propagated by cutting a Slit into the Bark of a Tree, and
sticking in a Seed. I have been told of one that has adorned his Trees with it,
to make them delightful in the Winter-Season; and surely a more beautiful Plant
can scarce be seen.

Pliny says, That it is apt to exhaust and wear out the Tree upon which it
grows: in which I am inclined to believe he was mistaken. The Reason, I
suppose, that induced him to be of that Opinion, was, That it most frequently
grows upon old Trees. Now I conclude, that it more frequently grows upon them
than young ones, because the Twigs and Branches of the old Trees are more
liable to Cracks and Accidents than young ones are: and being most commonly
seen upon old Trees, he from thence concluded that they were worn out by it.

There seems however to be a Difference betwixt this Plant and all other Trees
propagated by Grafting or Inoculating; they being most certainly entirely
nourished by the Juice of the Stock into which they are inserted:
notwithstanding which, as is before observed, they change the Nature of the
Juice, brought up by the Stock, into their own. But whether Misletoe receives
its full Nourishment from the Juice of the Tree, seems to me a Doubt. It Is
true, it continues alive during the Summer, but it does not begin to flourish
and appear in Vigor, till the Sap of the Tree is fallen, or otherwise spent,
and the Leaves dropped. Its Berries are full ripe, and in perfection, about the
latter end of December; and the more rigorous and severe the Weather is, the
more vigorous and flourishing is the Misletoe. Now considering that the Sap or
nutritious Juice of the Tree is at this time in a manner spent, I am inclined
to conjecture that it derives its principal Support from the Air. I have had
some thoughts that it was no hard matter to try, by easy Experiments, whether
this be so or not; but being confined to the Town, I have wanted Conveniences
of so doing.

How it thrives in hot Countries, or whether it ever grows upon those Trees
that never cast their Leaves, I am ignorant of.

Of all the ancient Authors that take notice of it, which I have read, Pliny in
his Natural History seems to be most full; but what he says, is little to the
purpose: and almost every body else recommends Misletoe of the Oak in
Epileptical Cases, but none of them give Directions how even that should be
used in a rational manner.

Amongst the Moderns, the Honorable Mr. Boil, in the second Part of his
Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, page 174. gives the following Relation.

"A young Lady of great Birth having been long troubled with an almost
Hereditary Epileptical Distemper, and after having been wearied by Courses of
Physic prescribed her by the famousest Doctors that could be procured, without
at all mending, but rather growing worse; so that sometimes she would have in
one day eight or ten of such dismal Fits as you and I have seen her in; was
cured only by the Powder of the true Misletoe of the Oak, given as much as
would lie upon a Sixpence, early in the Morning, in Black-Cherry Water, or even
in Beer, for some days near the full Moon. And I am assured, partly by the
Patient herself, and partly by those that gave her the Medicine, that though it
had scarce any sensible Operation upon her, and did not make her sickish,
especially when she slept upon it; yet after the first day she took it, she
never had but one Fit. And this Remedy an ancient Gentleman, who, being
casually present when she suddenly fell down as dead, gave it her, professed
himself constantly to have cured that Distemper with it, when he could procure
the right Simple, which is here exceeding scarce. And what further Experiments
some Friends of yours have successfully made, I may elsewhere have occasion to
relate."

My most worthy Friend Dr. Cole, encouraged by the common Voice of Antiquity,
and being farther prompted to it by this Relation of Mr. Boil, was induced to
try what it would do upon a Patient that fell into his hands by the Death of
his former Physician, who for three Months had in vain been attempting his
Cure. He relates the Case and the Circumstances of his Cure as follows.

"A certain Youth of a sprightly Genius, of about fifteen Years of Age, who at
first had labored under a Fever, from which he was perfectly freed, was soon
after attacked with an Epileptical Fit, which was about three Months since:
after a few days another, and after that with many, but without any regular
Periods. These Fits had so affected his Nerves, and brought such a Weakness
upon all his Joints, that he could not walk without difficulty, nor lift the
Weight of a few Ounces with his Hands, nor hold a Pen to write withal, in which
he before excelled. To this Youth various Remedies having before been given
without success, I prescribed a Vomit of Salt of Vitriol; then a Purge or two
with some Calomel. Afterward I took care that Misletoe of the Oak should be
given him twice a day, with some Cephalic Vehicle; and the Apothecary had
procured the Misletoe that was genuine: (Happy he! for to this time I could
never procure any.) Proceeding in this order, his Fits never returned. The
Misletoe being continued to this time, he sensibly perceived a gradual
Restoration of the Strength of all the Parts; so that he could now not only
walk, but run, and write elegantly, of which I was an Eyewitness. So that I
have reason to hope, that from the continued Use of this Medicine, he may be
perfectly freed from his Illness, etc."

The Good Doctor was one of those that afforded his utmost Assistance to the
distressed Youth before mentioned; but no Misletoe of the Oak being to be
procured, all other Misletoe was looked upon as despicable; and the reason why
the Pulvis de Gutteta did no good, was judged to proceed from the Apothecaries
making use of common Misletoe in the Composition of it, instead of that of the
Oak. But be that as it will, and let the Difference be never so great, the
quantity of Misletoe in that Composition is so small, as to render it of no
effect. And as for the Misletoe contained in the Anti-Epileptick Waters, the
Great Zwelfer has remarked, that it will not yield any of its Virtues by
ordinary Distillation.

Misletoe of the Oak not being to be obtained, I furnished myself with a large
quantity of that of the Lime; the Trees in one of the Parks at Hampton Court
affording great plenty, at least they did so at that time. I ordered it to be
gathered at the latter end of December: The Leaves, Berries, and very tender
Twigs, I got dried over a Baker's Oven, where there was a constant gentle Heat,
and then had it made into very fine Powder, to be put into a Glass covered with
Bladder or Leather, and kept in a very dry place. If it be not kept close and
dry, it will contract a Dampness, grow moldy, and be good for nothing: If it
be scorched by the Fire in drying, it will also be spoiled, and of no effect.

The larger Stalks must also be carefully dried and preserved, for Decoctions
and Infusions.

Furnished with my Medicine, though of no Reputation, not being suspended upon
the Oak; I was very impatient to see the Effect of it, and immediately went to
work with it.

The distressed Youth had for five Years been laboring in vain, and every
Month grew worse and worse; so that his Constitution both of Body and Mind were
spoiled to such a degree, that I could not be so presumptuous as to hope for a
Cure: The utmost I could wish for, was some Relief, and to render the Remainder
of his Life someway comfortable to him.

From being one of the sprightliest of Youths at Twelve Years of Age, at
Seventeen he was a perfect Mope, a most melancholy Spectacle both in and out of
his Fits. However, bad as he was, having carefully inquired into the Nature of
my Medicine, I went to work with it; I was sure it could do him no hurt, if it
did him no good.

His Fits in the beginning kept pace with the Moon, rarely having any but about
the New or the Full; but in Tract of Time he had them at all Seasons: so I
began with him, without any regard to that Affair.

From the first I gave him half a Dram of the Powder, made into a Bolus with
Syrup of Pioneys, every six Hours; and after it a large Draught of a strong
Infusion of the Stalks bruised, and sweetened with Syrup of Pioneys.

To my great surprise he had not one Fit from the time he began to take this
Glorious Medicine for a Month or more, and never one Cataleptick Fit to the day
of his Death. He continued to take it on for three Years, but after some
Months, only Night and Morning; and in the main, during that whole Space, he
enjoyed his Health tolerably well. But as his Memory had been almost entirely
lost by the former Five-Years Calamity, so it was not judged proper to set him
to any sort of hard Study, or employ him in any Business that should give him
any trouble: Upon which score it was thought necessary to send him into the
Country, to a good AIr, with one constantly to keep him company, and to secure
him against Accidents.

There he lived, with great Comfort to himself, and Pleasure to those he
conversed with; and was sometimes capable of applying himself to his Studies.
He would now and then have a Fit, but sometimes not one in three Months; and
those Fits he had, very favorable ones, which he had always Warnings of
beforehand, so that he could be trusted on horseback.

At last he was taken ill, in a manner different from what he had formerly
been, and died in about four and twenty Hours. I could not see him after he was
dead, but desired that his Head should be opened; having great reason to
believe, that the beginning of his Illness proceeded from an unfortunate Blow
upon the left Temple, in which Part he would often complain of great Pain,
especially in the first part of his Illness, before he became stupid. And the
Account I had of that matter, was, That there was a blackish Spot upon the Dura
Matter, of the bigness of a Shilling, just under the Os Temporis.

It Is true here was no Cure, neither could I expect one: I had the utmost
Success I could reasonably propose to myself, which was to render the short
Remains of a miserable Life comfortable and easy: And by so doing, to have a
reasonable Opportunity of introducing to the World a most Glorious and Useful
Medicine; which has one peculiar Property attending it, That it is capable of
doing the greatest Good in the most formidable of Diseases, and, I dare say,
will never do any Hurt.

The Jesuits Bark is a most Noble Medicine in Fevers regularly intermitting,
and in some other Cases: but I have frequently known the Misapplication of it,
of terrible and fatal consequence. But for Misletoe, I dare engage for it, that
it will never hurt any one; and tho it be so innocent, yet it will frequently
cure Diseases, that in appearance (as the Great Dr. Willis represents them, in
his Description of the Epilepsy, in his Tract de Morbis Convulsivis) do not
much differ from those we read of in the Gospels, that were cured by the
Redeemer of the World, the Eternal Son of God: But his Cures were wrought by a
Word, and not by Medicines. Glory be to him, that in the absence of himself has
created such Medicines for the Relief of the Distressed, as this I am treating
of!

No one can think that I am so far divested of Reason, as to recommend this
Medicine in the manner I do, there not being the least Prospect of Advantage to
myself in it; but that I am sure of its Effects, from thorough Experience, and
that I have all imaginable Reason to believe that it will prove of general
advantage to the World: there not being a Family, to which it may not at one
time or other be of the greatest use.

I have many times known about a Scruple of the Powder, mixed with a little
Black-Cherry Water, restore Children that have been agonizing with the most
exquisite Convulsions that can be conceived; but then it has been repeated in
less quantity very often, till they were perfectly well. I hardly ever knew it
given to Children without advantage: A Cure is not always to be expected, but
Relief is a great Blessing in such miserable Diseases.

It Is good in their Gripes, either to obtund the Acrimony of the Bile or
Pancreatick Juices; and if they will not take it any other way, may be given in
their Pap, Pannadoe, or Breast-Milk. Even to Infants there can be no Error in
giving them too much, but the more they take, the better; it being of a
nourishing Quality, and no ways hot, or in the least tending to throw them into
a Fever; nay, is rather of itself a Febrifuge. I have often found it of great
use in the dismal slow Fevers, attended with Convulsive Symptoms.

I have never, through the Course of my Practice, seen but two Persons
laboring under that frightful Distemper called the Chorea Sancti Vitis, or St.
Vites's Dance; or at least that might be truly called so. The first was before
I knew the Use of Misletoe: She had the Assistance of other Physicians besides
me; but in spite of all that could be done, she died miserably.

About three Years since, the second, a Girl of about Seven Years of Age, was
brought to me. Every Muscle of her seemed to be convulsed; if she were upon her
Feet, she was always dancing, and throwing her Arms about; the Muscles of her
Face would be variously distorted, and her Head moving backward or forward, or
from side to side, so as to be a most moving Object of Compassion. If she were
in Bed, she was under the same Circumstances; one being obliged to be
constantly by her, to keep the Clothes upon her, and she had no Sleep. She took
about two Drams of the Powder every day, and by that time she had taken twelve
or fourteen Ounces, she was made perfectly well, and so continues. She grew
better by that time she had taken it two days, and in a manner well in about a
Fortnight; but I ordered the Continuance of the Medicine, till she had taken
the quantity before mentioned, to secure her against Returns.

I have an intimate Acquaintance, an exellent Gentlewoman, who had labored
under Convulsive Disorders for twenty Years, and did not want the best Advice;
her Life was rendered thoroughly miserable: But by the Use of the Powder of
Misletoe for a Year or two, she is become perfectly well, enjoying the Comfort
of Life as much as any one does.

I have known so many Instances, both in Young and Old, in Rich and Poor of
both Sexes, some of whom had been many Years afflicted with Epilepsies, and
other Convulsive Disorders, that have been either cured or received Benefit
from this Divine Remedy; that I think myself bound in Conscience to divulge the
Use of it to the World; since, as I have before observed, it is capable of
doing greater things than ever I knew performed by any one Remedy, and I think
it incapable of doing any Hurt.

Another principal Reason that has induced me to it, is for the sake of the
Poor, the Meanest being able to procure it as well as the Rich, and that it
wants little or no Skill in the Administration of it.

Whilst the Virtues of Misletoe were confined to that of the Oak only, it was
of little or no Use to the World, as not being to be procured. I have been five
and thirty Years a diligent Searcher after it, but never could yet see one
Sprig; and as I have before observed, have never met with above two that had.
If the common Misletoe that is to be met with in every County of our Fortunate
Island, is capable of doing as great things, as have ever been recorded of the
Misletoe of the Oak; I shall have that Pleasure and Satisfaction of Mind, which
generally redounds to those that have the Happiness of being Benefactors to the
Age they live in, which I have in every Part and Circumstance of Life
endeavored.

But if from the common Voice of all Ages, and the modern Instances I have
produced, Misletoe of the Oak must still be preferred; I do not doubt but every
Oak in England may be made to produce Misletoe, by the Method I have before
proposed. And perhaps the Druids took that Method to propagate it upon such
Oaks as were for their turn. And when that can be had in plenty, it will be no
great difficulty to distinguish whether it excels or not: But I am really of
opinion, that all Misletoe is the same, for the Reasons before alleged.

In this Dissertation I have carefully avoided entering into the Reason why
Misletoe is so excellent a Remedy in Epilepsies, and of consequence in all
other Convulsive Distempers; but recommend it to the Use of the World from the
large Experience I have had of it, which is the same way that the famous
Peruvian Bark was ushered in: and perhaps the Experience of future
Practitioners may make that matter more clear, than at present I am capable of
doing. Nay, should I attempt it, it would swell the Bulk, and of consequence
the Price of this Dissertation, and be of no advantage to the ordinary sort of
People, whose Benefit by this Publication I propose as much as the Rich.

I began with it upon a Rational Foundation, and the Success has answered my
Expectation, even to my Amazement in some Instances. I don't doubt but others
will try whether what I have said be true; and when they see that it answers
their Expectations also, I hope it will exercise the fine Genius's of the Age,
to draw Consequences from it, that may be of great use.

As the Bark does sometimes want an Auxiliary, to enable it entirely to
overcome an obstinate Quartan Ague; so I have sometimes found that Misletoe has
done better in some obstinate old Epilepsies, with the assistance of an
Auxiliary, than alone.

A Dram of Sal Martis added to an Ounce of the Bark, will make that Ounce more
effectually to cure an inveterate Quartan, than six times the quantity of the
Bark alone will do without it: So I have sometimes known a Dram of Assa-foetida
added to an Ounce of the Misletoe Powder, and made into an Electuary, make it
act much more powerfully than alone.

Gentle Purging, and sometimes Bleeding, are useful before the giving of the
Misletoe: but I have been for some Years afraid of giving Vomits, even of the
gentlest sort, in Convulsive Distempers, from some terrible Accidents that have
been like to ensue, from moderate Doses of Ipecacuana itself; the safest, and
perhaps the best Vomit, that ever was made known to the World, barely as a
Vomit to cleanse the Stomach.

If the Plant be not dried, powdered, and preserved in the manner I have
directed, there is scarce any other way of keeping it, but that it will be
rendered entirely useless. This I desire may be carefully observed by every body.

I don't doubt but even Misletoe of the Oak itself, or what People have called
so, has often unsuccessfully been given, from not being gathered in right time;
or if it has been so, either ill dried, or not carefully preserved afterward.

From the Hints I have given, I hope others will be disposed to try this
Medicine to a further Extent than I have been able to do: I have been cramped
in it, because it was not to be had in more than two Apothecaries Shops, that I
could depend upon for its being regularly managed. But for the future, since it
will put them but to very small Expense, I hope no Shop in the Kingdom will be
without it.

If any one will be so good, as to communicate to me any, either Medicinal or
Natural Observations, that they have already, or shall hereafter make, in
relation to the Subject here treated of, they shall not fail of my most
Grateful Acknowledgments.

FINIS.

