Frontispeice.
LE RIRE EST LE PROPRE L'HOMME RAB.

The Conoisseur is mistaken, who fancys the Back drapery to be only a SHIFT.



THE DRAMATIC HISTORY OF MASTER EDWARD. MISS ANN, MRS. LLWHUDDWHYDD, AND OTHERS.

THE EXTRAORDINARIES of these TIMES.

Collected from ZAPHANIEL's ORIGINAL PAPERS.

Illustrated with COPPER PLATES.

LONDON: Printed for T. WALLER, opposite Fetter-Lane, Fleet Street.

M DCC XLIII.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, Master Edward, Ap Thomas, Samuel Foot, Esquire G. A. Stevens,
Corporal Knott, Harry Howard, Zaphaniel, Mr. Warner, Dancing Master,
Mountebank, Merry-Andrew, Connoisseur, Gentleman Haberdasher.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd, Miss Ann, Miss Shred, Governess, Winifred ap Shingle:
Constables, Bumbailiffs, Choice-Spirits, Gossips, Stroling-Players, etc. etc.
etc.

ZAPHANIEL'S Exhortation to his Fellows in the Faith.
THOSE vain tale-bearing Books, entitled Memoirs, have so far subverted
Readers, that the truth is to them but a threadbare Garment.

Unsatisfied are they with each History, unless the Writer delivers all the
Particulars, concerning every Person whom he memorialises; from the Color of
an Eyebrow, even unto the Pattern of a Shoe-buckle.

Since therefore it accords, that Narrators must use such Precision; enforced
am I to extend my Plan, the primitive Design of which was no more, than to
repeat the Spirit-moving Discourses, that preceded this Play Actor, and comical
Comedians Regeneration; which were uttered unto him, by the great Mr.
Whitfield, the good Mr. Wesley, the pious Mr. Bradbury, and the learned Mr.
Roman. But now it behooves me, for expediting the Sale of my Book, to give an
Account of his Birth, Parentage, Education, Character, and Behavior. Yet, for
as much as it does not, in any Sort, suit me to deliver those Historialisms,
according to the Vanity of the Times, I have agreed with a Scribe of this Town,
vulgarly called a Wit; and he has undertaken to Dress these Anecdotes, in all
the fashionable Language of fine fangled Phrases, for the Perusal of the
Public.

ADIEU.
Scene 1st.
Page. 1.

SCENE the FIRST.
DANCING MASTER. EDITOR. ZAPHANIEL. ONE afternoon as I was preparing a
Political Essay, for the next day's Chronicle, in answer to a letter, I had
inserted the week before, on the other side the question, the boy from the blue
posts, said, two gentlemen wanted me at his master's.

My dear wife, whose prudence, and person, are unequalled, was unwilling I
should go; but upon recollection, I ventured (not without some necessary
precaution, I must confess) and was inducted into a room, where two very well
looking men were seated.

The shortest of them was dressed in a laced coat, a fine flowered gold and
silver waistcoat, figured Ruffles, a heart at his shirt bosom made of green and
red stones; he had a sword and a bunch of ribbands at the handle, and he held a
snuff box in his hand.

As his complexion was of the olive tint, his eyes vacant, his nostrils charged
with rappee, and his eyebrows, forehead, and other parts of his face,
indicating he much practiced the look contemptuous, I took him for some foreign
nobleman, just imported: but he was a figure dancer at the Opera-house; and
thus he opened the business to me.

DANCING MASTER. Sir, we have taken the liberty to send for you; because we
hear you are an author. That gentleman (pointing to his friend, who wore his
own dark brown hair, parted on the top of his head, and smoothly stroked down
each side of his temples, then tucked behind his ears, as you have seen window
curtains turned back) Mr. Zaphaniel has got some very curious stories relating
to a particular player; but he wants to have them put into a proper style.


EDITOR. What sort of a style, Sir?


DANCING MASTER. Nay as to that, Sir, it will be left to you. I have nothing to
say to style, for my part. -- Gentlemen like me never read. I never looked into
a Book in my life. -- I keep my chariot, Sir, and people nowadays, don't keep
their chariots by book reading.


EDITOR. Would you have it in a drole style, Sir?


DANCING MASTER. Ay, Ay, as drole as you can, faith -- touch up all the actors
and singers in it. They are only fit to be made game with; as to the dancers,
you may let them alone, only if you can cleverly throw in any hints about
myself, for I teach most of the people of fashion in town, I am indecd the best
dancer either for execution or address, or school business, in Europe. I hate
vanity -- but I Will tell you more of myself, when you come to dine with me. --
Where Is the papers, Zaffy?


ZAPHANIEL. There they are, tied up together in the window, thou may take
them home (addressing himself to me) peruse the contents: give me thy opinion
of them, I will come to thee at the seventh hour on wednesday next, as this
porter seems to be very good, we will assemble here.


DANCING MASTER. But Sir (addressing himself to me likewise) that you may be
the better able to understand what you are about, you should have an idea of
the person, who this history is wrote upon, therefore come to me next sunday,
two o'clock, to dine at Jemmy Warner's, NED will be there, and Nancy with him.
NANCY you must know, Sir, is a wench he is a friend to, for the fellow faith has
a devilish smart sort of a genius for high life; although he is but a player,
he keeps his girl, wears embroidery, drinks burned champaign, and betts his 50
as freely, as if he was the best nobleman, or dancing master in England.


EDITOR. But, Sir, you spoke something of mentioning you in these memoirs.


DANCING MASTER. You must know, Sir, there is no doing any good in the world,
without puffing. It does not signify, if you are the cleverest fellow that can
be, in your way, without you can puff yourself off, or get your friends to puff
you off, you will never get forwards; for it is not now the question, whether
an artist is a genius? But whether he is in fashion? Now there are several ways
of managing this bringing a man into fashion; some choose to bribe a very great
lady's hair-dresser; others get into fashion 'cause their fathers have a vote,
or their sister a pretty face, or they were born on this side, or that side
Berwick-bridge; or, because -- because -- in short, Sir, there are many
schemes, but I don't like any of them half so well, as printing your merits in
the news papers, or writing a book about it.

I was let into the secret by my master, who got all his money by advertising.
For, as he said, never mind what other people say, do you say as much as you
can for yourself; and keep at it; and if you will go on telling the town, so
you will talk them into it, until they believe every syllable about you.

The MSS. I took home with me, and, being promised ready money, began to digest
the materials immediately.


ACT I.
SCENE II.
Master Neddy's Descent ascertained, from the Antidiluvian British Records of
the Llwhyddwhuydd Family. NO, not all the wives in the world shall persuade me
to it. Not for all the wives in the world, would I suffer such a thing.
(stamping with his foot at the same time, and throwing his hat hard upon the
ground) Bite my nose? What the devil business has she to long to bite my nose?
If it was a child of my own getting, and I loved the mother ever so well, I
would not allow it.

Thus was Mr. Thomas Ap Morgan, a Welsh chairman, very vehemently telling his
mind to David Llwhyddwhuydd, his partner. David mildly replying, you know, my
dear countryman, that now I am the very last, look you, of all the
Llwhyddwhuydds in all Wales, and will any countryman of mine, any true Briton,
and there are no true Britons but Welsh folks, you know, Thomas.

THOMAS. Yes, to be sure I do, and thank God for that, I am but a Welchman
truly, but I am a true Briton, and Britons never will be slaves; and therefore
why should your wife want to bite my nose then?


DAVID. Now, Thomas, would you have the most ancientest family in all Wales,
and all Merionethshire to boot, as indeed mine is, to be extinguished, rather
than let yourself be put to a little pain; and if my wife should miscarry,
there is an end of all my hopes; for only Providence and good Sir Watkins
knows, when I shall be able to get another child; for we have been a long time
about this; and if we lose this, all my hopes of having a family to inherit my
nam^ is gone; because, you know, we have never another child in the world, but
that which is coming to be born now.


Thomas picking up his hat, and wiping the flaps of it with his elbow, replied,
you know, David, that I would not have Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd vexed now she is so
near her down-lying, upon any account; but why should you say yours is the most
ancientest family in Wales, did not the Ap Morgans go to meet William the
conqueror?

DAVID. God's blessings upon us both, I am ashamed to hear a Welchman talk of
any thing so little a while ago as William the conqueror; why my family, I have
all the parchment account of it at home, was in Wales before the deluge.


THOMAS. But where did they go when the world was drownded?


DAVID. Why they went on board ship with Captain Noah, and the ship settled
upon a very high mountain, and the mountain was Penmanmuir, and Wales was the
first place peopled again; and Japhet married into our family, and I have some
of his blood now in my veins, and our family has been in Merionethshire ever
since. Now here lies the point, my dear. Suppose my son, because my wife should
lose her longing, is to be born without a nose, or (God help us) with two noses
now; for great authors say, that a woman with child, when she longs, or is
affrighted the effects will be the same upon the child.


THOMAS. But I don't believe it, no more than if I am carrying a fare, and a
dog shall come behind Page 29th.

me and bite my leg, that the gentleman or the lady, look you, in the chair,
shall have the print of the dog's teeth in their skin.


DAVID. But I will show you, friend Thomas, from the testimony of learned wise
men (pulling a book out of his pocket) I copied them with my own handwriting,
to convince you of the danger, that may attend letting my wife, that you
profess so much friendship for, lose her longing.


THOMAS. Well, you know, Mr. David, I love to hear histories, so let us sit
down. They did so; and Mr. Lwhyddwuyd began to read the testimonies of the
learned, as follows;


CASE. I.

Aldrovandus relates, that a woman in Sicily observing a lobster taken by a
fisherman, and being moved by an earnest longing for it, brought forth a
lobster, altogether like what she had seen and longed for. -- Vide the
copperplate.

II. Is told by John Swammerdam. A certain woman at Utrecht, being with child,
was frighted with the sight of a negro, and apprehended to be delivered of a
perfect black; but at last recollecting herself, she made use of a second
imagination, to prevent the danger from the first; for she washed herself from
head to foot, with hot water, to clear the child from blackness. The time of
her delivery being come, the child was born with all his teeth, and appeared
perfectly white, except those places, the hot water did not reach.

III. By ditto. A child was born in Normandy with horns upon his head, and
cloven feet, and he proved afterward to be a man of extraordinary sense and
judgment: the occasion of that misfortune was, that his father having
represented a satyr upon the stage, had the knowledge of his wife in that
ridiculous dress.

IV. We have a case in Fabricius Hildanus, upon the faith of Ludovicus
Horniceus, a physician of Frankfort, viz. a woman having been frighted with the
firing of a gun, was delivered of a child with a wound in the back, of the same
shape, as if it had been done with a musket shot.

V. Father Malebranche, in his search after truth, relates, that seven or eight
years ago, was seen in the hospital of incurables a young man, who was born an
idoet; and whose body was broken in the same places where malefactors are
broke; he had lived near twenty years in that condition, and has been seen by
several persons. The cause was, his mother hearing a criminal was to be broke,
went to see the execution.

Father Malebranche proceeds to explain this strange accident: children, says
he, see what their mothers see; they hear the same cries, they receive the same
impressions of the objects, and are moved by the same passions; all the blows
given to the malefactor did violently strike the mother's imagination; and by
the counterblow, the tender and soft brain of the child. -- The fibers of the
child's brain, not being able to resist the torrent of the spirits, were
broken; that is the reason why he came into the world without understanding. The
violent course of the mother's animal spirits went with force from her brains
to the several parts of her body, which answered to the parts of the
malefactor: 'twas the same in the child -- but because the bones of the mother
were capable to resist the violence of the spirits, they were not wounded. But
this rapid stream of the spirits was capable to carry away the soft and tender
parts of the bones of the child; and it is to be observed, that if the mother
had determined the motion of the spirits, toward any other part of the body,
her child had not had his bones broke; but that part which answered to the part
toward which the mother determined her spirits had been sorely wounded.

VI. A gentlewoman of Helsenor, says Bartholin, was delivered of a great cat;
which, to the astonishment of the assistants, ran away with great celerity, and
was never seen afterward -- because the lady was frightened with one.

VII. Bartholin also relates; I have it, he says from John Naborousky, a
gentleman of Poland, and my good friend, that a woman of that country was
brought to bed of two small fishes, without scales; which were no sooner born,
but they swam in the neighboring waters, as naturally as others do; because
the lady did long for them; so that you see, my friend Thomas, look you, it is
all the same, according to the opinions of these learned people, whether a lady
is frighted, or whether a lady longs.

THOMAS: Well, let us hear some more stories, in the Name of God. -- I do love
to hear such things, to be sure; but God help me, for my own sake, but to be
sure I cannot believe all these things, so well as the scholars do, because I
have not their learning; but go on, do my friend, do go on. Which request David
obeyed immediately.


VIII. Philippus Meurs, apostolical prothonotary, and cannon of St. Peter's in
Louvain, a reverend ancient man, affirmed unto me, and several others, says our
author, Thomas Fienus, that he had a sister complete in the rest of her body,
but without a head. Instead of which, was joined to her neck a shell fish, in
the likeness of a sea-muscle, made up of two shells, which shut and opened; and
by which, from a spoon, she took her nourishment. And this he said was
occasioned, for that the mother with child with her had a strong desire after
some muscles she beheld in the market, but could not procure at that instant.
This sister of his lived in this monstrous condition, to be eleven years old;
and then, by accident, happening angrily, and very strongly, to bite the spoon
they fed her with, and breaking the shells, died quickly after.

IX. Schenkius tells of a woman very big; who, among other discourses with her
neighbors, mention being made of her great belly, she told them, she reckoned
about the time of Epiphany, or festival of the three kings. Upon which the good
woman wishing she might bring forth three kings; she merrily answered, with all
her heart; and accordingly, at the time, she bore three sons; one of them an
Ethiopian, or of a black color, as usually one of those kings are painted. The
same relation is confirmed by Cornel. Gemma, being seen, as he says, by great
multitudes, in the city of Louvain, and authenticated by undoubted testimony.

X. There was a lady, a kinswoman of mine, says Sir Kenelm Digby, who used much
to wear black patches upon her face (a fashion among young women) which I, to
put her from, used to tell her in jest, that the next child she should go with,
should come into the world with a great black spot in the midst of its
forehead; and the apprehension was so lively in her imagination, that she had a
daughter born, and marked just as the mother had fancied, with a great black
spot upon her.

XI. There lived amongst us at Bern in Switzerland, says Gul. Fabricius, an
honest woman, who, about ten years since, being great with child, and
quarrelling with another woman, put herself into such a passion, that she was
unable to contain herself. After which, falling into labor, she was brought to
bed of a daughter, of a courageous and heroic mind, but her feet and hands
contracted, as if ready to fight, and her whole body in continual motion, so
that she walks, as it were, dancing, and in a trembling posture, after the
manner of angry people, unable to govern their passion.

XII. Amb. Parey gives us to understand, that in the year 1517, a child was
born (in a village near Fontainbleau) with the shape of its face exactly like
that of a frog; which was brought to pass by the mother's holding that creature
in her hand, to allay the heat of a fever, about the time of her conception.

XIII. But something singular beyond all these, is the tale of Languis, of a
woman longing to bite the naked shoulder of a baker passing by her; which,
rather than she should lose her longing, the good-natured husband hired the
baker at a certain price. Accordingly, when the big-bellied woman had bit
twice, the baker's wife broke away from the people who held her, would not
suffer her to bite her husband again; for want of which, she bore one dead
child, with two living ones.

Why then, I say (thus Thomas very loudly began, hitting his hand hard upon the
table) I say, the baker was --.

At that instant a voice from the street called chair, chair; out run Mr. David
and Mr. Thomas, the book, the nose, the wife, were in an instant forgot; for
the occult desire of money-getting annihilates all other considerations, as
black absorbs all factitious colors.

How the chairman came to be so learned (as we all love to know every thing)
courteous reader, you shall, if you please, be informed.

Upwards of twenty years had he taken in the Magazines, and had made so many
abstracts, and remembered so many extracts, that if he had Page 12

not been a chairman, he might have been made honorary professor of universal
erudition.

He was the living Lexicon, to which the whist and jockey clubs applied,
whenever they made a bett about spelling a word; and he had, from observation,
acquired such a genius or power in disputation, that all smatterers he
silenced, as easily as Socrates did the Sophists; if a true scholar happened to
contradict him, David, from his knowledge of the world, dumfounded the student,
by offering him ten pound on it; for he proceeded upon one general, and not an
often controverted principle, i. e. no rich men will mind learning; ergo, only
poor folks are scholars.

Therefore every fool, every dunce, dares to assert, to contradict, to find
fault, or praise; even with the utmost ignorant effrontery, and oppose the
opinions of men of real merit -- blockheads having one undeniable resource, the
proposing a wager.

Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd, master Neddy's mama, was born in America, the daughter of
a mulatto woman, her papa, the famous councellor Justice, who was sent abroad
on account of some books being missing. The grandfather's disgrace is the
reason why none of his descendants ever chose to learn their letters.

Hence, as Heinsius observes, it is very easy to account for the Hero of this
History being illiterate.

Miss Justice was imported under-cook to a West-Indian family, who came to
England for improvement; they hired a fine house the south side of Maidstone,
within half a mile exactly of the marketplace, and on the right hand of the
London road.

N. B. The utmost precision is made use of in relating the situation of the
house, because an attention to truth is the Editor's greatest care throughout
the whole of this publication.

In Maidstone, at this time, there was a company of Comedians, that town and
county being remarkable for the residence of such sort of people. It is an
observation of naturalists, that turnips and attorneys thrive best in Norfolk;
that Sussex is noted for bad roads and smugglers; and that it is as impossible
to eradicate buggs from London, as to free Kent from Hoppickers, Gypsies, and
Stroling Players.

In all rural theatrical communities, it is the custom of one of the actors to
carry play-bills to the people of fashion's houses about the country; and as
these Jamaica gentlefolks were remarkable for sumptuous living, the manager
cast himself into that part of the business; this occasioned much murmuring
when his back was turned, among the rest of the company; they would meet at the
alehouse, and call him all the scoundrels, and tyrants imaginable; but the
moment they saw him returning, they run out of the room, begged he would drink
with them, and happy was he; who could get his handkerchief out first, to wipe
the dust off from his master's shoes. He loved, like most of his brethren,
eleemosinary high living, therefore he never missed carrying up a bill every
morning to the West Indian squires; and used to wait in the hall, at first,
along with the butcher's boy, to know their honors commands.

Scene 4th.
Page 15.

The Moonlight amor



But Miss Justice, being very fond of players, asked this proprietor of clothes
and scenes to step into the pantry, where the rest of the servants assembled,
there he was treated with several remnants of danties saved from yesterday's
dinner, and he made the kitchen company vastly merry, for he could be
exquisitely entertaining.

He spoke Tragedy speeches to them, he showed them tricks, he made them faces,
he sung songs, he acted the lame man, and the stuttering man, and stood upon
his head, and drank out of his shoe, no man had more wit than he had; and he
rehearsed all the other comicalities, by which benefit-making geniuses push
their tickets off. The young lady abovementioned fell in love with this master
actor, his name, or at least the name he went by, was Samly; and as Mr. Samly
was seeing Miss Justice home from the playhouse, in about a week afterward,
she confessed her affection to him, and informed him, that she had forty nine
pounds of her own, and in her own possession, all in specie.

Samly immediately fell in love with her, they vowed eternal fidelity to each
other, and ratified those vows by the most particular engagement, before they
went out of the home close, while the bright stars in the fiery fretted canopy
of heaven sparkled over their heads, and the silent gloworms twinkled at their
sides, the leafy hedges rustling to their embraces, and the whoping owls at
distance toot tooting to their sighs (as Mr. Samly observed) made up great
nature's loving concert. The next week, unknown to any of their acquaintance,
they set out for London together; Samly left his clothes and scenes behind him;
indeed they were mortgaged for rather more than the worth, to the landlord of
the stable in which they acted.

The Editor of this Treatise remembers this Mr. Samly's company at Maidstone,
and they had the use of a brewhouse to shift their clothes in; the ladies
dressing-place was the mash-tub, and Alexander the Great, he has known to
rehearse his mad scene very cleverly in the cooler.

The brace of lovers determined to remain in cog for some time in London;
because, as Miss Justice said, what would all the world think of her, if all
the world should come to know it? therefore desired Mr. Samly would get a
license as soon as possible.

That he promised upon his honor should be his next morning's business; and
added, at the same time, my ineffable Chloe, we will content ourselves with
these lodgings for the present; what to thee or me does it a dram signify,
if as yet, we are at St. Giles's or St. James's -- no, we are ourselves, let us
be where we please.

Upon the instant he brandished his lady's curling irons, with which he was
then pinching his bag wig. -- Majestically he strode cross the room, and then
with most emphatical dignity -- he -- spit out of the window.

Resuming his subject, thus he went on -- before the winter comes on, thou
opening rose of beauty, we'll take a ready furnished house in some of the
genteel squares about Piccadilly. But first, I Will determine with myself, which
Theater I choose to belong to. -- A man of my merit, my lovely attractress, will
be caressed by the managers of both houses; so I Will play them off one against
the other; promise them both, and at last, who bids most has me. I know my cue --
but I am resolved never to come upon the square of common salary actors; no, I
will have so much certain when I play, or else such a sum of money out of the
house as a sharer, and this way -- (hitching up his breeches at the same time)
this way I shall, keep up my consequence; and consequence is what an actor
ought to study, as much, ay, and more than his parts. But it happened to Mr.
Samly, as it may have to thee, reader, his expectations were superior to his
advancement; the managers of both Theaters refused him.

His case was very severe, he had a great mind to print it, to let the town
know how he was used; he did so, but it did not answer any purpose; the public
took no notice of it, and the bookseller lost money by it.

His lady's fortune being soon dissipated, duns grew exceedingly impertinent,
misfortunes presented themselves before him, in all the frightful phantoms of
hunger, bad shoes, bum bailiffs, rainy weather, no trust, and an empty
coal-hole; he cursed the pride of managers, their ignorance, their inhumanity;
he damned the town, he despised life, he grew desperate; and one morning,
before the fringed covering of his lady's eye-lights were withdrawn, he went
down stairs, and opening the street-door, he, I am afraid it will never be
believed, but the fact is authentic, and I can bring several reputable people
to witness the truth of it, -- he, that very morning, resolved -- to work at
his own business, and relinquish the stage for ever, saying, with Cardinal
Wolsey,

Farewell, a long farewell to human greatness; onwards he went, leaving his lady,
London, his creditors, and choice spirits, making the best of his way to his
own parish in Nottinghamshire, to work at the stocking frame, nor cast one
longing lingering look behind.

SCENE III.
Miss Shred and Miss Justice. MISS Justice received a letter from Samly that
very day by the penny-post, with his reasons for absenting himself; and as the
epistle is really curious, we shall present a copy of it to the reader,
recommending the author to the notice of the gentlemen publishers of Periodical
Papers, as a proper person to be employed by them, when they need a journalist.
-- Since he can moralize, seems to know mankind, has a pretty knack at abuse,
can write very well on the worst side the question, does not much mind
orthography, and by his manner, I fancy him neither timid, hesitating, or
conscientious.

To Mrs. SAMLY.
My dear Adorable,
WHEN I consider life, it is all a cheat; as to the managers, blast such
scoundrels; however, I Am resigned to fate, whatever world I next am thrown
upon, cannot be worse than this -- as I am now determined to rennounce the
follys, passions and delights of desire, I have been obliged to leave thee, my
life and soul, my all that heaven can give; what can I do, while there was one
thing my charmer had left to raise money upon; did I desert her -- no -- did I
not, my lovely creature, stay with thee till the last penny was spent; for we
were rich in love; but now approaching want, with all its wofill train
appearing, I retire from the storm, not being able to live, my dear, and see
thee in distress; therefore have cut myself off from all the pleasure of loved
London, and thee the chief, and condescend (curse on my stars) to the vile
mekanicall method of being obliged to get bread, by working at my business.

I leave you in good hands, I know my landlord loves you; and if during my
exile, as he is rich, you admit him into my throne, only for a time, why it
will be political; I give you leave, as it may expedite my recall. As Congreve
says, he takes your body, I your mind. I must have the better bargain --
remember this is my request, nay, my command to yield yourself up to one
person, for the sake of another, and what is done by the finest women in
England, and what I would do for you, with the finest woman in England.

Adieu.

After Samly had put the letter in the postoffice, he recollected his dear
Chloe could not read -- however, upon reflection, he was not sorry for that;
for, by heavens, and all the ingenuity of arts and sciences, he called out, it
is an elegant Epistle, equal to any of Pope's literary correspondence; and
whoever my girl gets to read my letter for her, will and must admire the
writer, and with me lament the loss which the town must receive, by those
fellows of managers not employing me.

Just as the epistle abovementioned came to hand, it happened that Miss Shred
was upon a visit to Miss Justice, or Mrs. Samly, as she was called in the
neighborhood. This young lady, the visitor, had a very great taste for plays
herself, and was an occasional actress at Richmond, and at Bartholomew Fair;
her father has been breeches seater to me these nine years, and it was from his
mouth, that I have been assured of the authenticity of this relation.

As soon as Miss Justice had heard the letter read, she shrieked, she stamped,
she wrung her hands, she took salts: not Ariadne for the loss of Theseus; not a
queen condemned to the ducking-stool; not -- but no allusions could carricature
her. Her lamentations brought up the landlord Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, to whom Miss
Shred discovered Samly's perfidy, although she did not show him the letter, but
begged Mr. David would leave the lady a little until she came to herself. As it
is good manners to do so, we will attend the chair -- carrying gentleman down
stairs, who rejoiced exceedingly at the two pieces of good news, as he called
them.

In the first place, to find Mr. Samly was not her husband; and in the next
place, to suppose Mr. Samly was run away from her; for David long had loved,
long had he secretly admired her.

The tender God of soft desires roused all the sentimental soul of
Llwhyddwhuydd, softning his heart, as vinegar will render marble supple.

'Twas on the 4th day after Mr. Samly and his Chloe had taken the lodgings,
that Miss Justice fried some beef stakes and onions for Mr. Samly's dinner, and
invited their landlord to the feast; so relishing was the sauce, Page 21.

so crisp the vegetables, that the landlord thought her the finest woman he
ever saw; but when, on the next day, he discovered her darning so nicely her
gallant's stocking, which, like a French chicken glove, she had drawn upon her
arm, while Samly was rehearsing Othello, the conquest was complete, he became
perfectly her slave, and sighing, vowed, upon his honor, madam Samly was the
most compleatest gentlewoman to look to, that ever he did see in all his life.
Dash not the book down, oh ye delicate, because I have related unembellished
the beginning of love. -- Love has many beginnings, but one ending. Love is
like the city of London in a map of England, and the senses are the turnpike
roads on which travelers trot to it. Love is like the tunes in the Beggars
Opera, nay, its like the Beggars Opera itself; because the catastrophe is often
brought about very unexpectedly.

Men have odd tastes; why then should David be blamed for this? Is it not
common for ladies to relate the surprising conquests they have made over their
husbands, and the simple means by which those victories have been obtained.
Madam Blanch avowed to me, her spouse fell in love with her for her small ear.
The deputy's wife shot her good man with a pair of black satin shoes, and
stone buckles; the motion of the hips in walking has made many lady's fortune.
Esquire Pointer declared but last week, he was particularly struck with the
white point of his wife's elbow: and with all-becoming reverence for the
marriage state do I speak this, as I am myself in that nuptial band, I was won
to surrender my liberty to the all excellent graces of my wife, who, in her
virgin state, alarmed my eager desires, when she threw herself into that most
graceful attitude of tying her garter. Here I must beg leave to be indulged
with some anecdotes concerning my spouse.

She was born, she was bred a gentlewoman, I married her out of Sir Trinket
Trolly's family; her mamma was companion to lady Trolly, and my wife, born in
that house, was educated in all the becoming elegance, inherent to a woman of
the first quality.

While I paid my addresses to her, several wealthy tradesmen proffered her
their services; but her soul was above mixing with vulgarities. She scorned to
listen to the voice of mechanic money-loving-slaves, she valued the addresses
of a man of wit, more than all Peru.

On that hint I spoke,

She loved me for the stories which I told;
And I loved her, 'cause she did listen to them.
The rules of politeness obliged us to leave the afflicted Miss Justice, when
decency desired Davy to go down stairs; but now we have liberty again to walk
into her apartment. -- Sit down, good reader, you are very welcome, the young
lady is pretty well recovered, a serenity beams upon her brow, there is not the
least print of affliction's footsteps to be seen upon her countenance.

But this calmness was not owing either to the affected pedantry of school
stoicism, called philosophy, which honest teague, who never read a page of
Seneca, so well defined, by saying, by Jasus I am born to be unhappy, so I Will
make myself very easy about the matter.

Neither was the young lady of so callous a constitution, as to be easily
reconciled to the departure of her gallant, by the method which the present
females of intrigue make use of, viz. immediately to throw themselves in the
way of another -- no, this happy restoration was effected by that never-failing
Nostrum, Nants Brandy. Q. S.

Miraculous specific! blush, blush, ye diplomists of Gresham, ye who pretend to
understand things; asico for your knowledge, pound all the Materia Medica
together in a mortar, can ye compose such a mental Succedaneum? -- Behold,
reader, the two young ladies, and mark with what courteous words the visiting
lady addresses the lady visited.

Mrs. Shred. My dear Samly take the other pinch, it will do your head good. Thus
kindly did my taylor's daughter console her companion, untwisting at the same
time her paper of rappee.


Mrs. Justice. Call me not Samly, dear creature, I conjure you, I detest the
name. Oh Miss Shred! what woman would ever put her trust in man.


Mrs. Shred. Curse on um indeed, my dear, man is as the poet says, Deceitful as
the vind.

Therefore woe be to the woman, who has imbibed any fond ideas for Wits or
Players, or such sort of Geniusses.

Curse me, if ever Wit did any good to man, woman or child, since the invention
of clean linen. -- As to WIT'S perdition, catch such scrubs -- they behave as
bad to their ladies, as they do to one another.

They Will never give an absent friend a good word, or allow a girl a second gown
to see company in.


Miss Shred's Story.
Yes -- I must confess, a wit was the first man who really had me, that is,
critically speaking, possessed my soul; as to my person, that was merely
passive, in all those other connections, to which my interest made me submit;
because, as I was then upon the town, and my inclinations not being engaged
with my embraces, I was as indifferent to the performance as an actress, when
she plays a part don't please her.

In London, madam, there are men, as well as women, on the town, and they go by
the names of Wits, and Droles, and Clever-fellows, and Choice Spirits; whether
they give these titles to themselves, or other people call them so, its no
matter, but they are sent for into company to divert people of fashion, with
what they can do, just as girls are, I mean, madam, in the way of singing and
saying comic things, and telling stories.

It is a shame though, men should expose themselves so, because they are all of
them bred to trades, and might get their livings honestly and decently, if they
were not a set of lazy, mean-spirited, and conceited fellows.

Now when any of our sex is blasted, it is all up with us, we are unhappy
enough to be reduced to the necessity of going into company, or starving; no
body will employ us in an honest way; because a girl who is forced to be a
whore for her livelihood, is looked upon (especially by all good christians) to
be the most contemptible creature upon the face of the earth.

I sent a card to one of these wits and geniuses to sup with me; the
consequence of which you may naturally suppose -- we went to bed together. --
Really I loved him infinitely, for he was not only vastly clever, but immensely
odd, and that, you know, takes with our sex immoderately.

But he soon behaved as all such sort of people will, horridly ungrateful. For
after I had paid all his debts (they were not large, indeed, because no shops
would give him much credit) new clothed him, and put money in his pocket, he
used me -- as surlily, as if I had been his wife; had I really been married to
him, he could not have treated me worse.

The word fool, fool; was perpetually his answer, not only to me, but to all
his acquaintance; we were all fools, he swore, and yet in the whole fifteen
months of our cohabitation, though he called every body bockheads, yet he never
did one rational, or just thing: but by chance; he could repartee drolely, tell
very high stories, argue charmingly upon all subjects, make songs as fast as I
could cut out cap-patterns; but his words and his deeds were no more alike,
than the sign of a dolphin, and a real one.

He once wrote a book in praise of neatness in dress, of elegace, and of
decency, he was three weeks about it, and in all that time, never washed his
hands, face or teeth once. -- Cleanliness, or dirt, was all the same to him,
money or no money -- only let him but get into company, 'was all he cared for,
when he had no money, he was tossed into the reckonings when he got three or
four guineas, he threw it away; and he would sooner sit without shifting
himself for a fortnight, in a night cellar, if he had no body left that he
could make laugh but link boys, than be regular to the bounds of decency and
domestic enjoyments.

He grew so overbearing at last, so irregular and so obstinate, that I could
not bear it -- he scorned to be talked to, and too proud to say he had ever
been in the wrong -- he was indeed, as all wits are, irresolute and froward as
a baby, giddy as a drunken man, absent as a lunatic, as difficult to be pleased
as a vexed idiot, and conceited as an Opera Singer.

Oh, my dear, never have any thing to do with your geniuses, unless you can get
one of them now and then to write a song upon you, for that very often helps a
lady to many a good friend -- but for all that, I never would have any
connection with such sort of sparks -- as to granting a man that made a good
song upon me a favor, ang passawnt, as the French say, I should not mind it --
but don't never, dear creature, be fond of them -- no -- the only men worth a
lady's notice, are those gentlemen, who have no wit indeed, but then they have
what is better than all the wit, genius and understanding in the world -- and
what most commonly wit, genius and understanding never have any thing to do
with; and that is, MONEY -- Money, my dear. Let but a lady have that -- and she
is sure of having, doing, saying, and being, just what she pleases.

The next person to whom I was predestined, happened to be neither a wit nor
a scholar, nevertheless he was both a genius and a gentleman, because he was a
gamester. As daring as a lion, he would as soon draw his sword as his
snuff box, and was as quick as volatile salts.

He valued his honor before any other consideration, in the way of playing any
game at cards or dice; for he would sooner venture his life than be found out,
so careful was he of his honor. You cannot imagine how polite he was, and what
fine company he kept, although, as I told you, he could hardly write his name,
or spell a word of two syllables; but a gentleman's being ignorant of letters,
is no proof against his politeness; for really, I believe, it would go very
hard with some folks of the best company, if they were to be examined
concerning their reading and writing.

Miss JUSTICE. Very true, indeed, miss; but thank God, persons in polite life,
are two well bred to be pedants, and I would no more ask any fine gentleman or
lady after their scholarships, than I would after their religion; because both
the one and the other's out of fashion now.


Miss SHRED. Well, madam, my friend did such things in the money-winning way,
and with such grace! -- to be sure he lived like a nobleman, and mantained me
like a duchess; I had my equipage all upon gilded springs, and I used to scorn
all low bred persons, as I called them, for walking a foot; because, as my
friend used to tell me, nobody never need be poor, if they had but a spirit to
do things -- for if people wanted luck, they should make it, or else be
punished with poverty for their faintheartedness. -- But for all that, what by
the law, or by one thing or another, we dwindled, to be obliged to live in a
two pair of stairs back-room, madam, as you may do now; and I cannot but say, we
used to sit and think ourselves very ill done by Providence -- because, why
should we be poor? when we took as much pains in the proper way of getting
fortunes, as ever any people did who got estates, as the fashion is now to get
them. Well, madam, at last we parted, and he married a methodist's widow, with
500 l. a year jointure, and I engaged myself as a figure dancer at the Opera
House, because I was told, a lady had a better chance there of being taken into
keeping, than at the English Play Houses. But I did not find the Opera people's
taste so eager at intriguing with any of our sex, as I expected. -- O, curse
that Italy, my dear -- but no more of that -- I grew very low, and I sent to my
late friend, who had married the methodist's widow for a guinea; and his answer
was, truly he had done with all the vanities of this life, and so should I; and
that he would advise me not to look after money, but go and seek the Lord.


Miss JUSTICE. But who am I to seek, who will seek me?


Miss SHRED. Nay, as to that, madam, never despair, remember what is said to
you in the letter about your landlord David. -- I am sure it may be easily
brought about for him to marry you, I have so often heard him say, what would
he give for such a wife as you.


Page 7th. Case 1.



Miss JUSTICE. But, dear creature, would it not be immensely shocking, and
absurd in me -- in me, to descend from being an actor's, nay a manager's
mistress, and become a chairman's wife -- perish that thought -- can I bear it?
can I, dear Miss Shred, can I, who came from a gentleman's family. Yes, madam,
my papa was a counselor at law, he was prosecuted for his merit, persecuted
for the superiority of his talents, and banished from his native country by
faction; but I am his own daughter; and can I ever agree to have these arms
filled with any body, who is not a gentleman born, or who is not so by
profession; or is not a person of consequence, ay, consequence; that was what
my deceiver Samly used to insist upon; his consequence; but why should I
mention him, or any other belonging to the stage; I, who have suffered by my
fatal connection with an actor; O! that the world was all in flames, that final
destruction might seize on all, since I am deceived; deserted. Farther she
could not proceed, for her friend, fearful least her companion should relapse
into fresh grief, snatched up the pewter measure in a moment, in which was one
remaining cordial draught, and holding it to Chloe's lips, insisted on her not
making any more words, but drink it off.


CHLOE, [Wiping her lips. Dear Shred, you are so immensely kind; that, to
convince you of my esteem, I will be ruled by you, and marry this horrid
creature; nay, I Will do more; for from henceforth I bid adieu to all high life't
ideas, to the fond charms of even dear intrigue.


Miss SHRED. Miss Justice, you should not make rash vows; consider, my dear,
you are a gentlewoman, and many gentlewomen marry only for the sake of
intriguing; we should use the sex as that sex ought to be used. I would always
choose the man, who I fancied most properest for my interest, to be my husband;
and then choose the man, whom I most fancied, for my lover.


CHLOE. But how, dear creature, am I sure, that as this odd mortal, this David,
my landlord, now he knows I was only Samly's mistress, how am I sure, I say,
that he will have me for a wife? and upon my soul, I would sooner die than
derogate so far from the dignity of my birth, and my principles of honor; as
to live with any man but a gentleman, without being married to him.


Miss SHRED. As to that, my dear, you are vastly in the right on it; and our sex
ought to be as strict in keeping up our consequence, in that point, as any, or
more than any other; but as to the landlord's knowing of your having an affair
-- to be sure, although he is but a chairman, yet he is a Welshman; and he
might, perhaps, have too much spirit, had he not lived so many years at this
end of the town, as to know that it is fashionable; and what is fashionable,
you know, must be polite. Besides, my dear, not one of his companions dare to
hit him in the teeth with it, if he was to marry you, for fear of offending one
or other of their best customers.


CHLOE. I am determined; but, at the same time, am as determined, to avoid even
the appearance of intrigue; what other ladies of taste and delicacy do, shall
be no rule for me to go by. I will be true to my husband, my honor, and
myself, nor ever again grant any other man (save him) an involuntary embrace.


The next week's sun saw her blazoned in the matrimonial installation. With how
much firmness of soul, she maintained her resolution of chastity, will be
expressed in some of the succeeding chapters. In the conclusion of this, I
hope, the reader will give me leave to observe, that though, like Miss Shred,
ladies may be women of the town, and actresses at the same time; and that there
are some females belonging to the Theaters, who, now publicly act in both
capacities; yet so far from being a reproach, it is the greatest argument,
which can be brought, in support of the profession of a player; for although
the want of chastity, like the want of money, may make some people appear but
in an indifferent light; yet, according to the times, neither of them have any
thing to do, at present, with the respect which is paid to the accomplishments
of genius.

SCENE MATRIMONY.
ON the wedding-night, after the raptures of enjoyment between Mr. and Madam
Llwhyddwhudd were evaporated; when every heartfelt thrill and throb of desire
subsided; each fine string of delight, which had been extatic stretched by
imagination's apparatus, let down into a philosophic relaxation, the new
married pair lay back to back. -- The lady being most restless, was
considering, whether it would, or would not, offend the rules of delicacy, if
she was once again to turn to her husband.

Her spouse was then debating, since he had married so good a cook, and so
notable a woman, about making his house a public one; which he did the winter
following, and had great business, among the best people in the neighborhood;
his spouse being so obliging a landlady, occasioned the famous TRIPE AND
TROTTER CLUB, to be instituted at Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd's.

THE TRIPE AND TROTTER CLUB, was the original of all the other Clubs now
existing in this metropolis. -- From thence came the famous Beef-stake Clubs,
the Whist Clubs, the Ox-cheek Clubs, the Jockey Clubs, the Hornpipe Clubs, the
Pea-soup Clubs, the Choice Spirit Clubs, the Spirituous Liquor Clubs, the
Political Clubs, the Philosophical Clubs, the Roasting Clubs, the Punning
Clubs, the Spouting Clubs, the Kept Misses Clubs, and the Club of Discontents.

David, as he began to get money, grew asthmatical and pot-bellied; not
breathing so freely as he was will not to do, it frightened him; like the rest of
the wealth accumulating part of mankind, he was terrified at the thoughts of
dying, therefore sent for a physician immediately.

Reader, you must have known such persons, who, while they worked for their
living, were useful members to society; but when, by chance or craft, they
become masters of money, assumed a haughtiness of behavior, abandoning
themselves to a vitiated state of idleness, and gluttony. The event is, their
being seized with a complication of infirmities, which, in their active and
praiseworthy state, they felt not; they hurry to a doctor, give five guineas
for advice, in hopes to have a worthless carcass sheathed from the worms;
which, was it to continue on the earth for twenty years longer, would not be of
five shillings use to any of its fellow creatures.

David, by his physician's order, was to return to his former trade; this he
had entirely left off; his soul, as he said, being always rather above such an
employment; but when health is concerned, when a life is to be saved by it --
although a lady or gentleman may have ever so good a spirit, to be sure, upon
such considerations, they must give way; according to Sir John Falstaff's
aphorism,

Honor must be hid in necessity. While Mr. David was putting himself once more
into chair-carrying exercise, some soldiers were ordered to be quartered in his
neighborhood; and Corporal Knott brought a billet for himself, to Mrs.
Llwhyddwhuydd's

The Corporal was a gentleman remarkable for his gallantry; he had had as many
fine woman as any general officer; he was formed for intrigue, and graced with
every accomplishment which could undo the fair.

He sung all the songs in the Beggars Opera, he could speak ten Tragedy love
speeches, could dance a hornpipe, show tricks with cards, balance a lady's fan
upon his nose, no gentleman could fill a tea-pot more gracefully, or swear more
often, or more agreeably: then he wore his hat so smartly bluff, and his hair
was powdered so smooth, could he have been but as constant as he was lovely.
Yet as no man is perfect, he affected to imitate his betters, and boast of his
amors.

It is natural for one hero to take another for his pattern; he chose Alexander
the Great for his; it was the Macedonians frailty to glory too much in his
conquests; which Arrian could no more excuse in the son of Philip, than I can
in Corporal Knott.

He, though admired by the fair, was disliked by his brother subalterns,
especially the veterans, who, hagged by winter campaigns, their faces
weather-worn, and scarified; did not like to see him look so plump, so pert, so
smoothfaced, and wear his linen so well ironed; when they, who had endured all
the inclemency of every hard season, in the tented and untented fields of
unhospitable Germany; who reflected, that, at the time they were thus fighting
their country's battles, instead of wearing nice plaited linen, had not any
linen to plait; and half a dozen brave British battallion boys, who scorned to
turn their backs upon double the number of French fellows, though all beruffled
and chitterlin'd, yet all their linen, would not set up a tinder merchant.

They snarled at this beau Corporal; swearing he was not fit for any service,
but just to make one in an officer's guard, at the Opera-house.

Often have I heard these non-commissioned heroes, as they have limped along --
that defect in their gait proceeding, either from the wounds received in
battle; or from the neglect of not being dressed after the fight; or from
incurable contractions, or relaxations, the fatal effects of being exposed to
the scorching heats, and sudden damps of Africa, and America; and to the
severity of wintering in ill-provided quarters, on the banks of the Rhine, the
Weeser, the Lip, etc. etc. for which, perhaps, Flemish and Dutch
commissaries, * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * I was present at the
disputation, which old Winterness had with Corporal Knott on this subject;
which, with the reader's leave, we'll insert -- because, if it is not a story,
it is a dialogue; and as it is a dialogue, it will be a means of displaying a
copper-plate exhibition of an old warrior, and a junior fine gentleman; or,
more properly, to explain the print; it is a contrast between the Charms of
Peace in Mr. Knott's figure, and the Fortune of War in the old soldier's
portrait.

At the valiant tooper the altercation happened; old Winterness was relating in
the Corporal's company all the engagements he had been in; fighting all his
battles over and over again, and marking with a stick, upon the sand of the
alehouse kitchen, the marches and countermarches of our armies, dwelling with
emphasis on the spot where he had received a shot, or lost a limb. -- There, my
boys, just there, where I put my foot now, there I stood on the left of the
Scotch greys, and had these two cuts on my skull, and, as it might be here, I
had these three wounds; and supposing now these pieces of pipe to be our front
line, as I was to the right of the royal, a musket ball took me in flank, and
went through both my thighs, and there Sir, as I was running after the French
Pollavousees, I lost the use of my right eye; and, Sir, supposing this full-pot
now to be Bocachica castle, there I stood while we were attacking it; and here
it was, that I left my arm and leg at Cartagenah. -- But what then -- I don't
think much at it, not I -- I have gained honor and glory enough for an honest
man -- I know what it is to serve my country -- and so here is his Majesty King
George's health, and all his family, and Old England for ever -- and as to my
limbs, why they are welcome to um, as welcome as I am to this tobacco of my own
buying.

This limb-losing conversation was foreign to the Corporal's thoughts; he had
been bred up in polite and delicate principles, which was diametrically
opposite to such gothic customs; although several people of birth lately, have
been mad enough to relapse into their forefathers rusticity, and not mind the
sun's spoiling their complexions, nor different climates having any Page 36th

effect upon their constitutions; and have been as cool amidst batteries,
broadsides, pitched battles, and forts storming, as if they were only dancing
minuets at an assembly in England. -- Yet the Corporal did not exceedingly
relish such maiming honors; for, in his days, fighting for one's country was
not made such a fashion among fine gentlemen, as it is at present; therefore he
rejoiced, that a peace had been so expeditiously manufactured.

Yet he was ready, with a small sword, to give any private gentleman
satisfaction -- because that was fighting upon honor, which no person of
honor could refuse -- but fighting for one's country may be refused; because
you may have -- or -- or -- or -- or -- or -- etc. etc. Knott, unwilling that
Old Chelsea should win all the applause of the company, interrupted the
scar-furrowed grenadier; observing, that a man might run as many risques, be in
as many dangers at home, as abroad; and to prove it, related his intrigues with
several fine women.

First, he recounted the hair breadth scapes to get Miss Neatsfoot, the
tripe-man's daughter off -- how he scaled the back garret, how he knocked down
the watchman, and how the town was obliged to him for bringing so accomplished
a girl upon it -- thus the Corporal went on. -- It was I that gave that girl
the first idea of acting. I ust to tell her, how the first time she got into
grand keeping, she must persuade her friend to speak to some of the managers,
about letting her come upon the Stage; because I know that is common -- ay, and
it is grown a scheme too among several gentlemen about town, to get rid of their
women that way; for when a girl grows stale upon their hands, and they want to
part with her genteely, without being a settlement out of pocket by her; why
then these gentlemen, will call on one or other of the managers, and so, in a
sort of half-asking favourway, they will tell the proprietor, that there is a
fine woman of their acquaintance, who they know will be of service in the
Playhouse; and taking the patentee by the hand, the'll say -- come set the
girl down in the list, pon honor I shall take it immensely kind, I know you
will not refuse me, what is forty or fifty shillings a week out of your pocket;
besides, I am sure she will earn it. And this is the way that we have women of
the town belonging to the Theaters.

Then, continued the Corporal, there was Bett Filbert, she was the best dressed
fruit girl about St. James's market -- I beat the reforming rascals for her --
no woman of quality, though she had ever so fine a silk stocking, and diamond
shoe-buckle on, could show a neater leg and foot then Bett's was, with her
silver clasps, red clocks, and pinned up petticoats; and as to an elegant and
polite manner of doing things; who ever opened oysters with more affability
then Bett? or made a hot-pot with more taste then she did?

Then there was Waste Butt, the publican's widow, I spent about five and forty
pounds of her money, only she grew too fond; and when once a woman begins to
behave so its fulsome, and what no man of true delicacy can bear; I was
obliged, therefore, to leave her, and got cherry-cheeked Judy, that used to
lisp at Buckingham-gate, can o'milk, Sir? -- I was private then, my officer
made me a corporal for her -- I a'nt the first gentleman, I suppose, who has
made his fortune by women, nor come to preferment, by giving up his mistress.

Winterness, Who had sat chewing the cud of disappointment, to be cut off in
the concatenation of all his glorious recitals, and by a smockfaced boy too, as
he muttered to me; rose up, like Ajax, boiling with rage, and casting his eyes
upon the Corporal, he burst out with,

Why then, Sir, I must tell you -- that a man of honor, Sir -- striking his
fist at the same time against his waistcoat breast buttons, a man of honor,
Sir, would as soon sell his king as his mistress. -- A soldier, let me tell
you, Sir, would as soon desert from his post, or run away from his colors, as
give his girl up -- I have been among the beauties in my time, Sir -- but
before I would surrender my woman to a general officer's summons, I Would be
drummed out of the regiment for cowardice; and as to advancement, I have got
Chelsea honestly -- I never won preferment by pimping.


Corporal. Do You call me pimp, Sir?


This dispute would certainly have grown serious, had not the Editor of this
work started up between them -- whispered Knott, that he saw a fine girl pass
by the sash window, and give the Corporal a beckon; away skipped Knott, and I
begged old Winterness to be pacified; and that I would bring him half a pound
of the best pigtail next sunday.

This pleased the veteran, he shook the Editor heartily by the hand, promised
him never to mind any more fools for the future; swore, when he dyed he would
leave me all his papers, if I would promise him to write the history of an old
soldier.

It is necessary we should return to the other personages of our dramatical
copper-plate history; and consider to what purpose Corporal Knott was
introduced into this narration; with regret I record it, but Madam
Llwhyddwhuydd, for all her resolutions, fell in love with him.

Sometimes a lady's vows, like French treaties, are not to be relied on -- they
are like hasty made acts of parliament, which the cunning of conv^niency can
always find means to evade. -- Besides, when love is in the case; nay, when
money, for love and money are like a principle in mechanics, which acts equal
and contrary. Love is equal in its power of action to money, but contrary in
its effects; for as money will make persons blind to every thing, but their own
interest; love will make persons see every thing, but their own interest. And
with this mechanical, metaphysical, tritical, critical, and analytical
disquisition, proper it is to finish this scene of the drama.

The CHOICE SPIRITS FARCE.
There is somewhat vastly significant, not only in the reputation of being a
soldier, but also in a soldier's reputation; which made Madam Llwhyddwhuydd, as
soon as ever the Corporal came with his billet to her house, regard him with an
eye of complacency.

But when she heard what a number of women he had ruined, she could not take
her eyes from him, not being able to imagine what he possessed so
extraordinary, that made so many Page 41.

ladies fall in love with him -- and as we know curiosity has as sudden and
violent effect upon the frame of a fine woman, as an hysteric; she determined
to be satisfied.

The Corporal conceived a most violent inclination for her, from the moment he
was convinced her husband was a monied man, and that she bore the purse.

He immediately opened his trenches with a love speech, made regular
approaches, by squeezing her hand; planted his battery of ogles against her;
and quickly found he had a friend in the garrison, which determined him to make
one general assault, by a billet doux, that he resolved should be in the most
elegant manner; and concluded to have a song wrote upon her.

He enquired among the Choice Spirits, who then held their meetings, like the
primitive christians, by stealth, the reforming constables carrying on terrible
prosecutions against them; he found them at the cat and bagpipe, in
Rosemary-lane, after declaring, upon honor, he was no informer; and owning his
business; he was inducted to the president, whom you see in the print, one
George Alexander Stevens, and who was recommended to the Corporal as a
song-writer.

Stevens received sixpence from him as earnest; for it was a rule, which the
poets of that club had made, to always have half the money down; and the
president declared he would write the song, as soon as ever the disputation was
over, which the gentleman's entrance had put a stop to.

The argument was warmly supported by the two altercators, Stevens and Harry
Howard the ass-man, concerning essential qualities. George insisted, the only
acquisitions, which could constitute human happiness, were temperance,
stability, and propriety of behavior. -- Harry, on the contrary, swore, that
there were no accomplishments worth a man's while to be master of, except good
breeding, and a good education. This dispute would have lasted much longer, had
not a headborough opened the door, and producing a warrant against Harry Howard
for scurrility, took away one side of the argument.

A sheriff's officer would have carried off the other, he came there with a
thief-take's dog fearful of a rescue -- but least the thread of our history
should be snapped too soon, we shall turn over this cause and arrest, to the
chapter entitled the art of bail-taking, or -- the -- by -- London -- and
Westminster.

All gentlemen performers in the pen and ink way of song-making, must
acknowledge it is extremely unlucky, when the lady's name, whose person they
are to celebrate, will not make a proper rhyme.

The number of pretty ballads which are sung every summer season, at all
public places of entertainment, would lose one part of their merit, were it
not for the name jingle, which so aptly terminates every stanza; such as Kitty
Downs And Zouns Miss Apple And Couple Polly Savage And Cabbage Love Miss
Harriot And Judas Iscariot


What then could a song-maker do with Llwhyddwhuydd? had he not cunningly
supplied that defect, by versifying her Creolian name Chloe; and fitted up so
tasty a love-song for the Corporal, that Mr. Knott, taking the bard by the
hand, swore, had he had any more money about him to signify, he would have made
George a handsome present, over and above what he agreed with him for; however,
the military man's spirit was so great, and he was so well pleased with the
verses, that he slipped the remaining change of sixpence into the poet's hand,
which was all Knott had, after paying for a tankard of porter, the entrance
fee, which every body subscribed, according to the rules of the room, before
they could be admitted honorary members.

The Editor of this undertaking cannot be so ungrateful, as to suffer such a
noble action of the Corporal's to slip, without taking proper notice of it.

To the most Noble, most Worthy, most -- etc. etc. etc.

Ye great men of many manors, who at this present writing can choose your
taverns, and pay a ready money reckoning for every dainty you call for; while
I, twirling my mutton before an ill-supplied fire, am stretching the elasticity
of my invention, to its utmost pitch, how to obtain, upon credit, one single
beer and beer libation. -- Oh, would ye but imitate this generous soldier's
behavior, and bestow upon the artists, you employ, a premium for their merit.
But artists, perhaps, would think themselves happy, could they, instead of
being paid overplus, only receive the prices they agreed for.

But laments are vain, the laborers of genius, and the lollers in a coach and
six, are no more analogous, than politics and plain-dealing.

Honestly and bona side I speak; if they do call me names, I cannot help it; but
of all the rich people in England, were it not for their money, would have no
more sense, no more wit, no more taste, no more generosity, no more humanity,
no more learning, no more affability, nor more of any more, mores, than we
have, who are obliged to mind our books, to make the pot boil.

Yet writers, who pretend to satyrise rich folks, are to blame; nor should any
pen and ink dealers call the expectants and dependants of wealthy men, who are
known by the name of toad-eaters, to an account for their behavior.

To be sure, the members of the toad-eating club will give his honor vast
applause, if his honor says but any thing bordering upon common sense; and
they will also lift up their hands and eyes, with theatrical astonishment, if
her ladyship should make an observation pertinent to the subject, and extol the
vastness of their patron's capacities. Now I cannot see any flattery in all
this; for it is wonderful, considering rich peoples education. The ductility of
their tutors, the venality of their menials, and the libertinisms they are
indulged in; how they can ever say, think, or do any thing, to the purpose.

Heirs to great fortunes are born as well minded, very often, as the poorest
tenant's child under them; but the understanding of the eldest hope of great
families, is either totally neglected, or else cultivated in an improper manner.

The reason why men of genius are so seldom rewarded by men of fortune, is,
because men of fortune don't understand genius; therefore rich people are more
proper objects for pity than satire. It is the want of having their minds
justly improved by arts and sciences, which makes them such strangers, to the
happiness of knowing what to do with their time.

To be a man of fashion, they think, is the excellence of perfection; or they
would not lavish such vast sums for the encouragement of grooms, gamblers,
prostitutes and rare-shows; when so many works of public utility become
abortive, and so many artists pine away for want of the hand of bounty, to
bring them to life, for the service of their country.

Is it not a shame, that in so noble a nation as England, renowned throughout
the world for arts and arms, the major part of those, who should set a better
example, only exhaust themselves and their fortunes, in an eternal round of
visits, cards, auctions, foreign fiddlers, and ballad-singers.

As to ballad-singers and ballad-makers, the difference is trifling in regard
of their merit; but the reward is not proportionable. This Stevens, to my
knowledge, has wrote upwards of 200 songs, yet never was so well paid for any;
nay, for all the rest, as for that one he made the Corporal.

The POET'S BILL.
Received as earnest for making a love song upon Madam Chloe, to consist of
four verses 0 0 6 Paid the remainder of my demand as soon as I had finished my
work 0 0 6 Received overplus, or by way of premium 0 0 3 Sum total for Poetry 0
1 3

All the rest of this man's songs, I am certain (the weight of paper excepted)
would not now sell for so much money.

For the entertainment of the curious, we insert the verses that Mr. Knott
bespoke, printed from the author's original copy.

And as this song comprehends all that has been, or can be comprehended, in the
composition of love-song-writing, according to the method at present of the
public garden poets; the Editor presumes, this may serve as a pattern, or
measure, for all future amorous stanza makers, to cut out their works by, who
intend to write for the amusements of the summer parties, that swarm from
Ranelagh Rotunda, to the New Tunbridge.

A New SONG.
Called CHLOE LLWHYDDWHUYDD. An lambic, Sapphic and Lyric,
by G. A. Stevens.
Embellished with Notes, by H. Howard, Esquire Author and Etcher in Ordinary.
STROPHE I.
DOWN the Parnassian heights I soar,
Upon Pegasus' back my fancy I bore.
Bright Phoebus, with Apollo here, attend,
Be all ye Muses nine the poet's friend,
A Poet, as I Will show ye;
From France to Philadelphia's climes,
No haberdasherer of rhimes,
Can boast a Toast like Chloe.
Notes on the first Verse.
Soar and Bore.
Some people say; those two lines are rather false grammar, and it should be,
that Pegasus bore; but I say, whatever bad grammar they may be, they are good
rhimes; and as Mr. Skeggs and Mr. Massy both observed, that is the most
materialest thing in a song; because there are very few singers nowadays, who
will let you know whether they sing sense or nonsense, So for that reason I
never troubled my head with what I published in that respect.

H. H.

Phoebus and Apollo.
Phoebus signifies the sun, according to the dictionary; and Apollo is said to
be the God of physic and poetry. So a person said last night, that was the
reason why rhime-writings were generally called drugs; and also, why a great
deal of poetry was used in physical operations.

Philadelphia.
That word was put in, because the lady was born in the West Indies.

STANZA I.
She is not -- yes, she is complete,
Her alablaster, ivory teeth so neat;
Her eyes like starry suns all hearts illume,
And Zephyrus whistling sighs, her lips perfume;
Where is her marrow know ye?
Her cheeks are cochineel'd; her breasts
Are Cupid's kettle-drums, and love's birds nests,
That Venus builds for Chloe.
NOTES to the second Verse.
She is not.
The word not is a pun upon Corporal Knott's name. Your critics, that know no
better, will call out about false spelling; but I never mind that, I can write
songs for all them, or that either.

Alablaster and Ivory.
These words are two similes, to describe whitnesses, and clearnesses.

Like Starry Suns.
Poets may do what they will with nature, make stars suns, and suns stars;
because we have the poetica licentious for it.

Her Marrow.
That is a Yorkshire word, and signifies an equal; or a person upon the same
footing as yourself; introducing such obsolete words, gives the poem a true
pastoral turn; and as it is intended to be sung in an evening in the music
loft, among the lamps and trees, it ought to have some out of town allusions in
it.

Her Cheeks Cochineel'd.
One of the best lines, the thought is mine, but it is wrong spelt, it should be
scutchineel'd; because scutchineel is a better red than vermilion, and takes
its name from the herald painters, first using it in painting scutcheons.

The simile of scutchineel also signifies, that as those insects are never used
but after their death, so her cheeks would not lose her color until after she
is dead.

Cupid's Kettle-drums.
That Is a double ontender, and love's birds-nests another; and without such
things, a song will not fell. I told the author, I would etch him a headpiece to
this song about the bird's nest; because, what sells so well as smutty pictures
now; especially with a dash of politics in them, and politics is easy brought
in any how -- truly Mr. George said, he would not offend decency; then people
are damnably deceived in you, thought I; but, as I told him, why George, says
I, is there not a great many tradesmen, freemen of the city of London, men well
to pass, and masters of families, who are not ashamed, to have their
sash-windows filled with bawdy, blackguard prints; and why should you then
trouble your head about it? I Will answer, we could get money by it, and as long
as a man can but do that, and not go to Newgate, why it does not signify what
he does; and as to decency, I despise it; for I have always got a good living
(thank God) without it. However, George woud'nt consent, so I set him down
obstinate.

STROPHE encore.
Tempests I Will tear up by the root,
Earthquakes I Will undermine to boot;
With the galaxy of the milky way,
Upon Jove's threshold I Will at marbles play,
And stake my fair so showy;
I Will dare the synagogue of gods,
And play or pay, I Will lay the odds,
That nothing never beats Chloe.
NOTES to the third Verse.
Tear up Tempests by the Root.
This is a figure in poety, signifying, that the earth shall pull her hair
about her ears, in a passion. Trees are often said to be, in song-writing, the
locks of hair of the world's head.

To BOOT.
There Is a fine word for a pun, and fine punc have been made about it, and now
I don't care who knows it, but I have done more of those pieces of wit, than
any one else; they were all afraid; but I was like a true gamester, I went
nothing to something. I knew I could not be worse; and if they did take me up, I
was sure to be a great man, as long as I lived; because I should have suffered
martyrdom, for my wit and humor.

Galaxy.
There is no such a word, at least not that I know off. I asked the author, and
he told me, it was the mosaic pavement of Jupiter and Juno's gallery; but I was
not to be hummed so; for what business has Moses with Heathen Deities; not that
I know any thing about religion; I would as soon make a song about Moses, as I
did about Zebra; if I could get as much money by it.

The Synagogue of Gods.
This signifies something about parsin Whitfield, and his tabernacle-people,
but what, the author will not tell me.

Play or Pay, lay the odds, Nothing never beats Chloe.
This is the true verbatum language, used by sporting men, at all the meetings
in England, Scotland, and Ireland.

STANZA encore.
When time's sharp scythe mows down my breath,
Shall I not in my quick expiring death,
In tinkling rills her murmuring whispers hear,
While she, like echo sobbing, sighs, my dear,
Oh Corporal where go ye;
Revived; I Will rush into her arms,
And ravish all her curling charms,
And charm my charming Chloe.
NOTES to the fourth Verse.
Times Scythe mowing down his Breath,
Is a fine metaphor; and to be met with, or something to the same purpose, in
almost all the love songs for many years past.

Echo sobbing.
Because echo, Mr. Littleton in his dictionary says, she sighed herself into a
consumption.

Charm my charming Chloe.
That I will venture to say, is one of the most charming lines that I, or
Shakespeare, ever made. There was, as I have heard say, a critic once, a learned
man, his name was Villager, or Scalisher, or some such a foreign phrase; and he
said, that there was one of Horace's songs, which he had rather been the author
of, than been a king without a rag on. -- This is, as I ve heard the story --
and now I say, I did not care, if I could but have wrote that line, and charm my
charming Chloe, if I was to be reduced to my former state, and have nothing but
rags on.

SCENE, the OVERTHROW.
Home hasted the Corporal with the copy of verses, and gave them the lady
wrapped up, as he received them from the author. She hurried into her own room
with the packet, imagining it was some very pretty present; but when it was
unwafered, and it appeared to be only a paper filled with written hand, which
she could not read one syllable, Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd suffered the most cruel
agitation of spirits, that ever any lady was thrown into; who, by the sudden
whim of spouse or papa, was prevented from being punctual to the moment of
assignation.

She supposed the letter to be an appointment, the Corporal gone to the
rendevouz, and had left her that, as a direction where to follow him. How did
she then lament her not being book-learned; she fretted, sighed, stamped,
called on her stars, on the Corporal, and fate.

The maid, passing by the door, heard the outcry, run down to Mr. Knott,
beckoning him into the back kitchen, asked him what he had done to her
mistress; for that, as how her mistress was in the most wonderful
consternation, about the Corporal, and what he had wrote in a paper.

Knott, who had been, Bajazet like, enjoying, though but in fancy, his scheme,
and what an opinion his landlady must have of him, and how fine a fellow she
must think him; to be able to write so fine a song, was struck as flat, with
what the girl said to him, as a new actor just hissed.

It occured to him, on the instant that the verse-maker had hummed him; and,
instead of the song he had paid for, had palmed some other paper, on purpose to
make the lover look like a fool; and Knott muttered, damm these wits, they are
always full of mischief, especially against their best friends; however, I Will
break the rascal's bones.

Unluckily for some parties, George, the ballad-compiler, then was passing
along on the other side of the way, the military man had a view of him, and
through the entry Knott burst into the street after the scribbler.

Passion or anger will as effectually dazzle persons eyes as interest. Mr.
Knott, by rage, was so dim-sighted, that, as he sprung from the threshold, he
saw not a sedan, which David and his partner were bearing by with a fair in it.

Against its side rushed the Corporal, and down came the chair, shattering upon
the pavement. The glasses were smashed, the sash frames shivered; and the
soldier tumbling over the top of it, rolled into the channel, calling out, as
he lay, oh, Stevens, I^ll do for you.

George Alexander, hearing a threatening voice, imagining it to be a bailiff's,
started off, fast as fear could wing his feet; and (like an expeditious fine
porter, running to his duty) overset every one who stood in his way.

The first person, who fell a victim to the velocity of the poet's fears, was
Well-fleet Betty, standing on the upper step of a cook's cellar, with a basket
full of goods upon her head; one hand was rested upon her hip, her elbow
forming the point of an angle, and with the fingers and thumb of the other
hand, she was snapping defiance.

The bard took her in flank, rushing against her outstanding elbow; the sudden
shock turned her half round, and backwards she pitched into the cellar, just as
Theo. Cibber's propertyman was bringing up twelve-pennyworth of soup and
ox-cheek bouilli, for his master comedian's dinner.

Down soused Betsy's head into the dish, and her feet fell on each side of the
young man's head, upon his shoulders; her weight returned him into the cellar;
and the broken baking pan, the ox-cheek, the soup, and the oysters, covered the
floor.

Onward scampered George, overturning Haddock's waiter, who had a box full of
jellies in his hands; then the song scribbler met parrellel to his breast a
mop-handle, which a wench was twirling; his force flung it in a diagonal
direction down; but the mop hit in its way the silkstockin'd shins of a French
dancing master the blow brought Monsieur Capriole to the ground, he pitched
upon his face, and his nose was flattened against the pavement.

The perpetrator of this mischief began to be scant of breath; and turning his
head, as he ran, to see where his pursuers were, he threw down a salop stall.

The vender of that diet drink, had just served a dish to no less a chapman,
than the little poet DERRICK, the doer of Dryden's works, who, not thinking of
any thing, was very innocently cooling his sassafras, when the gross bodied
bard, like a collier, running foul of a pleasure boat, tumbled the small sized
versifier into the dirt.

The bulk of Mr. Derrick's muff, prevented him from being bruised; but the
blade of his pinch-beck hilted rapier, snapped in the scabbard, and the spray
of the salop, obliged the little gentleman to keep his bed, until the scowerer
had repaired the damage his laced coat and waistcoat had sustained.

Here the race ended; the author of all these ills, tumbling at the same time,
was seized by the woman, to pay for what was broke, spoiled and spilt.

It is impossible to say, what might have been the event of George's being
detained, since he always was inflicted, with that terrible malady, of non sum
solvendum; but Mr. MACKLIN the the actor came by, paid the cost, and took
Stevens home, promoting him to be his tutor.

The putter together of Love Alamode, being at that time of day in the bloom of
his youth, Page 57th.

not above thirty-four years of age, took to his learning prodigiously; and, in
less than a week, was able to make out every letter of the alphabet.

The COUCH SCENE.
The person who happened to be in the chair, when it was overturned, was the
very drole SAM. FOOT, Esquire the greatest mimic genius in England; who, after much
shrieking and struggling, rose head and shoulders high, betwixt the broken
frame of the chair-glass; his face all scratched, like a fresh blooded ghost,
ascending through the tragedy trap; on his countenance pallid fear sat
frightful; his livid lips quivered with terror; he begged help for God's sake,
and religiously reiterated his entreaties to the bystanders.

He had not, at this time, exhibited publicly any of his extraordinaries;
neither was he as yet determined, to what part of the arts and sciences he
should devote himself.

It was to this adventure, and the advice of Miss Shred, that the town has had
the happiness of being entertained with his Vis Oeuvres.

After he was delivered from the chair, and inducted into Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd's
best one pair of stairs room. Miss Shred, who saw from her chamber the
accident, ran over to David's house, fearful, they had not politeness enough,
to accomodate so brilliant dressed a person, as Mr. Foot.

Miss Shred insisted, upon carrying up the basin of water, and towel, to the
gentleman. Mr. Foot received her with all that complaisance, peculiar to
himself; and assured her, both in French and English, that he was immensely
obliged to her.

Miss SHRED. Sir, a person of your appearance demands the most polite
reception; and, as I am conscious, the people of this house, are too vulgar to
use such a person, as you are, as you should be; therefore I left my own house,
that I might pay a proper regard to one of your elegant appearance.


Mr. FOOT. Madam, you do me too much honor; to be sure ma'am, I conceive the
inhabitants of this porter-selling territory, to be the quintessence of
vulgarity. My Ideas never before announced such a contemptible set of reptiles,
as those creatures were, who helped me out of the chair: one should not, they
say, mock one's friends; but upon my soul, they were such a collection of
grotesques, that while they were doing me a great piece of service, I could not
help taking them off; and the fellow who seemed to have the most humanity about
him, and was really very tender of me, squinted his compassion with two such
inverted eyes, saying -- I hope your honor cant hurt, Sir.


Miss SHRED. I vow, Sir, that look was vastly like him; but I am surprised,
Sir, a gentleman of your accomplishments, should seem to hesitate, about taking
off your friends; it is the extreme wit of the politest persons; and which,
Sir, you must know, and if you was not to do it, Sir, it would be a loss to the
world; for you know, Sir, each individual admires to have an acquaintance, nay,
all their acquaintance, made ridiculous; and I am persuaded, no person, can be
more happy in that execution, than yourself.


Mr. FOOT. Madam, I am embarrassed at this rencontre, with a lady of your
consummate penetration; indeed, madam, I have been flattered by my friends,
with having an excellency, in taking off my intimates; and shall be proud, of a
lady of your sensations, determining, concerning the merit of my abilities.


Immediately he went through the defects, misfortunes, and weaknesses, of all
his acquaintance with immense spirit; he took off Sir Harry's lady, as she said
her prayers at church; mimicked her brother the judge, in his passing sentence
of death; shook his head as my lord's uncle did, who was paralytic from his
infancy; walked limping like Sir William, who lost part of his heel in a
sea-engagement; and then in the character of punch, preached a funeral sermon,
with such vivacity, such humor, and such naivetie, that Miss Shred became
transported, backwards she fell in raptures upon the couch, crying out bravo,
bravo, bravo, my dear creature --

SCENE III.
Miss SHRED and SAM. FOOT. Curtain up again. Miss SHRED. UPON my honor, Sammy,
you have reduced me to the most extraordinary circumstances, of not being able
to look at a genleman without blushing; and, believe me, Sir, I never was
guilty of such an action before; but, as Richard says, for this among the rest
was I ordained.


Mr. FOOT. Madam, it is impossible for me to express, how high an idea I
entertain of a lady, possessed of such a capability, as I find you mistress of,
therefore I can do no less, than dedicate myself to your service.


Miss SHRED. I accept your homage, dear Foot, and I give you my hand, which
acts equal with my heart; and as I know your talents, are as extrordinary, as
you are pleased to observe my capabilities are surprising, I will plan, and you
shall execute, as I am conscious my conceptions are perfectly picturesque.


This it was, on which Mr. Foot laid the foundation of that grandeur, we have
several times seen him so amazingly arrive at. To Miss Shred he was obliged,
for the hint of giving tea; by her he also was initiated into that species of
wit and humor, with which, to this day, he continues, with so much
originality, to entertain the town.

During this above-stairs conversation, David was busied, in picking up his
chair's fragments; the Corporal was upon foot pursuing the author; but the
soldier met his officer at the turn of a street, who ordered him immediately to
get ready, and set out next morning for Cornwall.

Knott, though he was alarmed at the command, knew his duty was to be silent,
and obey. -- But took his resolutions accordingly; as he had been hitherto
successful in his schemes, with the fair sex, and that his time was so short,
he went upon the hunt, for two of his comrades he could confide in.

This was the reason, that Madam Llwhyddwhydd did not see her lover all that
day; although its certain, no lady ever more longed, that is, she wanted to be
satisfied, and no person, she was sure, or at least she thought herself sure,
and that fancy with many ladies, amounts to a certainty, that no body could
satisfy her, so well, as the Corporal.

The damaged chair was sent to be repaired; Mr. Foot and his lady took coach
for a country jaunt. David, having nothing else to execise himself with,
resolved to walk into Wapping, to see his brother on board of ship.

His spouse, who knew her husband would not be at home, until four or five in
the morning, began to be vastly uneasy about the Corporal, who made it evening
before he returned.

The guests withdrawn, the maid hurried to bed; just as the feeble watchman,
whistling in his sound, came by coughing out, pa-a-aast 11 o'clock -- Mr.
Knott, high in blood, stole (like Lothario) unheeded to his dear
Llwhyddwhuydd's chamber, he found the lady loose, unattired, warm, -- I ashamed
to say it -- but fuddled, absolutely non compos; how it happened, as well as so
melancholy an accident can bear relating, shall be disclosed.

That night the lady went up stairs, in charming spirits. Mr. Knott having
received the wink of assignation, while he sat below, drinking with his
comrades. But alas, unhappy gentlewoman, reflecting perhaps too much, on what
might very naturally happen, between her, and the Corporal; she grew
immoderately thirsty, in poetry we should express it, she was burning with
desire.

By mistake she put a bottle of brandy to her mouth, which had, in the hurry,
been put uncorked where the water-bottle used to stand. It was there placed by
the maid, the mistress's sudden coming up, prevented the girl from any other
ways disposing it.

Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd's agitation of mind, rendered her incapable of judging the
difference, until she had swallowed so large a gulf; intoxication was the
consequence. By which the reader is deprived of one of those luscious
descriptions, which are now looked upon in the novel way, the most essential
embellishments for modern bookselling.

Yet not to have our customers entirely disappointed, we present them with the
lady asleep, in one of those engaging attitudes, so enticing, Page 63.

to the very young, and very old gentlemen of this metropolis, who want to see
pretty legs, pretty feet, pretty breasts, and all must be very pretty.

Masters under age, are supposed to have raw and indigested ideas; not being
arrived at a proper taste.

Elderly lovers have outlived their's, therefore both must be alike fed, and
their strengthless appetites, tempted by insubstantial garnish; not having
power to relish manly food.

Mr. Knott, knowing by the orders he had received from the captain, there was
no time to spare, took some pains to waken the lady; and having recovered her
so well, as to acknowledge she loved no man like the Corporal, he discovered to
her how he was pinched for time; the lady, fearing to lose her so very lately
gained lover; the force of liquor, and power of the Corporal's arguments,
altogether corresponding, made her consent that very night to go off with him.
The maid fast asleep in the garret, the drawer dead drunk in the cellar, and
her husband from home. She packed up all the plate, ready money, and her best
clothes; for that is an observation I have generally made, that ladies, who, by
stealth, leave their husbands, are determined that the loss shall be as
severely felt, as the time they have to accomplish their scheme will admit.

It was by the help of Mr. Knott's comrades, every article was brought safe to
the Fly; in which the Corporal and his lady were conveyed, without one accident
to Portsmouth; there the next morning, by the greatest good luck, they found a
sloop going off for Plymouth, in which they embarked, and in four days landed
there, then by easy journeys reached Cornwall; to which the Corporal's rout was
directed.

Since we have conducted Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd so far, we'll let her rest a little
after her journey, and take a trip to London, to inquire what became of her
husband.

The DREAMING SCENE.
David returned home the next morning about two hours after his unfaithful
lady's elopement; but too much filled with his evening's excess, to admit of
any information, until snoring had evaporated some of those fumes -- but the
physical account of SNORING, which was never before attempted, is proper to
introduce here.

To the Sapientifical, Scientifical, Celestial Magazine-maker, self-taught
Philosopher, Lecturer and Instrument-seller.

To the Venerable Antigallicanist and Balsam of Life vender.

To the most celebrated, most advertised, most graduated Ludgate Hill
Licentiate.

And last, though not least in character, To the Egregious, consummate Doctor
of all Doctoribuses, the Eccentrical, Occulistical, most superlative Egotist,
Adventurer, and Chevalier, this Elaborate Essay is addressed.

SNORING arises from the superabundancy of vapor, collected the preceding
night, by drink and conversation, treasured up in the storehouse, or magazine
of the head.

The spirit of the liquor sublimates through the valves, and ducts, from the
stomach: and the froth, or Aerial parts of disputes, observations, altercations
and witticisms, make their way, through the auricular glands or organs, at the
same time, into the cellulae of the brain. These puff-balls, thus collected,
float about, until secretion (I beg, my friends of the faculty, you will observe
this) although it is out of the power of the College to account for animal
secretion; ergo, all physic is upon undetermined principles. Yet I have
assigned a ratio for the secretory officinal of dreams, which are these
puff-balls; composed as beforementioned; and lodged in the tenements of the
pineal glands; just as infant maggots are housed.

But when all the pia and dura matter apartments are filled, and not a single
idea, even for the good of self, can be wedged in, there will remain great
quantities of this windy effluvia, which the owner of the head has imbibed in
the last day and night's exercise, which must be discharged, charged, before
the proper disposed imaginations can have room to act.

Therefore on a sudden, fast issue through those wind-gates the nostrils, the
overplus of yesterday's retailings, which cannot be performed, before sleep has,
for some hours, set his draining engines at work; and that is the reason, why
morning dreams are more to be relied upon, than those before midnight. The
violence with which this stream rushes forth, from the head, is the occasion of
that sound, which is equal to the diameter of the diapason of -- but the
solution of that question, concerning the mathematical proportion of major and
minor semi-tones, betwixt snoring and other eructations, is sent for a prize
answer to the Lady's Diary, to which we refer the reader.

After David had slept about five hours, loud and sound, the elastic coats of
his brain began to exert their pulsations, and he dreamed a dream which
forboded mischief, as plain as any dream, ever repeated at breakfast, by the
politest, prettiest, and most sensible maid, wife, widow or mistress, you
enjoyed a morning's tete a tete with, or at least, that you said you did.

David did dream, as how, that the Tower of London was made of papier machee;
and that the French intended to undermine all our coalpits, and so destroy the
nursery of our seamen.

Out of the seven or eight millions of Great Britain's inhabitants, one million
we may reasonably suppose will read this book; and that 900,000 of those
readers, delight in the interpretation of dreams; for their emolument, we shall
explain this dream, viz. The Tower of London, being made of chewed paper,
signified, that the affection of his wife, which he thought permanent, as the
bulwarks which the mud and grass of tower ditch semicirculates; was as
insubstantial, as the incoherent ornaments of waste paper: and the French, and
the coal-pits meant, that a wicked enemy, should undermine the navigation to
his wife's heart.

At noon, next day, David waked, and with broad eyes found, -- but by all rules
of writing, an author, as well as a painter, is to allow his customers
imagination, fair play, or game law; therefore this part of the scene shall be
left to the reader's conception. How Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd looked; where he looked;
what he said, when he could speak; and how long it was, before he returned to a
capability of saying, or seeing, or doing any thing.

Suppose yourself, oh sympathizing reader, in this afflicted husband's
situation; it is with some confusion, that the Editor acknowledges himself,
rather abrupt in pretending to place any buyer, or borrower of this volume,
upon the footing of a chairman. All that we mean by begging the question, is;
most reverend, most honorable, or most handsome, Sir, or Madam, a possibility
for what we call the finest person in England, when angry, to behave equal with
the lowest. To prove which, I shall make an extract from a book, called,

The History of the human Mind.
The three estates, or different modes of the Soul's constitution, are
denominated high-life, middle-life, and low-life.

Those degrees, when put into a passion, act upon the same parallel; and as you
may have seen Mr. Bayes's sun, moon, and earth, dancing the hay; so it is with
these; highlife shall be middle, middle shall be low, low high, and they
sometimes dance so much, and so long, that there is no distiction to be
observed between them.

But this only happens, in very rare cases' viz. in love, in anger, and in
drunkenness.

Furthermore, it is said in this Book, chap. 20, page 99. I wish, may it please
your honor, that you would either look a little more into it, or suffer your
eldest son, to be a little better acquainted with it; and I would bett a good
name against great riches, and that is ten pounds to a crown, you know; that if
those personages, who can read it, would study it, not thumb and dog's ear a
drole place or two; but go fairly, and honestly through it; they would be
taught, to think worse of themselves, than they do at present; and thereby
become better for the future.

There would every egotist discover, That his consequence was but conceit, and
judgment merely opinion. That FLATTERY is the universal language. KNAVERY
mankind's modus. Conversation quibbling. PUBLIC SPIRIT a riddle. FRIENSHIP a
phantom; and SELF-INTEREST, grand signior.

Good-breeding may be contaminated; and greatness put in an extreme fury, for
such trifling things, as an honest chairman, would be ashamed to be out of
temper about.

And when the most polite are most angrily agitated, they may, and do often,
swear, huff, kick, curse, strike, abuse, break, and bellow, with such violence,
as if they were no more than a chairman; or any other such illiberal beings.
And I beg leave to observe, (for all what the heralds office allege to the
contrary) even her grace, although delicately dignified, may be horridly
chagrin'd, if she permits passion to gallop over the course with her.

The unfortunate Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, presently swore himself out of breath, in
hurrying backwards, and forwards, throughout the neighborhood, to tell his sad
story. Vowed many rash vows, and said many bad things. When his friends found
his anger, was obliged, for want of fresh spirits, to subside; and he was
sufficiently relaxed, to hear consolation, they administered advice gratis. As
all English people ought to do, one among another; the generality of my
countrymen and women, are apt enough to bestow their counsels, even unasked, in
all cases, -- none but physicians and lawyers making money of their words.

They sell their advice, as Lapland witches do wind, only to make more mischief.

His partner, begged him to be comforted; squeezing Mr. Llwhyddwhydd by the
brawny part of his thumb; my dear David, don't hurt yourself any more, by
grief. I don't doubt, but all will be well as ever; and your spouse shall come
home again; and there will be no harm done; and you will live hapyy, to the end
of your days; and you must take example by your betters, and forget, and
forgive, as the Bible says.

This speech, gave David great cause of contemplation; and after he was in bed
that night, thus he soliloquised.

In the name of God, and St. David, can I ever, in honor, have my wife home
again? Am I not an ancient Briton? Where then must I put my honor? Is not my
honor, the seat of my heart? and has she not given away her honor? and would
she come home, and take away my honor too? now that damm dog of a soger, has
laid hold of her honor for himself, -- more shame for him; that any of King
George's men should not have honor of their own.

Not being able to sleep, he went to his library; and looking over the index of
his magazines, among those curious receptacles of the atoms of universal
learning, he found the following essay, concerning

HONOR.
There is no KINGDOM, STATE, PRINCIPALITY, PENINSULA, CONTINENT, ISTHMUS We
have endeavored at the true magazine style; it may seem tautalogous, but our
readers must know the necessity, those monthly productions lay under, to make
use of many words; they, like stage coaches, being obliged to set out to their
time, full, or empty.
, METROPOLIS, CITY, SUBURBS, or ENVIRONS, in or out of Christendom, possesses
so much honor as the town of London, Nor by the root of St. David's leek (Mr.
Llwhyddwhuydd called out) no man in London has more honor than myself.

To prove that London is the plenum of honor, what man or woman can you meet
with, that will not declare themselves to be people of honor? who can you
converse with, that will not assure you, upon their honor?

The Turks, cannot be such civilized persons, as christians. Therefore have no
idea of honor; and are strangers to duelling; that custom of killing, is only
practiced where the gospel is taught.

However, the mahometans have great honesty, in respect of their meum and tuum
dealings. But that method of merchandising, is no more than an absolute
sentiment, which might do well enough for the moral law, but the statutes, and
practices of the European courts, being by revealed religion more enlightened;
such infidels as Turks and heathens, by not having the advantages we christians
have, can never act so upright as we do.

Laws, honor, equity, and honesty, being refined, are to be considered -- but
we refer the reader, for a proper explication of those matters, to our notes,
upon the Athanasian creed.

In Italy, Spain, and Portugal, the natives are extremely tenacious of their
honor; as they are also of their religion; the two most noble practices of the
soul.

They are persons of superior honor, and religion, to the rest of Christendom;
which accounts, why so many people are poisoned, assassinated, and put into the
inquisition, in those countries, more than any others. It is all done, as that
very pains-taking Mr. Henriques observes, to GLORIFY GOD, and for their own
honor.

The French, are not much bigoted to matrimonial honor; but they have very
romantic ideas of glory, and imagine, that glory is preferable to limbs,
health, life, and even the profits of a 25 per cent. usury.

Nay, so prone are our English people, to follow French fashions, that we have
adopted this mode; and such is the common characteristic of our country, to
improve upon every invention, that a great many of our Britons have carried
this glory much farther than ever the French dared; they had a very fair trial
for it lately; and, in spite of pol^tical jockeyship; and though we were
obliged sometimes to shift saddles, and sometimes we could not go as we would;
yet we always came in for the sweep-stakes.

This was not satisfactory to Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd; he did not understand any
thing about glory; all his care was about his honor, and not meeting with an
explanatory account, in any of his volumes, he arose next morning, to consult
an old acquaintance, and country woman of his, and one of the wisest people
ever born; for she was descended in a direct line, from the child, that Queen
Sheba had by King Solomon. Though she could not prove herself of one of the
most ancient families; yet, for the greatness of her understanding, the defect
of birth was overlooked; and she was made overseer of the weeders, to a Welsh
gardener's at Lambeth.

During the time of Mr. David's walking to Mr. Winifred ap Shingle, and to make
an end of this scene of our drama, give me leave, by way of tag, to tell you an
old story about honor.

I do not doubt, but you may have read it in every jest book; I own the story
is old, -- yet, like a true commentator, I quote the ancient things, to exhibit
the antiquity of my reading.

MAGRAH MONAGHAN of Connaught, dined one day, with TERENCF O HARA, in the
queen's county; Monaghan was every inch of him a gentleman, and scorned to do a
dirty thing. But as necessity, and honor, are ever at see-saw, with all
gentlemen of no fortunes, it happened at that instant, Need was uppermost, and
gave an impelling, or propelling, quality to some of Mr. Magrah's muscles.

Astronomers are not yet clear enough in their accounts, for us to ascertain
which it was, of the occult qualities, innate to bodies, that occasioned a
silver spoon, before grace after meat was said, to gravitate into Mr. Magrah
Monaghan's pocket. The thing was missed, and his host (very mildly) taking his
guest aside, whispered him.

My dear Mac, will you be telling me any thing of the spoon?

MAC. Is it me you mean? the Devil burn me into tinder ashes, Terence, if I
know no more of the spoon, than St. Patrick.


TERENCE. Well, but don't you, at all, at all?


MAC. Why, then, by the contents of this -- (catching up the mustard pot) I
don't. Would you be thinking, I Would be telling you a LIE?


TERENCE. But, upon YOUR HONOR, don't you?


MAC. MY HONOR! -- By Jasus, there is (taking the spoon from his pocket) the
vagabond spoon again; and I Will tell you one thing, Terence, and that an't two;
I wouldn't forfeit my honor, for all the spoons in the whole country of
Christendom.


ACT II.
SCENE IV:
Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd and Winifred ap Shingle. DAVID Llwhyddwhuydd went over
Westminster-bridge, to consult Madam Winifred ap Shingle.

After the proper ceremonials were adjusted, of who should set down first, what
sort of a day it was, and every other polite phrase, which is used among the
most delicate, as an introduction to more interesting conversation. David
acquainted Winifred with his misfortune, and with his partner's saying, he
should have his wife home again; and how, continued Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, can I do
that with honor? for I do assure you, Winifred, that man is not worthy to
carry a pair of straps upon his shoulders, who is not a man of honor. For a
chairman, when his honor is gone, is no more than a hackney-coachman, or a
waggoner, or any other of those horse-driving rascals. -- How then can I
receive my wife again? -- oh, Winifred, you don't know what a fine creature she
was. -- To be sure her neck was as white, as a damask napkin -- and the best
people in the neighborhood, did use to send to by her pickles, -- and her
cheeks were as red, indeed as my new scarlet breeches, -- and such a hand --
ay, and for a pancake, Winifred, look you -- well, God bless her Majesty, and
all the ladies of honor, but they could not toss one better, to be sure. --
Damm Ochee, I will be the death of that damned dog, corporal scoundrel. -- It
was love-powder, which he did give her; and he shall be taken up, for poisoning
my wife, as sure as Sir Watkins is a gentleman.

WINIFRED. You come to me for advice, David, look you, indeed, and do speak all
yourself -- but you shall hear now in God's name, -- upon which she put her
band before his mouth, and bawled in his ear, -- you must take your wife again.


He started from the chair, his shoulders striking against Mrs. Shingle's chin,
cast her backwards into a washing-tub, where she lay head and knees bent
together; her legs hanging over the edge, while he, regardless of his
countrywoman's condition, swore a horrid oath, with as much solemnity, as ever
the finest gentleman gave himself to the devil, at a hazard-table; but stamping
at that moment on poor Winifred's cat Grimalkin fixed her teeth and claws so
furious in his leg, that he shrieked, he run about the room, he cried murder,
over the tub he tumbled, regardless where he was, or what became of wi^e,
Winifred, or all the world, but himself.

So true is what was said by the first philosopher before the flood, and has
been annually observed by all Philosophers, Play-writers, Annotators, and
Essayists, that It is natural for our own sufferings to overbalance all other
considerations.

The same SCENE continued.
David and Winifred seated as at first. WINIFRED. Look you, David, be quiet, I
tell you; you did not hurt me much; what I have put to your leg will cure it;
so drink up your porter, and I will fetch another quart.

Exit.
Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, when she was gone, began to be in doubt, whether he should,
or should not, pull off the piece of black-sticking plaster, that the dame had
applied to his leg, for the bite. He was not sure, it was the
Courtsticking-plaister; because, as he was a chairman, who had been brought up
at St. James's, he would not have any thing, as he told her, touch him, made at
any of the vulgars houses in her neighborhood; because, as he was a gentleman
born, and got his living among quality, therefore he would sooner, he said,
have his leg swell to the bone, than any low-lifed medicine should come near
his flesh.

Imitating herein, that nobleness of spirits, which all those most respectable
-- but I am interrupted.

Enter second quart of porter, and Mrs. Shingle. WINIFRED SWINGLE. Now, David,
I will have you be easy, hear reason, and not fly into any more passions; nor
don't swear against your wife, for, to be sure, a finer woman --


DAVID. Never was a finer woman, to be sure. -- So is my loss the more; I shall
love her to my dying day; but she has robbed me, and run away herself into the
bargain; and where is her honor now?


WINIFRED. Don't you talk so much about honor now; I desire, and require of
you, for if you would be a good christian, you must forget, and forgive; for
what, pray, does the Scripture say about honor? -- not much; and pray what do
the people of honor say about the Scripture? why not much. So you need not so
much mind honor, if you will but be a good christian.


DAVID. But then the Devil shall be a good christian for me -- God forgive us
-- but how can I, ap Shingle, how can I bear to lie by her side now; pray, will
there be any christanity in that?


WINIFRED. Silence, I tell you, David. You shall hear what I will read to you;
it is our teacher's sermon, which he did say at the Tabernacle last Sunday,
about forgiveness, and christianity, and women, and our backslidings; so pray,
David, mind.

Reads, Putting on her spectacles. The JUSTIFYING EJACULATION.
I say unto you, my beloved, that when the spirit agitateth the flesh, it is a
spiritual act; but when the flesh motioneth the spirit, it is a carnal one. And
this is the difference, between GRACE and DISGRACE.

For worldly things, unless sanctification seeths them, are no more than
kitchen stuff; which the scum of our sins makes, in boiling over, and that is
put into the offal pot of repentance.

Therefore, the saints of the Tabernacle, being clarified by the justification
of the new birth, are pure Christian suet; which, when mixed with the plumbs of
the righteous, make up the pudding of glorification.


Winifred Speaks. O sweet Abraham, what heavenly language is this: don't go to
sleep, David, I desire of you; how can you be worse than a heathen, and not
listen to this sweet soul-saving speech.

Reads again, The pudding of glorification -- therefore I say, that we may
mingle the spirit with the flesh, even as potatoes and butter-milk make
stirrabout; for that is the type of the carnalities, and spiritualities.

So I say [wiping her spectacles,] it is not sinful to consider the uprightness
of the flesh, as directed by the spirit; because we may receive the spirit at
home, or in the fields, or in an alley, or in a centry-box; and I Will stand
centry among you; and if you have faith, you shall raise the dead to life. I
will not be a velvet-mouth'd preacher, like your church doctors, and book learned
blockheads. -- no -- no -- no -- oh -- oh, -- can a boy fly a kite without
thinking of the clouds? can a woman spread her fan, without thinking of an
angel's wings? Therefore, I say, that the natural man is not the spiritual man.
Yet the spiritual man may think of natural things. So those things are to be
put forward, which are to satisfy the longings of the soul; and though at first
it may be painful to undergo them.


At that instant, the tankard from the hand of Mr. David, fell to the ground;
the good man, overcome with the two quarts of porter, the keeping all night
awake, reflecting upon his honor, and the potency of the preacher's arguments,
dropped fast asleep. Which, when Mrs. Winifred observed, she sighed, and said
he was a lost soul, waked him; and after some time spent between them, in
settling the terms, she went home with David, to be his housekeeper.

SCENE PLYMOUTH.
Madam Llwhyddwhuydd, Corporal Knott, Mountebank Doctor, Duel, Merry Andrew,
Cheating at Cards, and Newspapers. THE Corporal, by this time, and his lady,
began to view one another in not that rapturous point of sight, as at first.
All the plate, and ready money, which she had taken with her, was expended; for
Mr. Knott, had too much of the fine gentleman in him, not to be fond of play;
and too good an opinion of himself, to fancy any person could take him in; but
after the money was all gone, his eyes were opened, and he determined to
commence gambler himself.

At his quarters lodged a Mountebank and his man. The Merry Andrew was a master
of arts in sporting; he could bend, slip, shade, spur, feather-edge, work a
brief, knew shorts and longs, the high and low games at put, the three shuffles
of whist, upper and under palm, opening a pack, or rounding dice, with all the
secures, the bars, loads, ringing of changes, etc. etc. etc.

But he, having then an occasion for a partner, because he wanted to take his
master in for a sum; and as all sporting men act best by confederacy, the
Corporal and Pickle Herring entered into a family compact.

Mean while poor Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd daily sat disconsolate at home, never
seeing her gallant, but when he reeled to bed, incapable of behaving to her
like a gentleman.

I wish, some ladies of my acquaintance, with whom it is at this moment a toss
up, between inclination and interest, would read this part of my book
carefully; and they would know, notwithstanding, modern memoirs mention
whispering Zephyrs, eternal constancy, love-lane assignations, breath-stopped
kisses, midnight moonshine, a charming fellow, and the post chaise door open,
-- that according to the undoubted testimonials of several maiden gentle-women,
who, by heartfelt experience, vow, a lady is worse cooped up, who goes off
with her gallant, than the most domestic wife, that undergoes the drudgery of
the nursery, and kitchen.

Let us only example Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd. She had no person to visit her, was
visited by no person, obliged, from having a house of her own, to put up with a
mean, ready furnished lodging; in which, sitting all day solitary, -- for
believe me, dear lady, the fine fellow of your fancy, soon grows sick of his
sweatmeats, and every fond couple, who leave honor, family and ALL for love,
having then nothing but love to live upon, soon eat up their allowance.

Think ladies, what Mr. David's wife suffered; who, like all other eloping
ladies, had trusted the gallant with all, and dreaded to ask him for a single
shilling, lest he should think her extravagant; denying herself necessaries,
because he should not grumble at expense How melancholy her case; no
companions, but her own thoughts, reflecting and comparing past, with present
times; her former respect, her present infamy, -- her husband's tenderness, his
repeated tenderness; her gallant's coldness, his continued indifference.

It is not, I hope, so bad with every lovely lady errantress. Yet many of them
have experienced, -- don't sigh, dear creatures; -- I know its a melancholy
scene, and in the catastrophe still more vexatious; because the reason which
some ladies allege, for running away from their guardians or parents, is, the
unbearable usage, which they receive at home, therefore apply to gallants, in
hopes of mending their condition, as flying fish spring out of the sea to avoid
the Dolphin, and tumble into the jaws of the shark.

Yet as the most time-serving-scribbler subscribes himself, at the bottom of a
dedication, to his right honorable patron; as the tradesman bows, bill in
hand, to his honor, with parallel awe, I address the ladies, and assure them,
that my opinion of their magnanimity, will not suffer me to imagine, any thing
here said, can alter what a fine woman has already resolved upon. -- No --
spite of all advice or example, her spirits will carry her through, whatever
her will gives the word for, let the consequence be -- no matter what.

David's spouse had, for some time, been in a most uncomfortable state. She
felt the severe pinches of necessity, which are evident symptoms of repentance;
daily, hourly did she reproach herself, how ill she had used her dear, dear
husband; how ill her gallant had used her; not a friend had she to confide in,
except the Merry Andrew abovementioned; to him she now and then disclosed her
griefs; he proffered her all the assistance in his power; vowed he had a vast
regard for her, and sealed those vows, upon her lips; just at the instant, the
Corporal opened the door.

All in rage, Mr. Knott rushed on the tumbler, kicked him down stairs; b -- d
his lady, and vowed never again to bed her.

Indeed Mr. Knott was glad of an occasion to break off the acquaintance; for he
found it very heavy, supporting her out of his pay; and beside, he had
commenced another intrigue, with a lady who kept a raffle, who had agreed to go
off with him.

The tumbler, all in a rage, for being used so by the Corporal; went instantly
to his master, and discovered, that the night before, himself and the Corporal
had cheated the doctor at cards, of fifteen pounds, four shillings; and told
his master, that his conscience would not let him keep it.

No one thing can hurt a lady, or gentleman, or any other two legged existent,
if there are any other persons, in this kingdom, that are not either gentlemen
or ladies, except some of the Opera Singers. -- I say, and am sure, nothing can
hurt so much, as being made a fool, or a tool, unless self-interest orders it
so to be. -- then, indeed, as A -- B -- C -- D -- E -- and -- etc. observed, it
is proper to appear in taste.

But to be a tool, and be out of pocket by it, -- Seneca, at the head of his
stoical regiment of Old Buffs, could not bear it.

And as the doctor, like all other doctors, wore a sword (which, I believe, the
faculty at first bore emblematically, to denote an aptitude to kill) after a
consultation, with his Merry Andrew, he determined upon having his money, and
sent Mr. Knott the following letter.

SIR,
I Ham by my purfeshon, as will as you, a gentleman; because, as your a soger,
so am I a doctur of fysick. I did not think any gentleman wode ave taken away
mi moni clandestenly, that is rank burgularly, and wors then robbing upon the
hi way.

However, Sir, I suppose your a gentleman, for all that; so I desir, you will gi
me satissfakshon, and send me my moni agin, or mete me with your sword at nine
o'clock to nite, in the ditch by the cloisters, it will be moonlight, and we
can see to kill one another.

Yours, Doctor JONES.


The Corporal received this note, as he sat over a large bowl of punch, with
two recruits just listed. He was as brave, as British spirits could make him;
and reading the letter, swore 'twas very well, he would come; he would do every
thing like a gentleman, and give every body satisfaction -- but as to
returning, or paying the money back, he was above it. -- No, he was too much a
man of honor, he swore, to be compelled, no, the sword should decide it.

All flush, all gallant was Mr. Knott, the drum beating, recruits singing, and
bumpers going briskly about. -- Yet the contents of the letter, began like oil,
to prevent the potency of the brandy punch, any longer sublimating into the
Corporal's head.

Not that he feared the doctor, or even death, the president and commander in
chief of all doctors; but his honor was doubly concerned; he promised to meet
a lady, a new lady, that night; and he would not break that appointment, for
twenty doctors; but then, who would dare to say, Knott wou'd'nt fight? No body
should; he swore, and in order to keep his word and honor, with both parties,
he laid his plan of operations accordingly.

The doctor, who was equally political, (in what a political age do we now
live!) made this appointment by moonlight, because his antagonist should not
discover, that he had a quire of white paper for a breast plate, fastened
neatly under his shirt.

Each combatant, firmed in his safeguard scheme, went with the utmost
intrepidity to the combat. Nobly, magnanimously they met. So when -- no --
come, all ye spirits, who have inspired the belligerant powers, to firm
fighting; and thou, whoever thou art, whether begot by Folly, or Madness, or
both; thou AETHERNAL, who presides over duels, suitable-spirit for such a
subject, inspire me, to describe the memorable behavior, of those truly paired
bellonists, who so intrepidly paraded upon the supposed-to-be-sanguinary-spot;
and then, so woundless, -- so -- so -- so. -- So have I seen -- ay, reader, and
so may you also have seen, as well as me, a great many things; but among all
the shows, did you ever observe a slit deal figure, set up, on the top of a
malt-house tunnel, or, as a scare-scrow in a garden, holding in each hand a
wooden sword; which, by the contrivance of the carpenter, and force of the
wind, whirled its arms about, above, and below, across, around, slashing,
striking, flourishing, in every prize-fighting direction, ingratefully
thrashing that air, which puts it in motion.

Thus is a duellist agitated, by honor, which is no more than air; a puff, a
wind, a vapor. -- Mistake not the editor's meaning -- he is only writing
concerning the term honor, which urges, planet struck people, to take the
unnecessary trouble of cutting one another's throats, when, as the madman
observed, let but your enemies alone, and they will dye of themselves.

But duellists, like Jobson at blindman's buff, lay about them, slap, dash,
north, east, west, south, on every point of the compass, because this honor
answers to all points, all make a point of honor.

It was one of honor's points, the money-getting point, which goaded the
doctor to this honorable experiment, and which the Editor, would not have been
so explicit in, had he not taken the trouble of visiting tennis courts,
billiard-rooms, horse-race meetings, whist-clubs, skettle-grounds,
hazard-tables, and nine hole alleys; and been assured from all parties there,
that the doctor was right (in point of honor) to demand his money; and the
Corporal was right (in point of honor) to refuse returning it.

The place appointed for their meeting, was a very wide, dry trench, high
mounded on each side, and open at each end, like that part of New Market turf,
called the devil's ditch, and where, for the name sake, all hereafter duels
should be decided.

They came to the, spot, just as the clock struck nine, they drew their swords,
and stood in quart and tierce attitudes, between four and five yards asunder.

They flourished their blades, on which the moon shine bright beaming, the
glare startled the heroes.

As veracity is the Editor's principle observance, throughout this treatise, it
is necessary, to relate how two such men could be brought to the scene of
action, and draw their swords at each other.

The doctor was assured by his tumbler, that if he did but send a challenge, it
would bring the Corporal to any terms, and he had nothing to do, but only go to
the appointment, draw his sword, and Knott would return the money.

After (by his man's advice) the letter was sent, the mountebank began to have
some qualms -- he doubted, he was dismayed, and as Mr. John Wesley, and Mr.
John Wesley's coadjutors, have often declared, that Satan buffetted them about;
even so was the doctor's tho^ghts tossed, here and there, and not knowing what
to make of himself, he resolved to bumper it about until fighting time, to
drive off even the idea of death.

Not that he way any stranger to that spectre; having employed him in as many
shapes, as the doctor had patients; but he wanted not that fiend, to have any
concerns with himself; therefore he drank to fortify his mind, and wore a
stationary breast plate, to barricade his noble parts.

The Corporal marched to the rendesvouz, with a certainty of success. -- First
from his own consequence, that the quack scoundrel dare not fight him; next,
let it even come to the worst, and he should be obliged to draw his sword, --
Mr. Knott had planned such a scheme, -- and entirely by the scale, sector, and
true modern practice of duelling, which is, to acquire the vast, vast honor,
of being a fighting man, and duellist, without running any dangerous risque.

The Corporal's plot was, to wait for his antagonist, to make the first thurst,
then to fall backwards immediately, and bid the doctor make the best of his way
off, because that he himself was a dead man, the doctor having done for him.

Both thus secure in their safe-guards, stood firm -- but at the distance
beforementioned; indeed it is proper, all quarrelling people should so keep
asunder; their right arms were extended, sword point-paralled to sword point.

At last, the doctor being by drink, the most elevated, quavered out, ha, ha,
and stamped his foot at the same time; but the unfaithful sod, sinking to his
tread, brought his body forwards; destroyed the center of gravity, and prone on
his face he fell, without stretched arm and weapon.

The Corporal observed the glittering steel advance, backwards at that signal
fell down, and with a great groan cried out -- O I am done for -- it is through
and through me. -- Doctor I forgive you -- but make the best of your way off --
for -- oh -- I am a dead man.

Terrified at these words, his antagonist reflecting on what it was to kill a
man, and not according to the secundum artem statute; crawled backwards on his
hands and knees, crab like, out of the opposite end of the ditch. Leaving his
sword (as he supposed) sticking in the Corporal's body; as soon as he got upon
his feet, he scamper'd off, strait forwards, not minding which road he took,
all he thought of, at that time was, the hue and cry, which he fancied he heard
very plainly behind him.

The Corporal, rising by degrees, was soon satisfied of the success of his
scheme, and picking up the duplicate sword, hastened to his other rendesvouz,
and there he showed his new lady the weapon, which he had brought away with
him; telling Madam Raffle, I was obliged to kick that scoundrel mountebank, my
dear, and make him deliver up his sword, here it is you see, for his insolence,
to pretend to dare to hint any thing against your reputation.

In the beginning of every intrigue, fond beauty fancies all is gospel, which
her gallant speaks. -- Knott's new mistress replied, That to be sure, I knowed
as how, Mr. Corporal, you was a vastly brave man; and we will live and die, and
I Will go through the world with you. -- But the catastrophe of their loves
hereafter.

We have now got rid of a pair of lovers, as dexterously as any play wright, who
after cunningly bringing them together, gives the prompter a cue -- wheu --
wheu whistles Mr. Pimperlimpimp, the word giver, and the brace of woers are
intersected from the audience, by the canvas landscape, or size painted street
scene; and the rest of the comedy goes on as usual.

When our last express came away, the mountebank was on foot, terribly racing
it along, panting and trembling, -- the conclusion of his helter skelter flight
we shall now relate under the Anti-comic title, of

The ORIGINALITY of GHOSTS; AND ANATOMY of PHANTOMS.
RONDOCOSTO KAMBE DANESSO, in his defense of praeter-naturals, sub-naturals,
and non-naturals, very wisely tells us, that there are some very famous, and
what is more, very great, and what is more, very rich people, who are
undetermined whether ghosts are apparitions, or apparitions ghosts; whether
death-watches, dreams, night-mares, witchcraft, falling-stars, screech-owls and
religion, have, or have not reality. To them the following exhibitory is
recommended.

It is requested by the putter together of these lusitoriae, that all those
maxims, which relate to the analysis, solution, and dissection of phantoms,
will be carefully studied, by out of pensioned patriots; fourth and fifth
cousins to quality, by all dependants upon great men's generosity, or any man's
gratitude.

* * * * * * * *

Who is it will disinterestedly pilot a genius, to the Cape of Good Hope? -- I,
-- I, -- I -- I, will, -- we all will, -- every body will, -- and body will
take him on board, and be glad to sail with him; for all the world will be fond
of his company; who denis it? but pray, Sir, when the vessel comes to port, who
will help him out of the ship? who will pay the captain for his passage?

However diverting, during the voyage this drole fellow may have been, and
whatever applauses he may receive with invitations to every one's mess, while
on board, as soon as anchor is dropped, all is forgot. Every one then is
hurrying home about their own business, adieu Mr. Genius -- your servant, Mr.
Genius -- here Tom put these things behind the post-chaise; we are obliged to
you for your good company, Mr. Genius, sorry cannot stay with you any longer --
go on boy -- a very diverting creature that man was, my lord -- yes, answers
the man of title; these wits and droles are very well for a gentleman to be
entertained with, now and then at taverns, or on shipboard; but they should not
be taken any notice of publicly -- for they are always poor -- know nothing of
the world, and are rather impertinent.

The deserted genius, penniless, and a stranger, is left upon the beach, to
make the best of his way, where he can.

We'll suppose him arrived in London, there he must either prostitute his
talents, in vindication of villainy, or condescend to be Folly's Auditor,
Pride's Flatterer, Pimp, Informer, or Beggar.

Merit in this metropolis having been condemned to perish in the streets,
without benefit of clergy, had not Adulation persuaded Preferment to hire the
whole distressed family ostentatiously; and now they are employed, by his
Honor, as hay-makers, harvest folks, hedgers, stable-sweepers, errand-boys and
turnspits.

By this hyperbolical style, the reader will observe, Hope and Promise are
included in the dissertation upon Phantoms.

This will be illustrated in the continuance of the quack's history, who we
left upon foot, nor have we yet brought him to a stand-still. Fright made him
miss his way, it was midnight before he reached the gates of his inn; they were
barred, and every candle out in the neighborhood.

Pleased to think all was so quiet, he resolved to creep up the back way into
the yard, get his money and clothes out of his room, before daylight, and
secret himself among the miners.

Up a broken butterice, belonging to the garden, he scrambled, and got astride
the wall; just as Tom the tapster opened the garden-door, in his breeches,
shirt and slippers.

The moon brightly shining at the mountebank's back, made a long black shadow
upon the grass-plat; which, moving before the servant's eyes, stopped him from
stepping forward; his knees knocked together, his teeth chattered, his feet he
drew softly out of the slippers, and and sidling barefooted, he slunk into a
dark arbor at his left hand.

The medicine-monger was not a whit less terrified, at seeing a human figure in
white; for the moon gave him full view of the tapster. A cross the wall he sat
aghast; he thrice attempted to say some prayers, but had none to say. He
muttered the only religious sentiment, which he knew, viz. grace after meat;
saying, Lord make me thankful for what I have received -- this over and over he
repeated, holding himself on the wall by the help of his hands, as a sailor
fixes his fists upon the saddle pommel.

The doctor was confident he saw the Corporal's ghost; almost petrified with
apprehension, he sat there, and there would have sat until morning, had not the
stronger fear, least the ghost should be creeping along the side of the wall,
to seize him, forced him from his place; and heaving himself up by his hands,
he straddling, throwed himself along the wall, on the ridge of the bricks, with
his eyes all the time fixed on that spot, from whence the ghost had vanished.

He reached the top of an old cow-house, and rolling himself upon it, his
weight broke the boards, and betwixt two rafters he sell, jammed midway; his
weight forced him down, his bulk prevented his whole body to fall through;
there he was wedged fast by the waistband, and fancying all hell held him, he
shrieked, roared, kicked, flung his arms about, and tumbled the loosened rotten
planks over and over.

The poor drawer, hearing the dreadful outcries, ecchoed his shrieks, with
shrieks more shrill, and run up the yard, calling out help, murder, fire, help,
help.

The noise wakened every one in the inn except the landlord. Each started up
terrified at the exclamation, confusion, and affright seized them; from first,
second floors, and garrets; from down, feather, and flocks, all came, hurry
scurry, like mob from the twelve-penny gallery. -- Back to her own bed, Betty
the chambermaid slipped, to put some things on, leaving her gallant, a London
rider, shaking in a fear-raised argue fit.

The hostess scudded from the sergeant of grenadiers, her eldest daughter,
slipped out of the commanding officer's apartment, her youngest, down
barefooted was brought trembling, upon the boot-catcher's back. All the rest of
the good company half dressed, assembled round the tapster, who told them,
there was a spirit playing the devil in the old cow-house.

By the tempting promise of two guineas, the three ostlers and a stage-coachman
were persuaded to go armed with pitchforks, to find out this ghost, and the
company, the female part, all went together, to get the rest of their clothes
on; and the gentlemen the same; agreeing to meet in the large dining room to
hear farther particulars. And Sir Greenfin Calipash, was to be seated in the
grand chair, to take the examination.

While the guests were getting ready, all big with expectation, like the polite
audiences in Cock-lane; a new noise alarmed them, an outcry, which was within
the house, proceeding from the landlord, who having been put to bed very drunk,
was by the continuation of the various noises waked; and parched with thirst,
bawled out loud as asses bray -- some oat-ale, a tankard of oat-ale, and be --
to ye.

After the tapster and mountebank were brought up stairs, all the company in
the house (the host excepted) crowded into the room -- all stood together
promiscuous; postilions, baronets, ostlers, ladies, boot-catchers, squires,
chambermaids, great heiresses, cook-maids, etc. etc. For fear and
self-preservation, absorb all distinction in such terrible times of danger,
excepting that just then a lady, even of the most delicate principles, would
prefer a porter to a pretty fellow for her partner.

Sir CALIPASH in the Chair. The drawer deposed he saw the ghost, and described
it to be a black one.

The poisoner of parishes gave in his evidence that it was a white one.

Dr. SINECURE, the learned professor and connoisseur, begged leave to be heard
upon that subject, concerning the seeming contradiction of deposition, in
respect of the color of the ghost. And then he coughed, and then he hemmed,
and then thus went on. I am conscious, my most intelligent auditors, that I can
clear this contradiction much to the satisfaction of the polite part of the
assembly, I have now the honor to speak before -- because -- cough and hem
again -- I say, because ladies and gentlemen, I have not only considered the
nature of ghosts philosophically; but by every rule of prespective, as far as
is relative to the vanishing. -- Have I, Sir Greenfin, your permission to
proceed? bowing low as he addressed the president, the president as low down
bowing in return.

Upon which the professor of universal connoisseurship in arts and sciences,
looking about him with much consequence, coughed, hemmed, spit, wiped his
mouth, smoothed his foretop, spread his stock, pulled his ruffles, and began.

Every ghost, every ghost, and every apparition, and every apparition as well
as every ghost possesses in its own nature, two sides or contrasuperficies;
which are denominated philosophically an opaque side and a lucid one -- cough
-- now the two witnesses being, as it were, fixed or placed at opposite angles,
saw the opposite sides of the ghost -- for instance, the drawer who saw it a
black ghost, had his rays of light absorbed, by refrangibility of reflection,
while the other had a view of the ghost, in his illuminated state arising from
refraction; because the radiancy of the rays, striking upon the retina, and
this pellucidity of shade, is called by the painters, the CLEAR OBSCURE --
cough, etc.

Thus therefore I form my hypothesis -- coughs -- Suppose my left thumb to be
A, my left little finger B, all my left hand C, -- Hem -- hem -- now therefore,
I say, A plus, B; B minus, C, because every person being capable of seeing a
dark or a light, that is an opaque, or a lucid superficies, or side belonging
to my finger and thumb, not only according as I form it into an inclined plain,
then the shades and lights fly off in tangents of obtuse angles, or if that the
object refracted is diametrically opposite in a horizontal parallel to the
optic nerve; thus it was, one saw the apparition in a black or nigriferous
point of sight, and the other beheld it as a light, or illuminated appearance.
-- Cough, hem and spit.

Had I, my most ineffable auditors, had I my books and instruments here, I
might perhaps have demonstrated this more clearly.

Sir Tim. Dowgate replied, it was clear indeed, and he apprehended every
syllable on it -- vastly clear indeed, lady Dowgate answered; the doctor's a
most amazing man of science, and I am positive has more true learning than all
Doctors Commons. -- Indeed lady Hadit observed, nothing could have been
delivered more clearly, and she understood every word on it. So do I, so do I,
its immensely clear, vastly so replied all the polite heap, and agreed, that as
a scholar, an artist, an orator, and connoisseur, Dr. Sinecure was quite the
thing, and they were sure on it.

The under-bred part of the assembly, allowed him to be a most wonderful man;
and every one, gentle and simple, joined in praising loudly his late lecture,
and great learning; and they agreed he had made it out so well, that they all
understood it.

The doctor condescended to incline his head in a direction, between a bow and
a nod, with the utmost pedagogick consequence.

Then Sir Green fin Calipash stood up, and tucking his neckcloth ends under his
garnet breast buckle, he begged leave to observe, that as he had always made
the good of this nation his study, and would venture to say, that he knew both
Old and New England's political constitution, as well as any one man in it. Yet
he could not say, although he apprehended every thing doctor Sinecure had said;
yet he could not say he understood the meaning of these affairs about black and
white ghosts; because, though he believed in ghosts as much as any christian
could; yet why sholud ghosts be black or white either? why might they not as
well be of any other colors?

Dr. SINECURE. Black and white are no colors. Black is an absorbment, white an
aggregate -- hem -- ghosts cannot be of any color -- ergo -- hem, hem, hem.


Sir GREENFIN. So then I suppose you would persuade me, by that inuendo of
ghosts not being of any color, that they cannot be of any party, but I know
better. I know that ghosts are as liable to be in the French interest, as they
are to be of ours; and that this may be a political stroke, either of our
foreign or domestic enemies -- may not the thief-takers and ghosts have a
fellow-feeling.


Lady HADIT. Screaming out a laugh. A fellow see -- e -- eling -- oh, Sir
Calipash, what an idea! -- can ghosts feel?


Enter Landlord in shirt and napkin nightcap. Lady Hadit was the first who
viewed him, and her ladyship gave a loud shriek, sprung upon on the
window-seat, and wrapped herself in the window-curtains.

Every one in the room, by this time, had a glance of the figure in white; all
run helter skelter, oversetting benches, tables, chairs, stools, burrowing like
rabbits underneath them, and hitting their heads against one another, striving
to hide themselves.

Between Sir Greenfin's legs crept the landlady, which overset the knight upon
Sir Timothy Dowgate; who was hiding himself under his wife's petticoats, lady
Dowgate's head and shoulder, buried at the same time beneath a card table.

Every person rolling topsy turvy one upon another, the furniture cracking --
Dr. Sinecure, the chimney board being thrown down, had made there to cover, and
Tom tapster, and cook maid Nan, took to the same hiding place.

The reader may recollect, that at the alarm of the ghosts, the innkeeper
waking, parched with thurst, bawled out for some oat ale; not any being
brought, he determined to fetch some himself; and as it was the middle of
summer, and he very hot, would not stay to put any clothes on, but out of bed,
hurried down, and seeing a light in the large one pair of stairs room, opened
the door; and occasioned the aforesaid confusion, wondering, he stood, and
called out, I only want Tom tapster -- Oh Christ, cries Nanny, who stood with
Tom in the chimney corner -- a great groan came from doctor Sinecure, who was
mounting by Tom's help, he began to work with his elbows to pull himself into
the chimney.

Where is Tom tapster? again the land lord called out -- O Lord, again, shrieks
out Nanny, and was running from him, although her old sweetheart, and twice
asked in church; the waiter seizing her by her gown skirts, begged her for
God's sake not to leave him; the doctor was by this time standing upon the
tapster's shoulders, striving still to mount higher. Let go my gown, for God's
sake Tom; thus Nanny began pitiously to request her trembling lover; if you
have any love for me, Tom, get away, least the Devil fly away with us both.

LANDLORD. Where is tapster Tom?


NANNY COOK. Here, here, Sir, and please your honor Mr. Devil, he is in the
chimney place, squire; but dear, good gentleman, my lord Devil, I hope your
honor will not take me along with him, for all he holds me fast, good Mr. Devil,
don't for God's sake. Go Tom, go, go, now don't you hear how his worship calls
you?

The landlord began to be terrified -- the word Devil being so often mentioned,
had an effect upon his spirits, and he turned his head about to see where he
could run to.

When lady Hadit, who had been at bopeep behind her window-curtain, imagined
she could be certain, the figure in white must be flesh and blood -- more
earnestly looking, she vowed she could take her oath to its being a man;
courageously left her pedestal and advancing, demanded, who are you?


LANDLORD. Me, Madam, please your ladyship, the landlord, my name's Jordan.


LANDLADY from under Sir Greenfin. It Is the Devil in my husband's shape, my
lady, oh don't go near him.


LANDLORD. The Devil I believe has been in your shape several years, I am sure
-- but I am the landlord, roy lady.


Lady HADIT. Sir, I take for granted, that you are flesh and blood, and not a
spirit; but if you are Satan, or Beelzebub, or any other of those subterranean
geniusses, which the vulgar world call the Devil; I presume you are too polite
to behave indelicately to persons of quality.


LANDLORD. Indeed my lady, I Am no more a devil, than any other christian body
whatever, and I only want a little oat-ale, and that made me call Tom tapster.


Coming, Sir, bawls the waiter, and down souse on his posteriors squashes Dr.
Sinecure upon the hearth, and his teeth were loosened by the fall, for he stood
upon Tom's shoulders, who bolted out in an instant; but over eager as he
stooped to get out of the chimney, he beat his master down with his head.

The sidelong attitude in which the landlord lay across one of the benches,
made lady Hadit burst into a violent laugh; for it was, as her ladyship said,
such a sight -- this mirth, and the preceding conversation, dispelled the good
company's fears; they raised themselves by degrees, or else were helped up. Tom
and landlord went down, and the rest retired to their separate apartments.

The landlady waited upon lady Hadit, and would have made an apology for her
husband's rudeness in standing naked before her.

LADY HADIT. Not at all Mrs. Jordan, I beg you will not mention it, pon my honor
it was excessively drole -- I dote upon such things.


Mrs. JORDAN. Your ladyship's vastly good, to be sure.


Lady HADIT. But my dear creature, Jordan, had you seer him fall down -- my God
-- I though I should have expired -- such a sight.


Mrs. JORDAN. A wretched sight, to be sure, your ladyship -- but then, I am
obliged to put up with it. However, I am vastly glad, that as how, after my
brute of a creature had been so mischiefous, as one may say -- I am happy that
he could divert your ladyship. So I wish your Ladyship good night.


Exit. Lady HADIT. Good night Mrs. Jordan -- divert me; -- my God! what
wretches there are in this world

Sleeps.
Interlude between the ACTS, CALLED, The MYSTERY REVEALED.
This is to satisfy all the Curiosi in England, Scotland and Ireland,
concerning the Spiriting away of Miss Canning.
And also of the Cock-Lane, Miss Fanny's Spirit.
THESE were phenomena of such vast consequence to the public, that all the
people in London, interested themselves strongly either on one side, or the
other. The cause of these transactions must have remained a secret, had it not
been for this publication; which is authenticated beyond doubt, or even beyond
contradiction, for my brother has made his affidavit about it, and gave me his
papers; and from those papers, for the satisfaction of the town and country,
and in my brother's own words too, I shall insert it, as he swore to its
veracity before the worshipful the whole bench of justices.

The Journal of M. TRIP.
I William Trip, mate of the Concord transport, captain Robert Farding, of Lynn
Regis, master, do declare, that as we were coming from Lisbon, June 7, 1759; it
happened to be my watch upon deck, I saw a bean cod overset in our ship's wake,
just as we were coming out of the Tagus.

We having not taking in our boat, I got down abaft, cast off the painter, and
skulled away, to pick up a person I saw floating, and brought him on board our
vessel.

The gentleman whom I got out of the water happened to be a Roman Catholic
parson, one whom they call in their lingo a Jesuit, and who had got out of
Portugal by stealth.

He was very ill while he was on board us, and I tended him. So one day, as we
lay off the Wight, he sent to speak with me; and when I came, he desired me to
sit down by him, and hear someting he had to say to me.

Upon which, that I might be, as one may say, yard arm and yard arm, with him,
I got a coil of rope, clapped it aloft my sea chest, brought it along side his
hammock, so I set down on it, and our heads were then on the same latitude
together.

So then he began (reaching out his hand on the starboard side) says he, my
good friend -- you have been so civil to me, that I have no way to return your
kindness, but by making you a present of this book of receipts, and telling you
a piece of secret history, that you may make money of it, if you have a mind to
print it.

You must know, Mr. Trip, that our society, for many years, found our interest
declining both in France and Portugal; and therefore our superiors thought of
re-establishing themselves in England.

Several missionaries that were sent from Rome to England, assured us in their
letters, that the English people would believe any thing, that the system or
fashion of the minds of the generality, of both the high and low life multitude
turned upon an axis, whose points were CONCEIT, and CREDULITY.

The success which the methodists, and their doctrines met with, encouraged us
greatly; nay our society received several letters from their most eminent
preachers in your island; and they told us, our mission would be received,
provided we joined them; and that upon particular pecuniary concessions on our
side, they would unite with us. Because they assured us, they must and would be
of infinite service to our society, since they knew so well how to work upon
the multitude.

Before we would consent to sign any articles with them, we resolved, from
experiment, to discover how far we could venture to impose upon the people of
England.

I was dispatched upon that mission, and to prevent suspicion, or the least
inquiry of what I was, I made interest to be engaged, as one of the subaltern
players, belonging to the Theater in London, only to do trifling parts; and
when I was once seen upon the Stage in that capacity, it was impossible any
person could suspect I was good for any thing.

A brother of our order followed me with fresh instructions; but as his part
required he should be introduced at all hours, and in all places, to the very
best company; he assumed the character of an Italian fiddler, tooth cleaner and
designer; and when we have met to compare notes in an evening, he has made me
smile, to hear him relate how every door used to fly open at his approach; and
he would gossip for two hours with very great personages, while the
antichamber would be full of colonels and commodores, waiting for an audience.

The earthquake was of my projecting, so was the bottle-conjurer, it was me who
wrote the prophecy for the person called the life-guardman; but in reality he
was porter to the Fanciscans at Padua.

He, as you may remember, foretold the return of the earthquake would happen
such a day, and Bloomsbury-fields, and Bloomsburysquare, was filled with
coaches; and whole families crammed in them, who there set all night, not
daring to trust themselves in their own houses. I smiled when I saw them thus
huddled together; but was amazed to see many of your preachers hurrying out of
town, as if they were panick struck with the dread of leaving this world --
when they are certain, there is one so infinitely preferable, and in which, by
the doctrines they profess, they must be eternally happy.

Are they, thought I, only like physicians, who administer medicines for the
good of mankind, (as they say) yet have no faith in their own prescriptions.

One afternoon, by chance, I met with Elizabeth Canning; she had lost
sixpence, was crying about, dared not to go home, she said -- I observed her,
she had the most stupid look, yet on conversing with her, I discovered she
possessed cunning and obstinacy.

By the promise of making up her loss, a new topknot, and the temptation of
riding in a hackney-coach, I prevailed upon her to go with me, and when she was
perfect in her part, I exhibited her, as you must remember; this scheme
answered, to prove English peoples aptness to embrace, or take part with
incoherencies.

Rejoiced I was, when the gentleman, who endeavored to detect the imposture,
met with such opposition by his example. I was sure other magistrates would be
deterred from making any other strict and impartial enquires -- for indeed Mr.
Trip (thus the Jesuit went on) though your nation is one of the best in the
world, yet at present, folly and prejudice have spread themselves so
pestilentially among all ranks and denominations; that any person, who now
would en deavour to benefit his country from a praiseworthy principle of
integrity -- So great is the defection throughout all degrees -- so epidemic
the contagion of self-interest; the patriot would be hooted at for a madman,
reviled as a pretender, or punished with contempt, and if possible with beggary.

Preferment makes the English nation behave, just as the children of Israel
did, when the manna fell among them, they snatch up all they can, overload
themselves often -- no matter, by this method, less is left for their
neighbors.

After this affair was over, I was sent for back to Rome upon special affairs,
relative to our society; but I left a brother of our order full instructions
how to proceed, and the plan for a project, that, as soon as he recovered, he
was to put in execution; it was the COCK-LANE PHANTOM, or what was then called
Miss Fanney's Spirit.

This was our most favorite scheme, this was our corner stone; we therefore
employed more -- I suppose he would have said skill, but our ship, at that
moment, by the wind shifting, took such a lust, that her lee-ruff-tree dipped
in the water, and the Jesuit was canted overboard out of his hammock, pitched
his head upon the trunnion of a four pounder, and never spoke another word.

I was overset, but I soon righted; but as for my companion, death clapped a
stopper upon his tongue, as quick as one could crack a biscuit.

And this is the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, as
witness my hand.

WILLIAM TRIP, Mariner.

In the analytical destination of the incorporalities of ghosts, wrote
originally in Runic, translated by SAXO GRAMMATICUS into the German, there is
one page, which, for the benefit of all true believers, I have taken the
trouble to render into English, viz.

There are three distinct or separate species, or classes of ghosts and
apparitions.

The first is the miser's spectre; this phantom invariably appears loaded
with chains, to tell where money has long been hid; and it comes as a
skeleton, because it is supposed to starve itself to death, ergo, it cannot
have any flesh upon its bones.

The second is the winding sheet ghost, or torch-holding-immateriality; which
is a lovesick maiden, that glideth along the midnight dew, to undraw the feet
curtains of her forsworn swain, and bidding him bethink him of former affairs,
of plighted troth and ruined maidenheads. She comes in a white sheet, to do
penance for being so foolish as to break her heart, hang, drown, or poison
herself for love and constancy.

The third and last is the hobgobblin, or raw head and bloody bones -- this is
very terrifying, and often used to appear to several particular persons, both
at sea and land, an hour or two before an engagement -- but it is at present,
as well as the lovesick ghost, almost out of fashion.

Eternal infamy upon his name, who wishes to have any more ghosts among us; and
all honor, praise, and preferment, attend and wait upon the ambassador's
chaplain, who gave the Grand Signior wise and christian-like advice; not to
open a communication between the Mediterranean and Red Sea; because it would
disturb all the ghosts that are now so quietly laid in the last mentioned ocean.

SCENE, PLYMOUTH.
A BEDCHAMBER. Mrs. LLWHYDDWHUYDD sola in bed; tossing, sighing, fretting,
turning, tumbling, wishing and despairing; till on a sudden she upstarted,
looking seriously at the light upon the hearth, and taking a pinch of right
rappee, thus soliloquised. THE candles just burnt out, and no Knott come yet;
what would I give, if I was but at home with my dear husband; if ever I put my
trust in man again, except my own dear husband, I wish this pinch my poison! oh
what villains are that inconstant sex, except my own poor dear husband. O that
he did but know where I was, that my dear David was but with me, he would not
let me lie alone, frightening myself, if I was but this moment with my dear
husband in my own room, or if he was but with me here -- as to Knott -- he is a
scrub -- a wretch I despise and contaminate -- he never knew how to value a
woman of merit -- no, not he -- let him have his trulls, I always was too good
for him -- I despise him; nobody do I love, or ever did but my dear husband --
just then her stomach began to pain her -- her heart grew cold -- she put forth
her hand upon the chair, by the bedside was a bottle three parts full of
medicinal water.

She raised the elixir to her mouth -- and gently gulping -- once -- twice --
thrice -- administered, warmth to her sorrow chilled breast, discontent, died
away, sleepful she sunk upon her pillow, lulled to rest by the calm opiate, of
genuine Hollands.

SCENE next MORNING.
JUST as Madam Llwhyddwhuydd sat down to her tea, the Merry Andrew came jumping
into her apartment; bawling out as loud, as a bribed voter bellows liberty.
Madam Knott, Madam Knott, here is good news about you in the news-paper; your
husband has sent for you home again.

Cups, saucers, tea-pot, toast and butter, all tumbled to the floor; the lady
in her hurry, of joy, rushing strait forward, overset the breakfasting stool.
-- Where? where is it she cried? snatching at the same time the Chronicle out
of the tumbler's hands -- but recollecting her inability to make the words out,
returned the paper; and begged the young man would read every word of it to her
loud, and very loud.

Mr. SOMERSET began. Whereas Chloe, the wife of muster -- here is a hard word,
madam, full of double L's, and double D's, and double U's, and I cannot spell it.


Mrs. LLWHYDDWHUYDD. I know it, child, never mind that, my dear; go to the next
word.


Mr. SOMERSET. I Will begin again madam, and skip that.


Mrs. LLWHYDDWHUYDD. Do so, my best friend.


Mr. SOMERSET reads again. Whereas Chloe, the wife of Muster, what do you call
um, was decoyed away by one Knott, a Corporal; this is to give notice, that if
she will return home to her own lawful spouse, she shall meet with a hearty
welcome, and no questions asked.


The husband's grief, was left to the reader's imagination. The Editor
bequeaths the wife's joy to the same colourist, and as he made bold to carry
her off, takes the same freedom to bring her home again; her husband received
her with all that joy, which every fond forgiving spouse has felt, when, with
outstretched arms, he once more impounds his long strayed lady.

Blessing each other, they embraced; and over and over again they blessed that
day, and also blessed the inventors of publishing new-papers, advertisements,
etc.

In honor of the Press, I must be allowed

A DISSERTATION on DAILY-PAPERS.
No Patriot, in or out of place, ever considered their utility, with that
grateful attention, these publications deserve.

Is there a want in the world, but what may be instantly relieved, if the
patient will but consult the columns of those morning and evening
intelligencies? with as much gravity, as ever any one of the faculty pulled off
his gloves; I do declare, that without the help of these dictionaries for the
day, the great business of the nation could not be carried on.

How could Mrs. Philips hope for the continuance of her customers? or the
nobility and gentry know where to pay in their Opera subscriptions? where could
they send for the best royal beautifying fluid? or could be sure of having
French chicken gloves genuine? how should we know when Mr. Whitfield preaches
in Edinburgh, or Georgia? or where we should be sure of Roman purl
unadulterated? how should we be ascertained where the most notified Dr. Tailor
performs his occulistical, or oratorial operations? or where the best liquid
blacking is to be got? where to send for the pure aetherial volatile
quintessence of essence? or how could we be informed, that the seawater at
Bright-Helmstone, is better than any other seawater? were it not for being so
instructed, by paragraphs and advertisements aforesaid. O credulity,
cre-credulity, thou universal power, how much are we indebted to thy influences?

New discoveries, elixirs, lotions, injections, and nostrums, for the ladies,
are (as we read) to be had at every toy-shop.

Sometimes, indeed, the applications and uses of these extraordinary
succedaneums are not expressed, in so delicate a style, as polite persons might
wish. But when we consider, the humane intent of the makers-up, and venders of
these medicines, the style is excused.

As in the country, we put up with the indelicacy of the entertainment, for the
good will of the host.

The humanity of the College of Physicians here must be noticed; they have an
authority to inspect into medicine-mongers; and can, nay, and should, and I
suppose do, visit several places where drugs are sold. Yet it never was known,
that any deputation from Gresham College, or Apothecaries-hall, inspected into
the noted Dr. Franks, Dr. Sarrant, Dr. Rock, Dr. Jesuit Drop, Dr. Greek Water,
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. This wilful omission, is owing to
the same public spirit, by which Mr. Ashley on Ludgate Hill is agitated;
gentlemen of the faculty, are willing to let every person have physic as well
as punch, in small quantities, and therefore wink at the aforesaid advertisers.

Yet such is the malignity of humankind, that even this generous behavior of
the faculty has been found fault with; and the babbling pack of scandal yelpers
bark out -- that as quacks make diseases worse, the profits of the regular bred
must be thereby increased.

Malicious insinuations, as if gentlemen of the M. D. signatures, would be
guilty of such pitiful finesses. Thus the mad multitude have as basely
clamoured against the POLICE. -- The low-life herd of hirelings give out, that
truly, if the worthies in commission would but take half as much pains to
suppress the bawdy-houses, bagnios, etc. in their parishes, as they labor to
take highwaymen, it would be of more benefit to the nation in general -- but
how little do these people know of sporting -- if the cover was grubbed up, the
breeding of game would be prevented; how then could money for a subscription
pack of harriers, tarriers, etc. be collected?

With what force I ween? -- but good heaven forgive us, God bless their
majesty's, and every person who is commissioned by them, to see justice done as
it should be. -- And as Mr. Jacob Henriques observes, it is all for the
glorification of Old England.

When I mention the word quacks, it is not to be presumed, that any gentleman
recipe-vender, acting under letters patents, can be hinted at; because we are
all certain, patents are only granted to men of excellent science, of approved
education, whose discoveries have been owing to indefatigable study, and are
witness from repeated experiments, before the most skillful, to be entirely
calculated for the health and preservation of the people of England.

These, and many more uses than these, belong to newspapers, they not only
bring health to patients, but ladies to despairing lovers, and wives to
husbands, as in the case of Mr. and Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd now under our
consideration; had it not been for the convenience of advertising, when could
they have come together again.

Yet David did not descend one grain from the dignity of inbred honor, by
permiting his wife to return home.

For while he had one ready-money customer left, his big heart despised
submission; but when all his trade was lost, the garrison of his great mind was
forced to capitulate, his nobleness of spirit and blood of Japhet, were forced
to surrender prisoners of war, at and to discretion. He obeyed the times. Madam
Llwhyddwhuydd gave him her hand, he kissed it -- tears of joy swelled over his
eye brinks, and he told her, in the name of God and good people, how his heart
was glad to see her, to be sure, and I do hope in deed, I do now.

Mrs. LLWHYDDWHUYDD. And so do I, husband, that nothing hereafter may be
mentioned concerning my former withdrawing myself; for although my dear
husband, I esteem you as so worthy a man ought to be esteemed; yet if ever you
was to reproach me, with what might or might not suppose to have happened
during our separation; that moment should be my last, I would the next plunge
myself to the bottom of the river, and prevent that way your ill usage.


Her spouse, though in raptures at the stateliness of his wife's gesture; yet
the resolution of her look frightened him; fearful that she should make away
with herself, especially as he had been at such an expense to fetch her home
too; he kneeled down and begged her to be pacified, and forgive him, if he had
said any thing amiss.

She forgave him, and raised him with a tender reconciling look, equal to what
the most enraged (though detected) lady can soften into, when her husband has
made a proper humiliation, and giving up all his informers.

For it is not possible a man can love his lady, either married or unmarried,
unless he will wink at her errors; and the larger those errors are, or the
greater the number, the more occasion has he to manifest his affection.

To do David justice, which a man so well born as he was, deserves; although
his enemies said he was a perfect t'other-end-of-the-towns-man, suffering
himself to be carried down the tide in the corrupted currents of this world,
admitting the flaws and cracks of reputation to be cemented by the solder of
self-interest, yet he never let awry word pass his lips against his lady.

Madam Llwhyddwhuydd grew again the admiration of the neighborhood, and
customers, even the best in the parish, assembled there every evening as before
times.

SCENE the TROLLOPEE'S CATASTROPHE. OR RETORT UNCOURTEOUS.
SOON after Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd's return, Mr. Ap Thomas, her spouse's partner,
with a full pot of porter in his hand, happened to run against her, just as she
came from her Sunday noon's walk in St. James's Park.

Her white satin trollopee was splashed with it, and the very smell of porter
always made Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd sick; because persons are apt to depise what
they get their living by; her clothes were spoiled, and such clothes too! -- a
dress, that the first duchess in the land might have gone to court in.

Passion ever has power to serve an ejectment upon reason; the suffering lady
on that account, became so little mistress of herself, that she called Thomas
several severe names, and at last told him he was a vulgar creature.

The word vulgar, was grimgribber, to the ancient Briton; to be reflected upon,
as if he was not a gentleman, irritated him to that degree, that he returned
her severe words; with words yet more severe.

The writer of this part has served his time to the knowledge of mankind, and
since worked several year journeyman in that profession; else he never could
have believed such words could have escaped any man's lips; who valued himself
upon being a gentleman, as Mr. Thomas uttered. -- He made use of such phrases,
that no persons, if they were not in a passion, or chose to be looked upon
superior to the scurrilous rank of informing constables, would rehearse.

For in most illiberal language, he reproached her with the Corporal.

Company coming in very fast, she could not with decency stay, to hear him any
longer, Ladies may like to listen to some sort of expressions, yet it is not
proper every body should know it. It was extreme modesty that made Mrs.
Llwhuddwhuydd quit the bar, and leave her adversary master of the field of
battle.

She went up to her chamber, and sent for Miss Shred, to consult about
repairing the damage done to her dress; then she acquainted Miss Shred, with
Thomas's abuse, repeating the very words over and over, and over again, and
concluded, saying, No Miss, upon my honor, I never can, or ever will forgive
that Page 118

fellor. -- He told me, that the Corporal -- my God! -- besides to call me
whore, Madam. Whore, my dear Miss -- I never was on man's whore, it was always
love, to which I gave up my soul; not any mercenary views; and therefore, as I
never took money, how can I be a whore?

Miss SHRED. Indeed, Madam, I wish you was to have been last lecture night at
our tabernacle, to have heard that good creature the doctor divide the
difference of going into keeping, through inclination, or interest.

Love for love is, (as he said) like the Levitical law) of an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth; but mercenary matches, with or without the parsin (it is all
the same) is a sin not to be even purified even by regeneration. But, dear
madam, you never told me why you would come home again. I hope the Corporal was
not inconstant?


Mrs. LLWHUDDWHUYDD. Inconstant Miss! Do you imagine the horrid country ladies,
could have any charms for a gentleman like Mr. Knott? who had been titup a
tit-up with all the beau moon of St. James's Park We suppose she means tete a
tete.
-- Inconstant -- no Miss, I ashure you [looking in the glass] I didn't fear
any rivals; but I could never forgive the Corporal, because he would not hold
his tongue. To be sure, he might have made himself worthy of any woman's love,
if he would not have boasted so, and made my name the tent-talk of his
comrades. I vow, Miss, I have blushed spontaneously, as one may fay, and my
cheeks have burned as much, as if one was talking of a body. When I used to
reflect, how my name might be brought up as the Corporal's concubine, before a
parcel of sutlers wives, and sogers trulls -- me Miss -- was it ME to be
treated so -- I could not bear the idea [rising up] I, I, to be used so --
[walking forwards and backwards, her left hand extended upon her right breast,
her right hand waving a handkerchief in a curve, or serpentine line] I here she
set down again] I who was born in the Ingies, and my mamma was first waiting
woman of quality to the Empress of the Catawaws.


Miss SHRED [Pouring a little more into the glass. Indeed, Madam, it is
immensely monstrous, to reflect how men will blab; and that is one reason why I
have often wished to be a person of quality, because they don't care what is
said about them.


Miss LLWHUDDWHUYDD. Very true, dear Miss; but as I am but a simple
gentlewoman, one is obliged to be careful concerning one's reputation, and as I
left the Corporal, because I would not be talked off; shall such a reptul as
Thomas pretend to reproach me? my husband knows of it; and every body knows my
husband is a man of honor, and therefore -- Miss your health.


Miss SHRED. To be sure, madam, such affairs as yours with the Corporal, may
happen to the finest woman in England; and in polite life, it is looked upon to
be no more than an accident; and no persons would blame you, but vulgar
creatures, nor is there any harm in it; -- that is, when it proceeds entirely
from the spirit; as we prove at our love feasts The Methodists have all
night-meetings, called Love Feasts.
.


Here follows, in the manuscript, seven Chapters of Mr. Zapanhiel's own
handwriting upon the seven deadly sins; and a collection of receipts of
regeneration. Which he entitles, Fullers Earth for the Spots of the Soul, and
the account how Miss Shred became a Methodist, which is introduced by a preface
of observation; wherein he says, that gamblers and ladies of pleasure, if they
live to grow old, and have saved money enough to encourage our pastors, or any
pastors to pray by them, they are weaned from their wickednesses, and become
sanctified, for the older we grow, the wiser we grow.

And he says further, in exhorting all sinners to regenerate. -- Oh what a
heavenly comfort it is, to consider, that a sinner, after running through a life
of all wickedness, shall, only by attending on our tabernacle, be purified. Is
it not a rich balsam for a sore soul? therefore come unto us all ye who are
afflicted, with the remembrances of the methods, by which ye have got your
wealth; and ye shall but give a tithe to us, by way of paying insurance to the
saints, who will infallibly save you from being shipwrecked on the rocks of
perdition, and will stcer you into the harbor of grace. Yet we are not
Papists, no -- we will not give you absolution -- we are not Protestants -- no --
we will not save you by repentance -- no, no, we are Methodists; and it is
regeneration shall save you; it shall be the cork waistcoat to keep you
floating, and ye shall not sink into the bottomless pit of the sea, where the
Devil of Hell lies in the shape of a shark to devour you.

All these sentimental chapters, the Editor postponed; and therefore was
obliged to cut out, and to turn over above 70 pages, before he could find the
continuation of this Register, which went on as follows.

The Natural Reason for a LADY's LONGING.
David's lady soon had it in her power to perform her vow -- the vow of
revenge, which she had solemnly taken to be even with Thomas her trollopee
spoiler. Finding herself with child, to the great joy of her spouse, she told
her husband she longed for a bite or two at his partner Thomas's nose; and it
was that which occasioned those learned quotations, inserted in the first pages
of this history. And if the reader pleases to remember Mr. David and his
partner, in the midst of that most classical conversation, were called away by
the noise of chair, chair -- just as Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd had fixed his straps to
the poles, a message came that his lady was taken very ill; upon which hurrying
away as fast as he could with the fare, he returned to comfort his good woman,
who that morning fell in labor, occasioned by her over care as an oeconomist.

For though Madam Llwhyddwhuydd was big with child, and reckoned every hour,
yet she would needs go to market herself, because she said, servants had so
many ways of cheating their masters and mistresses. It happened, as she passed
by a public house, near the market, two people were quarrelling about the
critical rules of the game of Put; the altercation being pretty high, the cards
were thrown out at the window, just as this lady was passing by, and the knave
of Clubs hit her upon the nose. She was frighted, put into a chair, carried
home immediately, and fell into labor in about half an hour. Her friends
immediately prognosticated, that from the incident of the knave of Clubs
striking her, it would be a boy; if it had been a queen, they said, it would
have been a girl, and that her son would, as he grew up, be an odd mortal, and
as comical to look at, as the knave of Clubs was. The subsequent behavior of
Needy, has verified the truth of the prediction.

Just at this time, many prodigies appeared in the political, theatrical, and
scholastic worlds or circles.

At this time the great alloway was in blossom at Hoxton, and a maiden sizes at
York city; the first calf with five legs that ever was shown in England, came
to town that day; and that day Mr. Whitfield -- but whether these revolutions
and portents happened in consequence of Ned's coming into the world; or that
Ned's coming into the world, was in consequence of these things happening, we
leave with submission to the retrospection of all searchers into futurity.

SCENE the DELIVERY.
After Madam Llwhyddwhuydd was put into bed, and her gossips assembled, the
good women ordered a man-midwife to be sent for; but Mrs. Llwhyddwhuydd knowing
the objection her spouse had to men-midwives, was prudent enough to refuse such
assistance, because she was sure it would offend her husband's delicacy.

However, the other ladies were unanimous for a man. She entreated, she begged,
they were obstinate; the dispute was loud, it reached into the street, and
every stall, chandlers-shop, and cellar-keeper in the parish assembled at the
door, and determined, that as they knew David was sent for, he should not pass
into his own house, until they had his word and honor, to send for a
man-midwife for his lady; for as each said, if it was only for the look of the
thing, he should have one; David appeared, at that instant they surrounded him,
as the print relates to you, much better than I can. However, one figure in it,
I must beg leave to explain; which is, the big-bellied female, who seems to be
full of grief -- that lady, is spouse to a most celebrated writer of political
papers; and who has wrote very severely against men-midwives; because, not
being able to pay for their attendance, those gentlemen had refused their
assistance.

She was a party deeply concerned in this dispute, and it afflicted her, to
take notice of David's obstinacy -- he indeed once or twice attempted to speak
-- but it was a vain attempt; as he could not, we beg leave to speak for him.

p. 121.

SLAUGHTER Surgeon and Man Midwife



Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd was too fond a husband to deny his wife what she desired;
but being a great reader, the newspapers and magazines informed him of the
indecency, indelicacy, and evil tendency of having men-midwives.

The putters together of those daily and monthly paragraph compendiums had
proved, that no husband of nice honor, would suffer a man-midwife; and as
David was a man of the nicest honor, how could he endure them?

In some papers it was hinted, that men-midwives could be of no use, because
the Indian women delivered themselves.

In other papers it was inserted, that in a state of nature, there were neither
men midwives, nor parsons; and that people could do well without both; and as
how in the first ages, and the first ages were the best ages, and that this age
was the worst age; but in the first ages there were no arts, or sciences, nor
occasion for any; that people would live better without them, than with them;
that neither mankind or womankind had need for more help than the animals in
the fields; or the fowls of the air; that it was only villainous custom, evil
habits, wrong tendencies, and the prejudice of education; that made us employ
surgeons, tailors, chemists, shoe-makers, men-midwives, dancing-masters,
snuff-makers, French-cooks, saddles, shirts, shifts, or pocket-handkerchiefs.

From the information of those weekly paid journalists, we may easily account
why GREAT SCHOLARS, who study nature so nicely, are such GREAT SLOVENS; as they
know by their extreme skill, that we are not superior to the beasts; they choose
to retain as much brutality as possible in their behavior.

David, like the traveller in the contention with the wind, wrapped himself up
in his surtout, determined to stand out the tempest; when word was brought him,
that madam Llwhyddwhuydd was brought to bed of a fine boy, and as like the
father --

He would not stay to hear the rest of the messenger's observation; bursting
through the crowd, run home, and received the congratulations of his company.
Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd indeed rejoiced having a son and heir; and that was the
utmost of his hopes, wishes, and prayers, before he had read the observations
abovementioned. Yet now his principal satisfaction arose, from the reflection
his lady was brought to bed without the help of a man-midwife.

The METAPHYSICAL SCENE.
The authors of Joseph Andrews and Tristram Shandy wrote themselves into
reputation, and I believe got money by what they did; and really deserved it.
-- Ever since I have engaged in this work, I have endeavored to copy one or
both of their styles, manners, or maxims; but I cannot fancy myself quite so
clever. Yet have I all that customary fondness, that becoming partiality, for
my own works, which every author ought to have; and hold all the rest of my
cotemporaries in a trifling light, to myself. This I do as well as any or all
the dramatic writers of England, Ireland or Scotland; but yet I don't find
myself (honestly speaking) a jot better genius for all the abuse I make use of.

If the connections I have with publishers could be on my side discharged, or a
protection granted me, I might wear a laced coat, and live without working, as
well as many other gentlemen.

Then, I would no more meddle with a pen and ink, than a lady in high keeping
would mend her own linen; for my mind scorns the drudgery of writing, reading,
and reflecting, as much as any rich man in the kingdom can do.

My wife has an acquaintance, who promises to provide for me, either in the
church, the navy, the law, the army, the customs, at court, or in the excise;
it does not signify what branch it is; for if a man has but interest, he is fit
for any place.

Must it not irritate a genius, like me, or like my spouse, to see so many
dunces, driving their one horse-chaise, or else crammed into hackney coaches,
taking the air to White Conduit-house, on a Sunday, raising a dust on the New
Road, and choking such foot passengers as me, and my wife: but we enjoy the
satisfaction to reflect, though those wretches ride about flourishing, in the
folly of finery -- yet they perhaps, not one of them, ever made a rebus, or can
repeat the Greek alphabet.

At this instant, the dear creature my spouse is sitting by me; in dishabille,
indeed -- for what need we outward ornaments, when we can deck the mind with
understanding, or look upon the fashions of the world, but to condemn, or pity,
those that use them.

Our base grovelling-money-getting-neighbours envy us, and abuse us, for
suffering our children (we have but six, indeed) to run about ragged. But I
despise their rancour, my wife its too well born, too well bred, and too great
herself, to descend to the servile domestic drudgery of tending nurseries, or
the base culinary employment of cooking victuals; no, we had rather go without
a dinner, than dress one for ourselves; and the ingratitude and ignorance of
the world will not allow us to afford a servant.

N. B. This digression is here inserted to amuse the reader, until Madam
Llwhyddwhuydd was well enough to see company.

All the better most people of Shug-lane, and Middle-row, came to pay the
lying-in visit. But Madam Llwhyddwhuydd confessed to her very intimates, that
she could not relish a visitor, with half that satisfaction, who lived on the
city side of Northumberland house, as she did those at the polite end of the
town.

The Gossips met, and cawdle crowned the board. Unworthy would it be of me, to
have registered this gossipping, had not the meeting been so particularly
famous for the metaphysical conversation, which they, for the first time,
started in English -- concerning several abstruse and occult points,
predicaments, qualities, essentials, and immaterialities, relative to ideas,
contract, resistance, modes of the mind, habits of the body, rules of
government, errors of administration, defects in religious worship,
inequalities of rewards and punishments, hell, happiness, Doctors Commons,
faith, perjury, simony, heresy, adultery, accidents of matter, and spiritual
essences.

Piecemeal have these subjects been retailed, even unto this day, in every
coffee-house, tavern, punch-house, alehouse, eating-house, and night-cellar,
unless the more interesting vocations of politics, strumpeting, or gambling,
have employed the good company's attention.

First GOSSIP. Indeed, madam, you say true, and I must own, that after I was
delivered of my first child, I could not help considering deeply about these
things; and so, when I went down for my health into the country, I used to love
to see the hens lay eggs; and then those eggs I was told would produce
chickens; upon which, ladies, a thought came into my head, that I never have
been satisfied about since; and that is -- which was made first, the yolk or
the egg-shell? if the egg-shell was made first; how came the yolk in it? if the
yolk was made first; how came the shell over that?


Second GOSSIP. That, madam, is one of the mostest curious questions in the
world; and it was the parson of our parish, who first axt me that question; and
he laughed at me, cause I could not resolve him; so I made my husband send it to
the rial saciety, and they will tell us about it I know by and bye.


Third GOSSIP. Now there is one thing, that I, want to know sadly; because our
sexton says, the vestry divided about it; and they should know, to be sure,
ladies; that is -- whether still-born infants have any sins to answer for?


First GOSSIP. To my knowledge, madam, this has made great disputes among the
clergy; and they are divided in their opinions; though, to me, it is as clear
as noonday; for how can poor infants answer, when they never had been taught
to speak?


ALL. Oh, to be sure, quite right, quite right, indeed.


Third GOSSIP. Pray, ladies, don't you take fate to be a free agent?


Fourth GOSSIP. To be sure, madam; whatever may be a lady's fate, yet she is a
free agent; because, now, suppose I was fated to be married to a person, whom I
cannot say I could relish, it is at my upshot, to be sure, whether I will act,
or no; and so, fate is a free agent.

But a gentleman, who lodges in my one pair of stairs, told me, but yesterday,
talking about free agents, and fate, and what might be the fate of agents; that
fate, and free agency, were like king and commons, that the mind was the
monarch, and the will was the people. So I told him, in answer, that whatever
his mind was, he could not have his will of me, without I had a mind.


ALL. Oh, no, to be sure, no, to be sure.


First GOSSIP. Now, ladies, give me leave to ask you, whether, as Adam never
was born, as other people have been sense; that is, no lady was ever brought to
bed, or with child of him, could he have a navel?


ALL. No, no, no, to be sure, no.


Third GOSSIP. My brother, ladies, we all know is a great writer; and once
wrote a whole news-paper himself. He is so great a genus at handling his pen,
that I was told by the waiter at Ronelor, how he might have wrote a song, and
it would have been sung before the grand company there; and that you know,
madam, would be the vastest honor imaginable; because the quality could
recommend him, you know, to be poet larum song-maker to the rial familly; but
he has gone and disobliged my husband, and all his friends; for he has hired
himself to a club of philosophers, and so be is to publish a book, to prove,
how far free will acts upon the lodestone; and he says, he don't doubt but
he will get a penshum for it.


Mrs. Murdock, the nurse, then began a discourse upon ethics, to determine the
identical spot of Satan's demesnes, or where hellfire was. She affirmed it to
be seated in the middle of the sun -- but Madam Celery, the green-grocer's
lady, denied that, and said it was in the middle of the earth.

Miss Shred, who was always a systemist, supposed there were several hells, and
that every comet contained one. -- The Bible was quoted by Jenny Douglass; but
when it was asked what Bible, because Mrs. Murdock observed, there were so many
histories of the Bible, published at sixpence per month, she could not tell
what to say to it, for she didn't suppose they could be all good, because the
blue-paper covers said so.

Madam Llwhyddwhuydd observed, that she supposed they were all true
translations, and explications, or else, to be sure, the bishops would not
suffer such things to be published.

Mrs. MURDOCK. Well, there are so many religions, and so many religious
opinions, and so many books about religion, and so many disputes, and so many
sort of preachers, that they are not all to be trusted.


First GOSSIP. No, Madam, why an't they all christians?


Mrs. MURDOCK. Christians? no, Madam -- why some are Presbyterians, and some
are Methodists.


Miss SHRED. As to Methodists, Madam Murdock, you must excuse me; because they
are the only christians, for they are regenerated, and no body can be a sincere
christian, until being regenerated; but there are a great many people in the
world that are of no religion.


Mrs. MURDOCK. And that is better, than not being of the true one for its a
shame to see how parents use their children, here the poor innocents are soused
over head and ears, or else they are circumscised, or else made Quakers, or
else one thing done to them, or else another, and so they are bound prentice to
this, or to that teligion, without ever knowing if they can like it. -- And
that makes so many different opinions in the world, when they grow up to be men
and women; because it don't signify whether they were made Jews or Christians,
you see Jews behave as Christians, and Christians as Jews, and there is no
telling one from to'ther, I think.


This conversation determined Madam Llwhyddwhuydd, that as there were such
disputes about religion, her son should not undergo any spiritual ceremony,
until he came to years of discretion, then he might choose which religion he
liked best, and that was the reason, our Master Neddy was never christened.

SCENE, ISLINGTON.
Thus far the Editor compiled of the MSS, and attended on the appointed Sunday
at Mr. WARNER'S, who is a very good sort of a man; and one to whom the putter
together of these historical paragraphs has been very much obliged.

This would not have been mentioned, but to convince the world all authors are
not so ungrateful, as to forget the friends, who formerly filled their bellies.

I have composed Drolls for Mr. Warner's booth, and by his recommendation, I
have wrote several dramas for the proprietors of puppet-shows, in which, I used
to adhere entirely to the strict rules of Aristotle, Rapin, and Bossu. The
chastity of taste among English audiences at that time was so pure, they would
not bear the smallest innovation of the unities of time, and place, even in Mr.
Punch; -- because, as the coffee-house connoisseurs observed, it is more
instructive, and more elegant, even to be lulled into a slumber, by the rules
of art, than kept awake, and in spirits, by all the fire of fancy, contrary to
the Greek and French scale or standard.

At that time Mrs. Charke, sister to the late Mr. Theophilus Cibber, had a
famous puppet-show, which was conducted with such regularity. -- To compare the
puppet-shows of that time, with the puppet-shows of this time, would be only an
ill-natured attempt. But Charlotte Charke used to pride herself, that her
company, her ladies at least, were all vestals. Because, as she said, a lady
belonging to the Theaters Royal may be weak enough, or fond enough, or mean
enough, and mercenary enough, to descend being upon the town. But who? (Mrs.
Charke used to exult) who can say, they ever supped with the Queen of Sheba, at
the Shakespeare, or had fair Rosamond at Haddock's?

This daughter of Colley Cibber, the late Poet Laureate, was a lady of
surprising singularity; but the oddities of the human mind are unaccountable.

There is his honor Sir ******, a great politician; yet all his delight is
chucking sixpence into a quart decanter.

Is not Mr. ***** the great physician, an admirer of parched peace; but cannot
eat any, except what he cooks himself.

Mr. ***** the famous mathematician, prefers battledore and shuttle-cock, to
painting, poetry, and music; and don't we all know several dignified ****, who,
though amazingly orthodox, value themselves more upon their taste, in venison,
and Madeira, than in interpreting the scriptures.

Some ladies of distinction have been known to admire low company; their
husbands at the same time not caring for any; but it is impossible to account
why we are whim bitten. So far has oddity been epidemical, that noblemen have
been known; nay, and several at this time are, really fond of their wives; and
what is as remarkable, their ladies are as warm in their affections for their
husbands.

Our minds will be attached to irregularities. Miss ***, with the finest eyes
in England, affects to be near sighted; and Lady *****, a most charming figure,
drawn by elegance, and dressed by grace -- chooses to appear round shouldered.

Sir ******, one of our most eloquent speakers, and a gentleman of amazing
learning, believes he can spin a top, better than any other man in England, and
wants to have 500 upon it.

The Rt. *****, who has seven of the finest children, perhaps in Christendom,
has impaired his estate, in purchasing and preparing butterfly-wings, to line
his study, in imitation of tapestry. And Mr. ***, the most eminent attorney in
Great Britain, employs his whole time in gudgeon fishing.

This Mr. Warner abovementioned, had an oddity of temper, which is uncommon
among theatrical managers. He never looked upon his people, to be off the Stage
as good as himself; he never chose to countenance them as acquaintance, or be
familiar with them as friends.

A fortnight or three weeks preceding the Borough fair, he used to have a great
levee of people in the business, although at that instant perhaps out of
employ; who would wait upon him, to know if he wanted any hands in the acting,
singing, dancing, hocus pocus, or hannock and jannock way.

They used at first to come about dinnertime, and no person keeps a
better-house than he does, or understands it better; there was always something
good in the pot, or roasting at the fire. There would they walk up and down the
kitchen -- now glancing at the meat, now at the master; sometimes darting their
eyes down, desponding into the dripping pan, then eagerly expectant, lift them
up again to the boiler; and then they would strut across the kitchen, and
spout; and say, to be, or not to be; and Jemmy would laugh, and whisper me,
saying, not to be eat by them colls, I assure you.

Some of these passages I was remarking to Mr. Warner, and we were thinking of
old affairs, and I just had told him of the dripping-pan, and the tragedy and
comedy people, as Mr, Zaphaniel and the dancing master came in; we went up one
pair of stairs, and there I was shown MASTER EDWARD and MISS ANN, walking arm
in arm up and down the Skettle-alley.

The HISTORY of MISS ANN.
YOU see Mr. Poet (observed the Dancing Master) you see there, that is Miss
NANCY, she is a very desirable girl, faith, as showey a figure, as it is
possible to represent.

I owned her figure was extremely agreeable.

I protest, Mr. Zaphaniel replied, she is comely amongst the daughters of
delight -- yea, she is fair as the fairest females of Judah. -- She is more
precious to my sight, than the rose of Sharon, or the snow-drops of Damascus;
verily my friends, my heart beats to behold her, and I would sooner choose to
have her within my fold, than both my fists full of the gold of ophir.

DANCING MASTER. This lady appeared first as a public performer at Sadler's
Wells; for some years before she had performed with the public, but never until
then theatrically. As she was extremely agreeable in her figure, and the
novelty of her dancing added to it, with her excellence in the execution, she
soon grew to be a favorite with the town; and the ensuing season, Nancy was
engaged at Covent Garden Playhouse. She became vastly celebrated, admired,
imitated, and followed by every body; which is always the consequence, when
once a lady of pleasure becomes the fashion.

The first night of her performance at the New House, our hero, whose soul was
ever agitated by love and ambition, confessed himself her admirer.

Let me do Master Edward this justice, to praise him for his emulation, in so
spirituously aiming at every new part in comedy, which Mr. Garrick is famous
for. Yet as every biographer is supposed to be the friend of the genius, whose
life he celebrates, I would advise Master Edward rather, hereafter, to strike
out a new cast of acting for himself, where comparisons could not be made. In
justice to his merit, it must be allowed, he, who is capable of being the
master Stephen, the Miser, etc. etc. has a sufficiency of comic abilities, to
be, without buffoonery, grimace or mimickry, a capital actor; and be held in a
much higher point of character, than what at present he is. Although now he is
the drole and comical one of the town, and pleases them with his performances;
it is in his power, not only to give pleasure to an audience, but to gain their
esteem; and difficult as that part may be to act, it is worth his while to
study it.

Edward was in love to all the degrees, sallies, and dependencies of
desparation. -- The lady observed her conquest, and enjoyed it. She knew her
man; had heard that, to his girls and his gamesters, he did not mind what money
he threw away. He was a trout worth tickling, and therefore returned him look
for look.

Emboldened by this eye language, he began to contrive a scheme, for enlarging
the correspondence. He wished to talk with her, but he wanted words -- he
wished to write to her; but he wanted letters; therefore employed his landland,
Mr. THOMAS PHILIPS (of whom more hereafter) to be his secretary.

I cannot forbear mentioning a piece of ingratitude of Neddy's to that old
gentleman, who behaved in this affair extremely friendly to him; and yet so far
can gaming absorb all grateful principles, that Edward has betted twenty to
five his landlord will not live until Lady Day next. The conceit of such a bett
has had a violent effect upon the mind of the old gentleman. Mr. Pond also, to
the best of my remembrance, has such another wager. I have not, indeed, a
syllable to say against Mr. Pond; he is as fair a sportman as ever stepped up
the stand; and pays his betts as punctual, as if he was a man of quality. Yet,
after he has said done to such a bett; what business had he to drive Mr.
Philips from Greg's coffee-house? it seems as if it was designed, as a
heartbreaking stroke; since, to be debarred from that academy of universal
conversation, must be as great a damp upon the spirits of any of the curiosi;
as it was to Bussy Rabutin, to be banished from the French court.

When Miss Ann became a principal dancer, she had a friend, (a female one I
mean) to wait upon her behind the scenes, to watch her motions, and take care
of her steps.

This duenna was her relation, and therefore had a more than ordinary care of
her charge, least detraction should be malicious.

The ogles which Neddy the drole, and Nancy the desirable, reciprocally
interchanged, alarmed the old lady guardianess. She trembled at the danger
Nancy's honor was in; and soon as they came home that evening, thus began the
most careful governante.

I once thought, yes, that I did, Miss Nancy, how you had a better spirit, and
a more politer taste, than to coquet it with a player -- mercy upon us, what is
our family fallen too, if this is the case? and so you're in love with the
fellow, are you? I say, love too! I Will tell you what, child, when once any fine
woman, like you, condescends to give her company to people of fashion, who can
pay her well for it; why there is no harm done -- but for a lady to fall in
love, it is just like a tradesman dealing all upon honor, they had better shut
up shop at once, my dear.


Miss ANN. Lord, Madam, how you talk, as if I ever loved a man in my life, you
know I never did; and yet you know I have had as fine men, as ever put laced
clothes on, and did I ever love any of um? how should I, I have had too many
and seen too much of them, to love them* Indeed, I used to tell them I did;
what then? that was no more than rehearsing one's part you know -- as to love
-- why now, Madam, you know you have gone out a nursing, and have a sweet
creature it was; and yet at the same time it was ready to make you sick. Why so
it is with us girls of the town, we kiss men, and fondle them, and make babies
of them, and tell them they are sweet creatures, and yet, at the same time,
they make us almost sick -- what then, it don't last long; and though the
service may be hard, it is soon over; and if the wages are good, what does it
signify?


GOVERNESS. But who would receive wages from a player?


Miss ANN. Why, now, didn't you but yesterday read in one of those six-penny
blue covered books, there, that we take in monthly, and a charming libry they
make, that is certain, -- how that a great Roman Catholic Emperor, laid a tax
upon peoples making water, and how his son found fault with him for it, because
it was a base thing; and didn't the father, as the book says, take up a piece
of gold that was gathered by the tax, and bid his son examine, if it smelt of
chamber-ly. So, madam, what does it signify, if we girls can but get money, who
it comes from; do you think my mercer can tell one body's guinea from another?


GOVERNESS. Yes, child, but what guineas can you get from a show-man?


Miss ANN. Why, mun, he no more minds money, than I do modesty; but will give
it away as unconcerned, as I do my hair-combings. Besides ma'am, the case is
this, I shall not always look so well as I do now; for these cursed washes I use,
for all they do give one's neck and face such a fine whiteness, yet they make
one's skin in a morning, look all crumpled, like a washer-woman's fingers, and
turns one's flesh as yellow, as a pease-pudding. Now, you must know, that this
young fellow, Ned, will always have a good salary from the Playhouse; because
he is devilish comical, to be sure; though he has not all the wit in the world
neither -- what then -- the fitter for my purpose -- if I can but persuade him
to marry me -- why shouldn't I be made an honest woman of? and I will too -- I
have got some money, and I Would give it all, if I could but be made an honest
woman; for it don't signify talking, but I can no more look a modest woman in
the face, as I should do, than I can say my prayers. I wonder what is the
meaning of it; however, I don't despair, 'cause I know Ned's but a Nicodemus,
and a girl may get him to do any thing; we are to sup together to night.


GOVERNESS. Are ye? then I suppose you are to go to bed together to night; but
not at my house, Nan -- no, by all that is honorable, I never will consent to
so undervaluement a connection. -- A player! lie with my relation? -- no -- as
to your having an intrigue with a man of fashion, why it is what no lady need be
ashamed of, and indeed few are -- for that is natural, and therefore no sin in
it; but shall any of our family, ever stoop so low, as to lay the cloth for an
actor's ordinary? I detest such business. But see, there is Harris from the
Shakespeare at the door, some gentleman has sent for you, I Will lay my life on it
-- go to him, in the Lord's name; but never let me hear any more, about Mr.
what is his name.


Miss, not being willing to anger her governess, like other prudent young
ladies, was determined to hear her guardianess's opinion, and follow her own.
She went to the Shakespeare, where her impatient lover Ned waited for her.

Thus began the amor -- Mr. WARNER then bringing up dinner, prevented any more
being said upon that subject.

Master EDWARD and Miss ANN, dined in the next room, the apartments only
divided by a slit deal; as we were impatient to be ear-witnesses, at least of
their conversation, we dispatched our ordinary with such expedition, that both
their dinner and ours were over together; when, for the benefit of observation,
Mr. Zaphaniel made three or four peep-holes in the partition, through which we
could see the underwritten Dramatis Personae.

EDWARD, ANN, JEMMY, MRS. MOLLY.
As I was determined to be punctual in their conversation, I took it down in
short hand, at the very time the dialogue was uttered; as follows.

Miss ANN. Lord, Ned, now don't be so foolish, as to pull one's hair out of
order so; I am sure, you men, not one in a hundred of you, know how it is to
treat a woman, as you should do -- Lord, don't paw one so.


Master EDWARD. Paw one so! -- there is a pretty speech, indeed -- paw one so --
what now, is that polite language, Miss?


Miss ANN. May be so -- I hope you don't set up for a critic; do you, Sir?


Master EDWARD. Suppose I do, ma'am?


Miss ANN. Why then I suppose you do wrong, Sir -- because you should never
find fault with other peoples words; until you can tell your own letters, Sir.


Master EDWARD. I can always tell your letters, Nan, when you send to me for
money.


Miss ANN. Yes; but who reads them for you? your landlord, does not he?


Master EDWARD. Your landlord, does not he? why I neither value my landlord, nor
you into the bargain.


Miss ANN. Nor any body else, Ned, that ever did you any favors; I will say
that for you, your gratitude and my virtue, are two very fine things, if any
body could but tell where to find them. -- There was, what is his name; who
wrote the droll for you, which you thought proper to call your droll, and made
you your Dish of all Sorts, and the Day of Taste, and several comic songs,
which have been of such service to you in your benefits both in town and in the
country, how did your serve him? did not you exspose him falsely, and
scandalously; and strove, by what you said of him publicly, in some of the
infamous bawdy-houses, that you frequent, to render him contemptible? And he
had never done any thing, to my knowledge, to merit such treatment. -- I wish
he would write something about you; I wish he would; nothing he could print
against you, could be half so bad, as the abuse you have loaded him with, in my
hearing, Neddy, but he don't value you, -- nor I neither -- that for you --
that for you; and she snapped her fingers, as if playing upan the castanets, or
like Caledonian ladies figuring country dances.


Master EDWARD. There Is a pretty piece of St. Giles's music for you, there is a
gentlewoman's action for you.


Miss. ANN. No, Ned, I lost that character, as soon as I let you have any thing
to say to me.


Master EDWARD. I think myself as good a gentleman --


Miss ANN. What, because you wear a laced coat? and belong to the play houses,
why so does Newgate Tom, and he bought his finery second-hand ^oo, the same
way, that you came by your wit, (...) your jokes -- you have them all at
second-hand now -- the maker will not furnish you any longer -- you a gentleman?
yes, when a night man's cart, may pass for a nobleman's chariot.


Master EDWARD. If you never was to have any people to trade with you, but
gentlemen, you would have very few customers.


Miss ANN. I had one too many, when I took you for my chapman.


Master EDWARD. Well, let us have no more of your nonsense.


Miss ANN. As much sense as yourself, Ned, and come of a better family -- now
there is a spiteful fellow for you, to throw a glass of wine in my face -- O you
malicious -- but I Will do for you -- and then she clapped her hands together, as
if she was applauding him for his acting.

I Will expose you, sirrah; I Will tell Squintum of you; yes, that I will, Mr.
Jew's Face: though, for that matter, he knows as many tricks as you do; for, to
my knowledge, the saints at the tabernacle can humm as well as any player in
England, they are a parcel of sad dogs, and for your part, Ned, you are --


At that moment Master Edward's clench'd fist, like a battering ram, was drove
hard, horizontally, against her mouth; which blow would have been repeated,
quick as the change of a pantomime trick, had not the rest of the company
interposed.

Soon as the suffering lady recovered the use of her speech, bursting into
tears, she declared, that the villain wanted to spoil her face; because she
should not get her bread any longer, as she ought to do. -- For you know,
Jemmy, addressing herself to the landlord, and still crying; a girl upon the
town, when she has lost her beauty, is like a toyshop having its show glass
stole away: but by G --

Mrs. MOLLY. Oh, don't swear, my dear creature, consider it is the Lord's day,
and such a thing as an oath shocks me. Christ, what conscience must those
people have, who break any of the commandments.


Miss ANN. Lord, Madam, I don't want to be taught about conscience; I believe
my conscience, and yours too, madam, if they were hung upon a hedge to dry, no
body would think them worth stealing.


Mrs. MOLLY. Madam, I suppose that I may have as much conscience as my betters?


Page 148.



Miss ANN. But if you have not more, than most of them, Lord help you, Madam --
see how that fellow stands grinning there -- don't hold him, Jemmy -- let him
come on -- curse me, if I don't box him -- I Will beat some conscience into him
-- so stand clear; for if I don't give him something to make him remember me,
may I never know what a guinea is again.


In a hurry she pulled off her treble ruffles, with trembling fingers, twitched
from her waist, the deep flounced apron, threw her garnet edged cap upon the
floor, and in amazonian attitude, flourishing her fists, with hornpipe step,
she advanced against her adversary, who stood in bear-garden position, with
horrid grin, as Satan encountered the seraph Abdiel.

The lady's locks, unfilleted, fell down her back; dangling like the dropping
tresses of a sign painted mermaid. -- HE bare-skulled, bruiser like; -- and now
the belligerant pair advanced within fingers reach of each other.

OH, FOR THAT WARNING VOICE!

But what signifies wishing for it? that CHURCH-ILL'S a very ill-natured
monopolist, and will not part with a note of it.

Come then, thou stimulator, and inspirer of all prosaic scribblers, who, like
me, jumble words together, unmusical, unmeaning, inaccurate, inelegant, and
indifferent. SPIRIT of RIBALDRY assist me, to sing, or to relate.

How Nancy seized Ned by the collar, with one hand; and with the other, drew
from the top of his forehead, four perpendicular lines along his face -- blood
following every scratch. -- But as she passed her fingers down, two of them
were caught between his teeth; she shrieked, he bit, his fist fell furious on
her face; his other hand seized her hair; and with head bent back, and swelled
out throat, down on the floor she fell, pulling Ned upon her, and by the fall
her fingers were released.

But as it often happens in states, that those who are IN shall be OUT; and
those who are OUT shall be IN; the nose of Mr. Edward, pitched between the
upper and lower rows of ivory, which adorned Miss Nancy's mouth. Quick as a
shark's snap, she fixed them in the gristle, Ned roared like a whipped
schoolboy. She pinned him fast, -- she --.

Enter in a violent hurry the waiter, to Mr. Zaphaniel and his company. WAITER.
Gentlemen, there is somebody's footman below; axing after an author -- down
stairs hurried the Editor.


FOOTMAN. Sir, you must come to our house this moment. -- Great people are to
be obeyed implicitly. Not a reply to be uttered. -- Because PASSIVE OBEDIENCE
is elected foot-stool-maker to LADY FASHION.


Away I went along with the servant, running, trotting, walking, panting, and
almost breathless, arrived at the palace of my patron.

The footman informed his honor, that the man who made books was below -- very
well, let him wait. -- So I did, about three hours, and then had the happiness
of a command, to attend there next morning, delivered from the most respectable
personage himself; who condescended to give me that order, viva voce, as I
stood bowing at his chariot door, before he pulled the glass up.

This postponing or delay in my affair, with my patron, arose not from his
haughtiness -- or any other supercilious practice, with which geniuses are
generally treated, when put into trammels by their superiors.

My BENEFACTOR, my MAECENAS, my MAGNUS APOLLO, had too much regard for the Arts
and Sciences, to use me, or any other professor, in so contemptuous a manner.

But the reason I had not an immediate audience was;

An ARTIST from Siberia having met with the celebrated tooth and pinion scheme
of Mr. JONATHAN SWIFT for making verses mechanically, improved upon the hint,
and constructed an engine for the universal erudition of mankind, respecting
ARTS and SCIENCES.

This piece of mechanism, being just imported, was brought to my patron, for
his countenance and inspection, just after the footman came for me. He saw at
once its most amazing utility; and cried out, BRAVO, before one wheel went
about.

The rudiments of learning, the judgment of scientific taste, the excellence of
all genius, the mystery, art, plan, design, projection, section, elevation, and
estimate of all professions, callings and occupations, without the gift of
invention, the labor of study, or the benefit of a fine understanding, this
machine explained, and taught instantly, by the new discovered principle of
INTUITION; and in half an hour's time, the purchaser became an universal master
of arts, as easily, as pretty miss plays tunes on a hand organ.

It was very dear, and therefore no persons, but people of fashion, being able
to become purchasers; it kept the knowledge of every thing confined to the
polite part of the world; and as every thing is to be estimated by its worth;
and as the worth of every thing is only what it will sell for at market; and as
no body but rich people can afford to buy every thing; and as every thing a man
buys is his own; therefore only people of estate, family, title, or pension,
can be said to be possessed of the arts and sciences, which they purchased in
the manner above related, by this ENGINE.

The name of it is TECHNICATHOLICAUTOMATO PAN TOPPIDON.

The fabricator met with that encouragement, it behooves the rich to afford the
ingenious.

The truly delicate, made a point of encouraging so extraordinary an artist;
especially, as he was not of this nation's growth, but imported.

Persons of breeding observed, their children threw away a horrid deal of time
at school; and as they could judge by themselves, that they were very little
the better for it. Nothing could therefore be so immensely convenient, or
indeed so elegant a piece of furniture, as a clockwork schoolmaster, that
would teach grown people of fashion, to be persons of reading and taste, while
their hair was dressing. One objection was made to the engine, which was, that
it could not be so proper a thing to vent one's spleen on, as a living
creature; because it is the ultimate of taste, among the very best bred, to
behave rudely, to those ingenious, who have only their own merit to recommend
them: more especially, if the artist should, by the misconduct of parents, and
cruel decree of providence, be born in ENGLAND.

For the truth of this, and other as horrid particulars, I appeal to the
behavior of 9/10 of all the connoisseurs who keep coaches. -- As to what any
person else is pleased to prate about, it is not to the purpose; because no man
has a right to speak in company, unless he is qualified, by much money, or
sanctified by court interest. Then he may express his contempt for his own
countrymen, with proper consequence.

Sir Minikin Pinfly, at the Opera, last week, was observing to Lady Fidgill,
(her ladyship having informed the Baronet, that the great premium was given to
the gentleman who had found out the art of preventing black lead combs from
being brittle.) In an affair of so much consequence to the nation in general,
as black lead combs, he thought, that the contriver could not be too much
encouraged; especially, if he was a foreigner; because, I do assure your
ladyship, that English artists are generally immensely impertinent.

Lady FIDGILL. Frightfully so, pon onner, Sir Minikin; and then they are vastly
ungenteel, and such slovens.


Sir MINIKIN. Detestable, my Lady. -- To be sure, I don't trouble my head about
pictures, or statures, or books; but a gentleman must have such things for
furniture; and if I send to any of these artists, to do a job belonging to
those things; if he is a foreigner, the dear creature is so delicate, so
submissive, and such vast good company, -- I vow, I dote upon them. But if you
send for any of the English brutes of geniuses, why, truly, they are so saucy,
they will not dine but at what table they please; and are so impudent, as to
pretend to offer to give their opinions to one of us; as if such common bred
creatures could know things so well as we do.


Lady FIDGILL. They are hideous creatures; and I cannot bear to see a genius,
without it is at Sadlers Wells; and to be sure, there, they are very well upon
the wire, or tumbling, or dancing hornpipes; but for your painting-engraving
people, -- or your house-building-architects, or mathem -- I detest such horrid
barbarous names; but indeed, the whole crew of creatures, who know one nonsense
or another about the arts and sciences, are only mob -- positive mob -- I Am
sure on it; specially those born this side Berwick -- they even have the
effrontery, with their stuff, about understanding, and learning, and fancy, and
wit, and humor, to conceit; their senses, are as good as ours, who are persons
of distinction, and scorn to be beholden to any such low bred mechanical
acquirings, as they value themselves upon.


An interview between Author and Patron.
Next morning, being introduced to my most respectable Lord, submissively I
made my obeisance in low bows, according to the eastern worship, as soon as the
door of his apartment unfolded, for me to appear before him.

He beckoned me to advance; I did, bending at every step; and as I approached
the carpet, where his armed chair was placed, in which he reclined, I was awed.
I considered myself in the time of the Roman mythology, entering into the Inner
Temple, where the tutelar deity was enshrined.

The good, the great, the wonderful man, all affability in his smile, all
condescension in his gesture, was thus most graciously pleased to announce his
will unto me, one of his unworthy dependants.

N. B. As his honor spoke to me, he was putting a piece of brass wire into a
guinea-pig's ear; on account of some philosophical experiment, I suppose.

CONNOISSEUR. Your wife, Mr. Trip, is a vast intelligent being, and one for
whom I have an immense regard.


I bowed -- indeed, I bowed at every word I had conferred upon me; for, by the
observations I have been empowered to make, in the politest, grandest
assemblies of my superiors, I have noted, a bow, and a smile, and a curtsy, and
a simper, are the general answers and explications to almost every address.

My patron, having set down the guinea-pig; pulled out his ear-picker; and, as
he used it, thus delivered himself.

You are going, Mr. Trip, to enjoy a happiness, which very few geniuses ever
enjoyed; or is it fit they should. You will be provided for, according to your
merit, by having a place; but it must be accepted on certain conditions.

AUTHOR. May it please your generosity -- you may be certain of my coming into
any conditions. I hope you will find, I possess as proper a ductility of mind,
as any other writer, your mightiness has been pleased to make pensionary.


CONNOISSEUR. Your speak, Sir, as every man of sense ought to speak. By men of
sense, I don't mean those wretches, who pretend to be clever, without having
shoes to their feet, or dare to arraign the conduct of their betters; yet have
not as much earth of their own, as will serve to bury them. They, Mr. Trip,
should be punished; they shall starve for their contumacy: but be you
conformable; you shall find your account in it. You are a man of sense; your
understanding, I don't doubt, is clear, ripe, and strong; that is, clear enough
to distinguish what is for your own interest; ripe enough to be ready for any
thing; and strong enough not to be biased by any of those beggar-making
bubbles of public spirit. Love, gratitude, friendship, freedom; those, and
other such like terms, Mr. Trip, are only tubs tossed out for the whale, and
which the hydra MOB call the harmonies and sympathies of the soul.

Next, you are to take care that, in your future writings, you rail against the
liberty of printing, call it the licentiousness of the press.

You are also to endeavor to inculcate the doctrine of non-resistance; and to
argue strenuously for the eligibility of arbitrary power.

Lastly; you must give up all your friends, relations, and acquaintance to me,
Mr. Trip.


AUTHOR. Your honor may be assured, that not one of your honor's writers can
give up more for your service, than I will; or do more any how. Because, thank
God, Providence has blessed me, with as copious a talent for abuse, as for
panegyric. I know, may it please your honor, and with all respect to your
universal scientific conceptions -- I know, as well how to vilify, as to
compose a dedication; and if my play --


CONNOISSEUR. Tomorrow, Mr. Trip, you shall go under instructions, for a foot
walk in the excise; for no genius shall be unrewarded by me; such, I mean who
are modest, and know themselves. But as you will now be settled for life, --
you must relinquish all acquaintance, with what are called clever-fellows; they
are dangerous companions, rebellious reipublican spirits, who have the
insolence, not only to think about us; but even are profane enough, to give
their opinions concerning how things are, and how things should be? However,
you have a better way of thinking; and therefore keep company only with those,
who have nothing to do, and as little to say, and taste the benefits of that
tranquil indifference, which hardly any, but those who have their fortunes made
for them, are ever acquainted with.


I bowed; to the ground I bowed, and hastened home; happy to think, I should
soon be able to lead an uniform, steady, and obedient life, go to bed, get up,
dine, sup, and so forth, always in one way, at such, and such stated hours; and
never make any attempts at wit or humor, or concern myself with the merits and
distresses, for the future, of my fellow creatures; because I should arrive
soon at that glorious state of insipidity, and dissipation, in which I had
often seen many, of what are called the gay part of the world, indulge
themselves.

Being thus provided for, by his excellency, I humbly take my leave of the
public; sorry I could not finish this work; but more sorry, for some other of
my works, wherein I have endeavored to be witty and comical; for which I most
submissively beg pardon, of all gentlefolks in general, from the highest of the
betitled, unto the lowest of their door-keepers, and promise, for the future,
to be as dull as the best of them.

Yet, well as I can, to expiate in some measure for former offenses, I propose
a scheme, to prevent authors, attempting either humor, or wit, in what they
write, for the future, viz.

As some part of the army is to be disbanded; if those persons, who in the camp
are the hangmen of the army, and called the provost guard; and if the most
active of the drummers, who have had the most practice in whipping, during the
late war, were not to be sent adrift, but incorporated in the regiment of
reforming constables, this scheme, with the other common methods of turn out,
and starve scoundrel, what is your wife and ten children to me, would preserve
the POLICE of this kingdom for the future in proper subordination, and writers
on the wrong side of the question be taught respect.

FAREWELL. N. B. The proprietors of the copy of this history having been at a
great expense for Plates and Authors, hope the Town will encourage the
assiduity, with which they have labored to find out a person capable of
finishing this work; because, by the first Editor's preferment, this DRAMATIC
PERFORMANCE -- a work so very essential toward bettering the understanding of
every reader, whose penetration can unaenigmatise the foregoing pages, must
have been postponed, sine die. The loss which that would have been to the
public, can never be estimated.



An Account of the Continuation of this Work.
AN errand-boy belonging to the printer, vulgarly, and irreligiously called a
Devil, hearing that, for want of an author, no more copy could be obtained to
complete this volume, told his master, he knew a gentleman, who lodged in his
mother's back garret; (the author and devil being bed-fellows) who, the boy
said, he was sure would finish it; because he had often heard the gentleman
say, that as far as a pen and ink could go he would undertake any thing.

The Devil being agent for both parties, a bargain was immediately struck,
between publisher and author, whose name is CANNON, commonly called, CAPTAIN
CANNON, on account of his inventive faculty, or allegorical manner, in which he
was will not to express himself.

This person appeared to be one of the EXTRAORDINARIES OF THE TIMES, by his
argumentatives against the late Orator Henley.

In those altercations, the loquacity of Cannon was so conspicuous; he became a
favorite among all the people of exquisite taste, particularly a mountebank
doctor; who admired the lad for the facility of his physical and metaphysical
replies; and determined (even without the least interest being made in the
young fellow's behalf) strange as it may seem, to encourage so promising a
genius, therefore constituted him immediately his MERRY ANDREW.

A widow lady, whose spouse had suffered the severity of the law, because he
endeavored, upon a belligerant principle, to investigate the universal axiom,
GET MONEY, fell in love with the Merry Andrew, for eating fire and tow; she was
then in equipage, by a very famous ministerial writer; therefore the lady had
power to recommend, or introduce Cannon to her friend; who made him his
amanuensis.

Under this master, he became proficient in politics, and was properly
initiated in the grand mystery of mysteries, or the true art of preferment
writing, viz. to DEIFY the INS; and make DEVILS of the OUTS.

The Methods he made use of in his Pickle-herring capacity, were of infinite
service to him in his political one. He was also a very good posture-master;
and that brought him into great esteem among his superiors; and he had hints
that he should be encouraged, equal to the most celebrated of the retained
writers.

He grew noted among the notified; he was supposed to have great interest with
some people. It was whispered about, he was in the secret, therefore when in
company, he abstracted himself accordingly.

He began to consider himself, and reflect, that such a writer as he was, and
engaged in such connections, was liable to meet with a sudden change of
circumstances, either for the better, or worse, according to the weight,
balance, or prejudice of party.

Upon a CHARIOT, and the PILLORY, he daily meditated; as they were both
particular exaltations, and what he knew had been bestowed upon different
persons very often, for the same action.

Conscious of his own importance, he formed to himself a new system of
behavior; and assumed, wore, and bore an author-like consequence.

He had his shoes cleaned every day, and wrote E. S. Q. R. after his name. The
waiters at the coffee-houses made bows to him; and the landlord at the
Shakespeare shook him by the hand. He had the liberty of the scenes, gave his
opinion in the green-room, and told every body, how many days in the week he
dined with my lord.

Then he wore a sword, and a snuff box, began to pity poor writers; hired a
laced coat; and looked about him.

At last, he condescended to tell the town himself, that he was a man of wit
and learning, and folks pointed at him as he went along the streets, saying,
That Is HE.

He drew his pen for preferment; and waged scurrilous warfare against all his
betters, who were out of favor. He fought blushless, through the field of
faction. He mangled the overthrown, he despoiled the departed of their honors.
VENALITY crowned his temples with a brazen frontlet; and trampling over the
fallen worthies, she led him to the shrine of SECRET SERVICES; where the Oracle
assured him protection and reward.

At that time, there were numbers to provide for, who had been true servants of
his HONOR; and for whom, when no more vacancies could be made, new places must
be contrived.

This was the captain's case. He had the promise of being INSPECTOR GENERAL of
the MILK OFFICE, within the bills of mortality; to prevent so wholesome a
commodity from adulteration.

The author of this salutary scheme was an Arabian; who came over here in
Oliver's time, to get a patent for it; because foreigners always are more
studious for our good, and study more for the benefit of this nation, than the
English can do, or indeed dare do, for themselves.

But the Arabian was discovered to be in the Tartar interest; because he
endeavored to substitute mares milk instead of cows; to make us brew all our
porter from oatmeal, and pretended to prove horseflesh more wholesome than
ROAST BEEF.

This project was thrown aside for several years, until particular
contingencies occasioned it to be revived, as above mentioned; and all the
proper attendants appointed, viz.

24 Tasters, who were to be the sons of Freeholders. 6 Clerks, These were
obliged to be housekeepers. 4 Porters, These were obliged to be housekeepers.
A Gauger, These were obliged to be housekeepers. A Secretary, These were
obliged to be housekeepers. A Deputy, These were obliged to be housekeepers.
The Inspector general. He was allowed to be any thing. With him was joined, A
COMPANY OF ASSISTANTS;

Composed of Two Apothecaries, Two Dairy-women, Two Experimental Philosophers,
One Butter-melter, Two Spectacle-makers, Two Physicians, Two Wet-nurses, A
Clyster-pipe borer, A Metaphysician And The Curds and Whey-keeper.


The multiplicity of friends, which somebody, or somebody else had to oblige,
procrastinated the institution; which made Cannon, about the year 1746,
relinquish all his inspectorial hopes, and be contented with the head labor of
an author, mantaining himself by the sweat of his brow, as poets, or prose
people, should do.

During the winter season, he picks up a pretty living, with several more such
subaltern genii, by putting together magazines, and memorandum books, penning
murders, making rebuses, and singing songs for both parties, and writing in
newspapers against the players.

Yet I must do those prose writers the justice to declare, that they would not
do so if they could help it.

They acknowledge it is wrong, to prejudice the town against any performer;
because his bread may be lost by it. -- What then? -- they had rather all the
world should starve than themselves; and starve they must, if their works did
not go off; and they can only send abuse to market; well knowing, scurrility is
always saleable; depraved appetites delight in things uncleanly; and some
virtuosi make collections of snakes, toads, spiders, monsters, deformities,
dark lanthorns, and poisoned arrows.

In the summer months these writers retreat into the country; mantain
themselves very decently, and indeed reputably, by making hay, and harvest work.

N. B. The publisher thus far has taken the liberty to premise, in behalf of
the second undertaker of this performance, who now begs to be indulged in a
word or two from himself.

CANNON.
To the READER,
IT is with reluctance that I agreed to finish the Memoirs of this Comedian;
because I am not in amity with any Theatrical Professors -- having met with
severe usage from the superiors of that Fraternity.

At the age of 19 I did a Tragedy, not acted it, I mean (for I was always above
being a player) but wrote one; which had not the least bankruptcy among the
unities; and therefore I assured myself, I must have great credit for my
manufactory.

As to making interest, to have my tragedy recommended; though I was told, it
was the only way to go to work; yet, being bigoted too much to the excellence
of my piece, I despised such advice; and was assured, within my own mind, that
it would be put into rehearsal by the manager, upon his first reading it.

But multa cadunt, etc.

However, by using the same chandlers-shop, I got acquainted with a young lady,
whose sister was dresser to a very celebrated actress.

She invited me to drink tea with her sister, the dresser, to whom I read my
play; who approved of it mightily; because, as she observed, there was not much
dressing in it.

I had the honor of being introduced to the lady, her mistress, who received
me with pecular deportment; which, as Gil Blas observes, most of the ladies
theatrical put on to strangers, especially if the visitors are foot people.

She stared at me, when I came into her room, so much, that I was prodigiously
out of countenance (a fault, of which even detraction will deny I am often
guilty.)

But recollecting it is the common look, which ladies bear, both on and off the
stage, when they condescended to SEE their inferiors, I began to come to myself.

After I had been surveyed, as much as she thought it consistent with her
dignity, to observe me, she tinkled a silver hand-bell; and, on the maid's
entrance, the lady, in a most delicate accent, ordered her servant to take the
footstool, which the actress was then resting one foot upon, -- carry it there,
thus the lady pointing to the corner of the room, ordered; put my footstool
there; that the man (pointing to me) may set upon it, and read his play to me,
and bring my eau-deluce, and my ether bottle.

Then, in the most engaging attitude, she reclined herself upon the couch, on
which she had before been seated, and looked like one of those fine figures at
the print shops, of Venus, or a Madona, or some singing or dancing lady in a
repose, And those graving and etchings are done by some great man, or after
some great man's manner, as we are told in the catalogues by auctioneers and
picture-dealers, who have such universal capacities, it is impossible for them
to be mistaken.

They are the loadstones of connoisseurship. The only judges of genius.
Counselors of taste. Determiners of merit. Interpreters of science; and
leading-strings, baits, bits, curbs, spurs, whips, wheels, levers, pullies, and
primum mobiles, for every lady and gentleman of fortune, who choose to be
trammell'd into taste, and be ambled about as connoisseur's hobby-horses.

Before I had read a page of my play, the lady interrupted me, finding great
fault with my tones, with my emphasis, and my accents.

Swinging herself off the couch, she arose with a graceful dignity, becoming a
Penelope; the gold fringe of her slippers playing to her feet, her silk train
sweeping along the carpet; then flourishing her white handkerchief, the lady
spoke three or four speeches of Calista, to show me how people ought to deliver
tragedy. After that, when she had again seated herself, as she looked into the
lid of her patch-box, she enquired if I had seen her play all her characters,
and which I liked her best in.

My reply was (for I had a hint given me, not to be sparing of compliments)
that where every one was excellent, it was impossible to perceive an
inferiority.

She smiled, with the utmost complacency, upon me; she took my MSS. promised me
it should be done, and suffered me, kneeling, to salute the back of her hand,
as I took my leave; but meeting at the door a person very richly dressed, I was
ordered to walk in again.

This visitor to the lady was in a velvet coat, embroidered; a gold tissue
waistcoat, embroidered; and every other part of his apparel equally rich. I
took particular notice of his watch chain, it was remarkably long, and as
remarkably filled; for I counted no less than ten various seals, and toys in
different shapes, upon it.

The gentleman was a very eminent haberdasher, and a great friend of the
lady's, as I heard afterward. He stared at me also; full as much as I had been
stared at before -- then turning to the gentlewoman, he asked her, in very ill
pronounced French, Who the Devil I was?

She replied, an author.

I thought so, he replied, still in French; and swore a great oath, at the same
time -- I thought he was a shabby genius, of some sort, or another -- but now
my angel we'll have some fun with this fellow, I ha'ant roasted a scribbler a
great while: for damn me, if these authors, not one in a hundred of um, have
any thing to say to a gentleman as they should do; because they are blockheads,
and ought to be caned, kicked, or dragged through a horse-pond; for what
business have they to think about their betters.

I would not discover to him or the lady, that what they said in French, was
understood by me; but allowed him to the length of his tether, without
interruption; and he accordingly assumed all that contemptuous behavior, that
unworthy insolence, which the wearers of fine clothes conceit they have a power
to bestow on the wearers of plain ones.

Hear what their honors ALL say.

Every person must be a scoundrel, a Liar, pitiful, illiterate, damned
contemptible, despicable, filthy, fulsome, horrid, vile, vulgar, base, odious,
and one of the MOB, who is not a person of fortnne, fashion or family, -- vide
the world.

The fine dressed gentleman haberdasher feating himself by the lady, his leg
across her lap, putting one hand to his side, and with the other chinking the
seals at his watch chain -- yawn'd -- then leaned back -- yawn'd again -- then
bending suddenly forward, fixed his eyes full upon me; seeming, as Falstaff,
says, to awe with a stare.

GENTLEMAN HABERDASHER. And so, Sir, -- this lady tells me you have -- got --
yawn -- that you have got, looking at his shirt bosom buckle -- that you have
-- yawn again -- heigho -- have got a play, Sir, -- pray, Sir, where was you
bred up, pray?


AUTHOR. At Leyden.


GENT. HABERDASHER. What, among the Dutch? drole enough, faith -- a fine place
to make plays in -- butter, cheese, and Holland's gin are three fine
ingredients for poetry -- ha, ha, ha, -- I suppose all the ladies in your piece
are Dutch fros -- yes, by g -- d, I Will hold fifty on it, and all the fine
gentleman, or mynheer-love-makers, if they quarrel, instead of drawing their
swords, go to snicker de snee with one another.


LADY. Dear, Mr. Caddus; my God! -- I am immensely ashamed of you; how can you
shock a gentleman so?


GENT. HABERDASHER. Shock the gentleman; no, faith, he knows too much of the
world for that; and I keep company at the Bedford, so often with the best
writers in England -- that sure, my dear, I must know how to behave to authors.
Well, Sir, and so at Leyden you say -- I suppose you studied the oriental
sciences there?


AUTHOR. The oriental languages, Sir?


GENT. HABERDASHER. No, Sir, I mean the oriental sciences -- I believe, I am
too much acquainted with both sciences, and languages, to mistake one for
the other. The oriental arts and sciences, I mean; as to the oriental languages,
I re'd um all, and every one, from the teutonick down to old Homer's Iliad,
Odyssey, and his Telemachus.


LADY. Pon my honor, Caddy, you must have had a vast education, my dear, to
read so much, and remember things so.


GENT. HABERDASHER. Faith, I never re'd much, po' my onner -- I was rather a
buck at school. -- But I had a quicker way of study, I believe, than any other
fellow ever had in the world -- but a -- Mr. Author -- and so -- don't you
never write no songs?


AUTHOR. Sometimes, Sir.


GENT. HABERDASHER. O, then we'll have a song; come, Sir, sing one to the lady.


AUTHOR. Indeed, Sir, I cannot sing -- I cannot indeed, Sir.


GENT. HABERDASHER. Nay, Sir, but I insist on it, to oblige the lady -- to whom
he then said in French, I know the fellow cannot sing, 'cause I Have heard him
attempt it among Comus' court; but that is the fun on it, we'll make him expose
himself.


LADY -- replied in French. For God's sake, my dear Merchant, don't ask him; I
shall die with his noise; I am expiring with the headache already. -- He sing!
I am certain, poor Devil, he looks so down in the mouth, that he could only
hymn the hundred Psalm, or a hanging stave for a Tyburn Penitent, on an
Execution-day.


GENT. HABERDASHER, in French still. Bravo, bravissimo, my angel -- you have
more wit than all the world. -- Then bid him tell us a merry story, or desire
he will say something clever. Oh, damn it, that does for these genuisses at once.


LADY, in ditto. He looks so disconsolate, he shocks me --


GENT. HABERDASHER, ditto repeated. Well now, you shall have a drole scene, my
(...).

Then, in English. And so, Sir, I suppose you live by writing?


AUTHOR. I endeavor to maintain myself and family, Sir, by every exertion of
my small capacity, that honesty and industry will warrant.


GENT. HABERDASHER. And pray, Sir, what can you get a year by writing?


AUTHOR. As to that, Sir --


GENT. HABERDASHER. Ay, as to that, Sir -- Oh, mum, a word to the wise is
enough -- You are not willing to confess, because you are afraid I should want
to borrow a hundred of you. -- Why, Sir, my credit's pretty good; and if you
was to lend me a cool thousand, I Would give you 4 per cent. and an eighth for it;
I suppose, Sir, you are too conversant with the stocks, to be ignorant what
that is a year?


LADY. Lord, my dear --


GENT. HABERDASHER. In French, encore. Nay, my angel, let me alone; for, upon
my soul, if gentlemen were not now and then thus to mortify these fellows, and
make them ashamed of themselves, for not having money, there would be no
bearing them. I have a great mind to show him an eighteen shilling piece, and a
guinea, and ax him, what is the difference? I Will hold six to four, he don't
guess the first time.


LADY. Let me perish then, but you will be immensely wrong, and barbarously
absurd; you see, he turns pale, and red, every minute; I Am sure he is hurt
enough already.


GENT. HABERDASAER. Well, mum then, I suppose, Sir, in your play, you have been
critically exact, in the preservation of the unities; and you have seen what
Aristotle and Bossu says upon that subject; for that is what I blame Shakespeare
for; the fellow had a fine knack at metaphor, faith, but he never understood
the unities: now if he had but have been a scholar, and could have read what
Aristotle and Bossu says.


AUTHOR. Aristotle, to the best of my remembrance, says --


GENT. HABERDASHER. Ay, I know as well as you do what -- but that is nothing now
to the purpose, what either Aristotle, or his Brother the Stagyrite, says -- I
speak how things should be done. Dam it, there is nobody, but gentlemen, that
can either write or judge, for that matter. I wish it was not quite so damned
scandalous to be either an author, or a scholar. There are about twelve of us
that would and could restore the Drama to that original purity, which the
divine Plato, the preceptor of Socrates and Plautus, says, the stage ought to
be preserved in.


AUTHOR. Under favor, Sir, I did not think Plato was much attached to dramatic
poetry, any more than he was to Homer; whom I cannot think he uses so well.


GENT. HABERDASHER. What does not Plato use Homer well? -- that is false, Mr.
Author, you must allow me to tell you -- I beg pardon, but I know better -- why
Plato is the best friend Homer ever had.


AUTHOR. But I mean, Sir, that Plato, who was disciple to Socrates.


GENT. HABERDASHER. Pho, pho, Mr. Author, we an't to be humm'd so, neither;
you're devilishly out; there never was but one Plato, and he taught Socrates
all he know'd; and if you have a mind for a bett, you shall have your sum on it.
This Plato, my dear Betsy, was cotempre with the first primitive fathers.


LADY. Pray, my dear, were they poets or playwriters.


GENT. HABERDASHER. No, my dear, they were what was called the Christian
philosophers, in opposition to the heathen philosophers; and this Socrates we
have been talking of he was burned for his religion, because he turned
christian.


LADY. Let me perish, my dear, if your memory is not astonishing; I shall be
jealous by and by, that you have so much learning in your head, it must prevent
you from thinking of me.


GENT. HABERDASHER. Never, by all that is soft, I swear, upon which be kissed
the lady, and turned to me, with a look of happy consequence, as much as to
tell me, what would you give, could you do so?

I suppose, Mr. Author, that you must have heard of Sophocles and Empedocles.


AUTHOR. Yes, Sir.


GENT. HABERDASHER. I re'd all their works at college, both their Tragedies and
Comedies; and though I never looked into um since, I only wish I had a hundred
on it, that I couldn't say um all by heart, without missing an apostrophe. And
so, I suppose, you have heard of Terence and Euripides, and Lucan's true
history. Swift stole every line of Gulliver from him, to my knowledge.


LADY. Well, this conversation is to me immensely agreeable, and dear Caddy,
you are the most surprising creature.


GENT. HABERDASHER. My soul's affection, I do believe, nay, without vanity, I
am sure on it, that if I had a mind to it, I could have made a greater figure as
a scholar, or a writer, than any on um. But I was always above such slovenly
pedantic notions; authors are very well, when a man has a mind to make a lady a
present of a song, or an acros^ic; why then such fellows are useful; because
they take the trouble of composing these things off of a gentleman's hands; and
books, now and then of a rainy day, are well enough; but at other times, they
are damned low dull stuff. -- But I beg pardon, Mr. Author, for talking French
so.


AUTHOR. Oh, Sir, a gentleman has a right to converse in what language he
pleases.


GENT. HABERDASHER. That Is true, Sir, and therefore you and I now will have a
little Latin together -- You remember Horace, his advice about discipline. Qui
mihi Discipulus Puer es cupis atque doceri,


AUTHOR. Sir, I beg to be excused, but that is not in Horace.


GENT. HABERDASHER. Not Horace -- that is a fine hum, indeed, not Horace: what
the Devil, sure I know Horace a little better than you. I thought I should find
you out -- why, does not he go on, and say,

Hoc ades huc Amino, concupedictis tuo.
Up then he started, looked in the peer glass, and stroked his eyebrows gently.

The lady, at that instant, standing with her back to him, told me, -- Sir,
this gentleman is a prodigious scholar, and you must submit to him in these
things, I assure you. But I could see, that she winked at me while she said
this. I would have taken the hint, but flesh and Blood could not bear to give
up Horoce to Qui mihi. Emboldened by the lady's signal, I told him, that
perhaps, as gentlemen were not obliged to read so much as authors were, his
memory might not be --

GENT. HABERDASHER. O dam it, Sir, as to that, I have a better memory than any
man in England, and those two lines I spoke are Horace's, and I Will bet you 50
l. on it; and out he pulled a green purse, seemingly full of money; which, in
his eagerness, he let fall upon the tea-table, and broke a cup and saucer,
belonging to a set of French china, that had been presented to the lady by a
former lover; and which set she told the gentleman, she would not have had
destroyed for 500 pounds.


A strange scene of altercation ensued, reproaches rose high between them --
until the gallant, swore several of the most horrid oaths, profaneness could
put together, that he never would speak to her again; and hurried out of the
room, bouncing the door after him, as violently, as if, like Sampson, he would
shake the house down about us.

After the passionate departure of her friend, the lady addressed herself to me
-- but in a manner, different from that she received me with.

Affectation was away -- the haughtiness of the actress was banished; and only
the fine woman of affability appeared.

Desiring me to sit down, with a look, that spoke the most delicate
sensibility; the lady told me -- I believe, Sir, I am not the only person in
this room, whom the hotheaded man, that has just left it, made uneasy this
morning; for if I guess right, your face told me, you understood every thing he
said to me in French about you.

AUTHOR. Indeed, madam, I understood every syllable.


LADY. I thought so, by heavens! I thought so, I admire your behavior, Sir,
and will endeavor to recompense you, for the pain of mind I am conscious you
must have endured; too much I feel of that myself; what are all diamonds,
equipage, fine furniture, and elegance of dress, when the mind, retreating into
itself, shrinks back ashamed to reflect on the means by which those are
purchased. Yet I must act the hypocrite, I must conform -- conform to those I
hate, nay worse -- bear with rich stupidity, applaud with seeming attention,
arrogant dullness; and flatter, even fondly flatter, indelicate folly. Sure of
all slavery, mine is the worst! where the will is not left free; what is --


Thus she gave vent to her reflections; as she walked up and down the room,
tears following one another, down the damask of her cheeks, transparent as dew
drops, upon the rose leaf.

At that moment, her lover, the gentleman haberdasher returned, and discovering
her crying, run to her, took her in his arms, forced her to the settee, and
kneeling down before her, begged her to forgive him; desiring her to accept of
a ring he held out to her, and vowing, that had he known his leaving her so
abruptly, would have so deeply affected her, he would not have done it for all
the world.

The lady's face at this time seemed agitated with astonishment, and disdain,
by turns; but I had not an opportunity any longer to observe it. Her friend
addressing me that instant, with, you will excuse us this morning Mr. Writer, I
shall be glad to see you some other time.

Exit. Cannon. The DEDICATORY SPECIMEN.
Assured of my play being presented, I sought some time for a proper person to
dedicate it to; one from whom I could expect the greatest advantages; one, who
could do me great service, if I did but properly apply myself, and blazon forth
his merits to the WORLD.

I had a sufficient quantity of matter by me which I had abstracted from the
Greek, Roman, and French panegyricks; and also from the works of most of our
best writers, upon religion; from whom I had borrowed the choicest phrases,
which they made use of in their addresses to the Divinity. All these things I
had ready marshalled, to appear in rank and file, before the public, in behalf
of my patron, as soon as I could find one.

Being for some time troubled with bad eyes, because the room where I write,
lay, and cook my victuals, smokes terribly; and as I dread blindness more than
any other distemper, I gave up all thoughts of baiting my works with great men's
defense, and turn pension or place fisher.

I considered my natural defects ought to be first remedied; therefore to the
OCCULIST CHEVALIER TAILOR, SENIOR, I addressed the following dedication.

TO THE PRIME GENIUS Of this AGE; Professor of the Art of Teaching the
Passions, and unparallelled Adventurer.
SIR,
THE Performance I here offer to the Public, under the Sanction of your Name,
is an extraordinary Work, and therefore should be addressed to an extraordinary
Man.

You have distinguished yourself as such through the whole Course of an
unblameable Life.

A Friend to the Ladies you have been, as your Works confess; but your Love of
them has arisen from your being able to taste their genuine Beauties.

No Countryman of yours, or of any other great Man can I be -- I was born at
Sea. -- National flattery therefore am I free from -- I only do scanty Justice
to the Man, not only as a Man, but also a Minister, or Administrator of the
greatest of Blessings, and which concludes the Happiness of a whole People.

You have opened the Eyes of all the World; taught both Sexes to look about
them; placed them perspectively in a proper Point of Sight to see, and also to
be seen.

Though some Persons may blame you -- as Blackguards will be abusive -- don't
mind the Mob now -- a hundred Years hence you will be out of the Hearing on it --
then you will have (and a fine Satisfaction it is to be told on it) what no
Popularity can give -- no temporary Wants destroy -- you will then have every
Thing in the World a Dedicator can bestow upon you; for who the Devil dare
contradict him?

The Day you was born (if eyer that Day was) was the brightest Period of
British Glory.

The Doubt I have of your Birth, arises from my supposing you to be the unborn
Doctor; one who sprung spontaneous among us -- to be -- ay, or not to be; just
what himself and the conscious Rectitude of a right Mind pleases.

In the political Science of Perspective -- the Point of Sight, Point of
Distance, and vanishing Line, properly investigated, are as follows;

The Point of Sight is Preferment.

The Point of Distance, is what Length your Patron will go to serve you.

The vanishing Line is Hope.

All these multiplied in a proper Modus, form

Mr. Hogarth's Line of Beauty.

And that Praise, in all its Parts, as well as in the whole, for the honor of
every Country, is almost exclusively your own:

Therefore, to the Importance of your Mightiness, Prostrate at the Threshold of
your Munificence, Do I Asiatically bow my Head; Hallelujahing your Honor, and
Honors; And may your scientific Brow, Nod Benignly, On the Insignificancy Of
your most humble, And most submissive Servant, and Slave, The AUTHOR.

First Chapter of the Continuation of the History of NEDDY, etc.
How Master Edward was to be brought up.
THE morning following the gossipping scene. David and his lady, at breakfast,
consulted together upon the most proper methods for educating their son and
heir.

DAVID. To be sure, and indeed, my dear wife, I do suppose you will suckle the
child yourself.


Mrs. LLWHUDDWHYDD. You do? then, my dear, you are guilty of a very indelicate
supposition. Are ladies of fashion to turn wet-nurses, and have their heads
horridly distracted by the noise of the nursery, or vapoured to death with
cradle-rockings? is it taste? -- I ask you, my dear, upon your honor, is it
taste, for me, who come of such a family as I am come from, to have a child
dangling at my breast, as beggars carry their brats. Nay, is it for your
honor, your wife should appear so? you, who come of so good a family.


DAVID. Yes, thank God; and good providence, I do come of the most ancientest
family, that ever was born.


Mrs. LLWHUDDWHYDD. There, my dear, you must be wrong; immensely wrong, upon my
honor. -- Your family may be the more ancienter in England; but my family is
from America; we were the ancestors of five original nations of the SENEKAS,
from whom came the CHIKASAS, from whom came the CATAWAWS, from whom came the
CHEROKEES.


DAVID. But I tell you my family is the most ancientest in the world; ay, and
in America to boot; for they did go into the Ark, as game-keepers to squire
Noah; and his worship's son did marry queen Winifred; and from whom came the
Cadwalladers; and from whom came the Tudors; and from whom came the
Llwhuyddwhuydds.


She Ay, and from my family came the Cherokee, and the


Both together. Rikketis, and the Mohawks, and the Tomahawks.


He. And from mine the ap Morgaus, ap Jenkins, ap Rice, ap Jones, ap --


Then they raised their voices at the same time, louder and louder, until out
of breath, and black in the face, they stood speechless, staring at one
another, like a pair of pitted turkeycocks.

The lady first recovered, and giving her husband a look, blended with scorn
and reproach, that look, which fine women know so well how to wear (beating a
tatoo with her feet, and hitting the tea-spoon upon the edge of a saucer) thus
she addressed him.

I am sorry, Sir, that I should so far forget myself, as to contend with you
about families. Upon my honor, I shall, for the future, take care how I ever
enter into any such arguments with you, and immediately fell into a violent fit
of the sullens.

Had I but time to analyze that distemper, and point out the methods of cure,
how happy should I make many husbands? but a more interesting scene presents
itself, viz.

David, kneeling at his wife's feet, most pathetically begging her to be good
to him, to speak to him, to look at him, or let him take hold of her hand.

But all his address was vain -- vain, as the petition distress presents; vain,
as the hopes of wit; or pretensions of undower'd beauty and virtue.

Mr. Llwhuddwhuydd was forced, before the preliminaries could be signed, to
give up (upon his knees) every original branch of his family, and allow, both
lineally and collaterally, the superiority of his lady's ancestry.

Mrs. LLWHUDDWHUYDD. I beg, my dear husband, now you will rise, -- I choose it --
there is my hand, I offer it to you as a token, I don't take any thing ill, -- I
forget and forgive; it is taste to do so; and I Will suffer death, before I would
be impolite. But pray, husband, how will you have our child brought up?


DAVID. He shall be put to school, as soon as he goes into breeches; and he
shall be kept at learning, Latin and Greek for 12 or 14 years, to be sure;
because I will have him a great scholar, and then I will bind him prentice --


Mrs. LLWHUDDWHUYDD. No, excuse me -- he may be a scholar, indeed; I am not
against that; because, perhaps one day, or another, such a thing may be taste.
But I renounce his being 'prentice, there is something so vulgar in it, -- no,
let him go into the army. I am certain, that as you have carried such a number
of people of fashion, for so many years; and as they are under great
obligations to you, for the care you have always took of them, they would not
deny you such a small favor, as to give your son a commission.


DAVID. But for all that, my dear, I would have him a scholar: ay, he shall be
a genius too.


Mrs. LLWHYDDWHUYDD. Dear Mr. Llwhyddwhuydd, I shall faint at the very name of
a genius -- my God! a genius! -- what shall my eldest son, the hopes of two
such families as ours, be made a genius? why, at best a genius can but be a
jack of all trades; and as to his making his fortune by genius; why, you may as
well say, the sun shines at midnight. Is not every genius despised by the
politest people; do not the persons of quality call creatures so out of
contempt, my God! did you ever know any body of fashion a genius -- no, Mr.
Llwhuddwhuydd, instead of bringing your son up a genius, let him be a
gentleman; let him keep gentlemen company, not but, I must say, if his genius
could turn to politics --


DAVID. And please God so it shall; I will bind him 'prentice to a politician;
and when he is out of his time, he can set up for himself, and provide for his
relations.

Enter MISS SHRED and DOCTOR NOSTRUM.
Miss SHRED. Dear creatures, excuse me coming in so suddenly -- but I promised,
you know, last night, to bring a great physician, and my friend, to prevent
your son, Mr. David, ever feeling any pain, or being in any danger, while he
was cutting his teeth -- give me leave, therefore, to introduce the only man in
the world, that has any sort of skill, to you, -- he knows more than the whole
college of doctors put together; and they envied him -- so they wou'dn' give
him his degrees without his undergoing an examination -- but he was above that;
therefore he went down to Edinburgh -- there they knew better -- he had his
certificate signed at once, and now he practices here, in spite of all the
London doctors -- and what is very wonderful, he took physic entirely out of
his own head, for he never was brought up to it.


DAVID. No.


DOCTOR. No, Sir, I discovered it all myself -- I scorned to be taught. I
despise all the fellows of the faculty, they are ignorant pretenders, I have a
genius above them all.


DAVID: Ay, Ay, that is the thing -- a genius -- for a genius is above all
learning, look you, as much as God is above the Devil, bless us!


DOCTOR. Ladies, let me beg your attention, while I plainly demonstrate to you
the nature of childrens teeth-cutting.

Hyppocrates and Celsus declare, infants are subject to the aphthae, phoboi,
diarrhaeas and paroxysms upon cutting their canine teeth. Hernius tells us of
inflammatory tonsils, tumors of the parotid glands, or saturiasmoi, which may
be, I think, the achor. -- Now Aetius says, --


DAVID. Never mind what Mr. Aetius says, Sir, no more than an cracked
chair-pole; for you do say such fine things yourself about Hyppocrates, that I
would give all I was worth in the world, if I could but talk so learnedly.


DOCTOR. This lady's -- (pulling a phial out of his pocket) this is the
MAGNETICA TINCTURA SACRA; the LOADSTONE ELIXIR; or ANODYNE SPECIFIC. With this,
if you wash the infant's feet, it will attract all the morbid, foul and peccant
humors from the child's head, and your son shall cut his teeth as easily -- as
-- as --


DAVID. Ay, it stands to reason, as easy as I can cut an onion -- it must -- I
have read about loadstones -- and my magazines do tell me about Sir Isaac
Newton's attraction. Yes, yes, well God help me, I have studied and studied a
great deal, yet never can be a great man, because, doctor, I have not a genius.


Which observation we beg the reader will memento, and endeavor to become a
genius; it is a sure and certain estate to him; as for example, this doctor
Nostrum, to whom, and the rest of the Nostrumists, who, without understanding
or experience, education or capacity, so publicly advertise, and vend their
unwholesome compositions to the detriment of the credulous multitude, and
reproach of those, who have power to prevent such scandalous impostors.

FINIS.

