THE OBSERVER: BEING A COLLECTION OF MORAL, LITERARY AND FAMILIAR ESSAYS.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

-- MULTORUM PROVIDUS URBES
ET MORES HOMINUM INSPEXIT. --
(HORAT.) LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY IN THE POULTRY. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
NUMBER LXI. UPON pleasure, as pursued by system; a meditation upon this
pursuit, entitled The Voluptuary's Soliloquy PAGE 1 NUMBER LXII. The advantages
of public education exemplified in the story of Geminus and Gemellus PAGE 9
NUMBER LXIII. The story of Geminus and Gemellus concluded PAGE 17 NUMBER LXIV.
The case of the Jews considered; their method of secreting their religion, in
countries where the Inquisition is in force. Letter to the author from Abraham
Abraham's a Jew; observations on this letter; some hints as a general apology
for the Jews PAGE 26 NUMBER LXV. Dialogue between two Jews, extracted from an
old novel written by Thomas Nashe in 1594; descriptions of French, Spanish and
Italian travelers, taken from the same author PAGE 38 NUMBER LXVI. Remarks
upon Congreve's comedy of The Double Dealer PAGE 46 NUMBER LXVII. The first
library in Egypt founded by Osymanduas: The inscription upon the front of that
library considered and applied: Account of the public libraries in Rome; their
number, description and furniture PAGE 60 NUMBER LXVIII. Remarks on the
passions. Cases of Palpatius, Procax and Splendida PAGE 70 NUMBER LXIX. Letter
from Mr. Jedediah Fish, with cases of several persons brought to their hearing
by his process: Reflections thereupon, and a hint to parents PAGE 76 NUMBER
LXX. A visit to Vanessa: An old gentleman there silences a talkative person by
a fable: Vanessa's remarks thereupon PAGE 84 NUMBER LXXI. Account of a ghost,
from the narrative of a clergyman, to whom it appeared PAGE 92 NUMBER LXXII. Of
the Greek comedy; of Aristotle's definition and chronology of the first comedy.
Of Epicharmus considered as the first writer of comedy PAGE 101 NUMBER LXXIII.
Fragments of Epicharmus: Account of Phormis, Chionides, Magnes and Dinolochus,
the founders of comedy PAGE 111 NUMBER LXXIV. Of Cratinus and his comedy, in
reply to the satire of Aristophanes: Of Eupolis, his fragments compared with
certain passages in Ben Jonson PAGE 119 NUMBER LXXV. Of Aristophanes; his
history, character and works PAGE 135 NUMBER LXXVI. Aristophanes defended from
the criticisms of Plutarch; also from the account which Aeli^ gives of his
attack upon Socrates PAGE 145 NUMBER LXXVII. The motives and grounds for
Aristophanes's attack upon Socrates more fully considered, with some anecdotes
of that philosopher's school and private character: The dates of the eleven
remaining plays of this poet ascertained Page 155 NUMBER LXXVIII. Of the
remaining writers of the old comedy, viz. Amipsias, Plato, Crates, Phrynichus,
Pherecrates, Amphis, Hermippus, Hipparchus, Philonides, and Theopompus, with
their fragments translated Page 165 NUMBER LXXIX. Of prejudice, its various
descriptions Page 178 NUMBER LXXX. Letter from Rusticus, giving his reason for
laying aside reading. Newspaper critique of a tragedy of Shakespeare, supposing
it now to be brought out Page 186 NUMBER LXXXI. Memoirs of a Sentimentalist
exemplified in the adventures of Sappho and Musidorus Page 195 NUMBER LXXXII.
Conclusion of the above Page 208 NUMBER LXXXIII. Of the morality of
Christianity as compared with that of natural religion; of the benefits of
revelation independent of its moral doctrines Page 216 NUMBER LXXXIV. On
natural and acquired taste: Virgil's Aeneid considered; a passage compared with
one in Claudian. Ben Jonson's opinion of Shakespeare: The situation of a more
modern poet described Page 223 NUMBER LXXXV. Advice to a man of landed
property: Habits of life and expense in England particularized. A short view of
the learned professions: An irregular poem addressed to popularity Page 233
NUMBER LXXXVI. Remarks upon the characters of Falstaff and his group Page 242
NUMBER LXXXVII. Witty sayings of several ancients. Of Laberius and Publius
Syrus, Roman actors: A prologue of the former, spoken in the theater before
Julius Caesar Page 251 NUMBER LXXXVIII. Comparative review of Rowe's Fair
Penitent with the Fatal Dowry of Massinger Page 263 NUMBER LXXXIX. The same
continued Page 272 NUMBER XC. Conclusion of the review Page 282 NUMBER XCI.
Visit to the house of a deceased friend; some account of his death;
circumstances attending the death of Antitheus, the disbeliever Page 302 NUMBER
XCII. Anecdotes of Jack Gayless Page 311 NUMBER XCIII. Author explains the
motives of his work and concludes the third volume Page 323
THE OBSERVER.
No LXI.
Primum Graius homo mortales tollere contra
Est oculos ausus --
(LUCRETIUS.) At length a mighty man of Greece began
TO assert the natural liberty of man.
(CREECH.)
THERE are so many young men of fortune and spirit in this kingdom, who,
without the trouble of resorting to the founder of their philosophy, or giving
themselves any concern about the Graius homo in my motto, have nevertheless
fallen upon a practice so consentaneous to the doctrines, which he laid down by
system, that I much question if any of his professed scholars ever did him
greater credit, since the time he first struck out the popular project of
driving all religion out of the world, and introducing pleasure and
voluptuousness in its stead.

Quare religio pedibus subjecta vicissim
Obteritur, nos exaequat victoria coelo.
We tread religion under foot and rise
With self-created glory to the skies.
So far from meaning to oppose myself to such a host of gay and happy mortals,
I wish to gain a merit with them by adding to their stock of pleasures, and
suggesting some hints of enjoyments, which may be new to them; a discovery
which they well know was considered by the kings of Persia, (who practiced
their philosophy in very ancient times) as a service of such importance to all
the sect, (who had even then worn out most of their old pleasures) that a very
considerable reward was offered to the inventor of any new one. How the stock
at present stands with our modern voluptuaries I cannot pretend to say but I
suspect from certain symptoms, which have fallen under my observation, that it
is nearly run out with some amongst them; to such in particular I flatter
myself my discoveries will prove of value, and I have for their use composed
the following meditation, which I have put together in the form of a soliloquy,
solving it step by step as regularly as any proposition in Euclid, and I will
boldly vouch it to be as mathematically true. If there is any one postulatum in
the whole, which the truest voluptuary will not admit to be orthodox Epicurism,
I will consent to give up my system for nonsense and myself for an impostor; I
condition only with the pupil of pleasure, that whilst he reads he will
reflect, that he will deal heartily with the truth, and that he will once in
his life permit a certain faculty called reason, which I hope he is possessed
of, to come into use upon this occasion; a faculty, which, though he may not
hitherto have employed it, is yet capable of supplying him with more true and
lasting pleasures, than any his philosophy can furnish.

I now recommend him to the following meditation, which I have entitled -- THE
VOLUPTUARY'S SOLILOQUY.
I FIND myself in possession of an estate, which has devolved upon me without
any pains of my own: I have youth and health to enjoy it, and I am determined
so to do: Pleasure is my object, and I must therefore so contrive as to make
that object lasting and satisfactory: If I throw the means away, I can no
longer compass the end; this is self-evident; I perceive therefore that I must
not game; for though I like play, I do not like to lose that, which alone can
purchase every pleasure I propose to enjoy; and I do not see that the chance of
winning other people's money can compensate for the pain I must suffer if I
lose my own: An addition to my fortune can only give superfluities; the loss of
it may take away even necessaries; and in the mean time I have enough for every
other gratification but the desperate one of deep play: It is resolved
therefore that I will not be a gamester: There is not common sense in the
thought, and therefore I renounce it.

But if I give up gaming, I will take my swing of pleasure; that I am
determined upon. I must therefore ask myself the question, what is pleasure? Is
it high living and hard drinking? I have my own choice to make, therefore I
must take some time to consider of it. There is nothing very elegant in it I
must confess; a glutton is but a sorry fellow, and a drunkard is a beast:
Besides I am not sure my constitution can stand against it: I shall get the
gout, that would be the devil; I shall grow out of all shape; I shall have a
red face full of blotches, a foul breath and be loathsome to the women: I
cannot bear to think of that, for I dote upon the women, and therefore adieu to
the bottle and all its concomitants; I prefer the favors of the fair sex to
the company of the soakers, and so there is an end to all drinking; I will be
sober, only because I love pleasure.

But if I give up wine for women, I will repay myself for the sacrifice; I will
have the finest girls that money can purchase -- Money, did I say? What a sound
has that! -- Am I to buy beauty with money, and cannot I buy love too? for
there is no pleasure even in beauty without love. I find myself gravelled by
this unlucky question: Mercenary love! that is nonsense; it is flat hypocrisy;
it is disgusting. I should loath the fawning caresses of a dissembling harlot,
whom I pay for false fondness: I find I am wrong again: I cannot fall in love
with a harlot; she must be a modest woman; and when that befalls me, what then?
Why then, if I am terribly in love indeed, and cannot be happy without her,
there is no other choice left me; I think I must even marry her! nay I am sure
I must; for if pleasure leads that way, pleasure is my object, and marriage is
my lot: I am determined therefore to marry, only because I love pleasure.

Well! now that I have given up all other women for a wife, I am resolved to
take pleasure enough in the possession of her; I must be cautious therefore
that nobody else takes the same pleasure too; for otherwise how have I bettered
myself? I might as well have remained upon the common. I should be a fool
indeed to pay such a price for a purchase, and let in my neighbors for a
share; therefore I am determined to keep her to myself, for pleasure is my only
object, and this I take it is a sort of pleasure, that does not consist in
participation.

The next question is, how I must contrive to keep her to myself. -- Not by
force; not by locking her up; there is no pleasure in that notion; compulsion
is out of the case; inclination therefore is the next thing; I must make it her
own choice to be faithful: It seems then to be incumbent upon me to make a wise
choice, to look well before I fix upon a wife, and to use her well, when I have
fixed; I will be very kind to her, because I will not destroy my own pleasure;
and I will be very careful of the temptations I expose her to, for the same
reason. She shall not lead the life of your fine town ladies; I have a charming
place in the country; I will pass most of my time in the country; there she
will be safe and I shall be happy. I love pleasure, and therefore I will have
little to do with that cursed intriguing town of London; I am determined to make
my house in the country as pleasant as it is possible.

But if I give up the gaieties of a town life, and the club, and the
gaming-table, and the girls, for a wife and the country, I will have the sports
of the country in perfection; I will keep the best pack of hounds in England,
and hunt every day in the week. -- But hold a moment there! what will become of
my wife all the while I am following the hounds? Will she follow nobody; will
nobody follow her? A pretty figure I shall make, to be chacing a stag and come
home with the horns. At least I shall not risque the experiment; I shall not
like to leave her at home, and I cannot take her with me, for that would spoil
my pleasure; and I hate a horse-dog woman; I will keep no whipper-in in
petticoats. I perceive therefore I must give up the hounds, for I am determined
nothing shall stand in the way of my pleasure.

Why then I must find out some amusements that my wife can partake in; we must
ride about the park in fine weather; we must visit the grounds, and the
gardens, and plan out improvements, and make plantations; it will be rare
employment for the poor people -- That is a thought that never struck me
before; methinks there must be a great deal of pleasure in setting the poor to
work -- I shall like a farm for the same reason; and my wife will take pleasure
in a dairy; she shall have the most elegant dairy in England; and I will build
a conservatory, and she shall have such plants and such flowers! -- I have a
notion I shall take pleasure in them myself -- And then there is a thousand
things to do within-doors; it is a fine old mansion that is the truth of it: I
will give it an entire repair; it wants new furniture; that will be very
pleasant work for my wife: I perceive I could not afford to keep hounds and do
this into the bargain. But this will give me the most pleasure all to nothing,
and then my wife will partake of it -- And we will have music and books -- I
recollect that I have got an excellent library -- There is another pleasure I
had never thought of -- And then no doubt we shall have children, and they are
very pleasant company, when they can talk and understand what is said to them;
and now I begin to reflect, I find there is a vast many pleasures in the life I
have chalked out, and what a fool should I be to throw away my money at the
gaming-table, or my health at any table, or my affections upon harlots, or my
time upon hounds and horses, or employ either money, health, affections, or
time, in any other pleasures or pursuits, than these, which I now perceive will
lead me to solid happiness in this life, and secure a good chance for what may
befall me hereafter!



No LXII.
Pudore et liberalitate liberos
Retinere satius esse credo, quam metu.
(TERENT.) Better far
To bind your children to you by the ties
Of gentleness and modesty than fear.
(COLMAN.)
GEMINUS and Gemellus were twin-sons of a country gentleman of fortune, whom I
shall call Euphorion; when they were of age to begin their grammar learning,
Euphorion found himself exceedingly puzzled to decide upon the best mode of
education; he had read several treatises on the subject, which instead of
clearing up his difficulties had increased them; he had consulted the opinions
of his friends and neighbors, and he found these so equally divided, and so
much to be said on both sides, that he could determine upon neither;
unfortunately for Euphorion he had no partialities of his own, for the good
gentleman had had little or no education himself: The clergyman of the parish
preached up the moral advantages of private tuition, the lawyer, his near
neighbor, dazzled his imagination with the connections and knowledge of the
world to be gained in a public school. Euphorion perceiving himself in a
straight between two roads, and not knowing which to prefer, cut the difficulty
by taking both; so that Geminus was put under private tuition of the clergyman
above mentioned, and Gemellus was taken up to town by the lawyer to be entered
at Westminster school.

Euphorion having thus put the two systems fairly to issue waited the event,
but every time that Gemellus came home at the breaking-up, the private system
rose and the public sunk on the comparison in the father's mind, for Gemellus's
appearance no longer kept pace with his brother's; wild and ragged as a colt,
battered and bruised and dishevelled he hardly seemed of the same species with
the spruce little master in the parlour; Euphorion was shocked to find that his
manners were no less altered than his person, for he herded with the servants
in the stable, was for ever under the horses' heels, and foremost in all games
and sports with the idle boys of the parish; this was a sore offense in
Euphorion's eyes, for he abhorred low company, and being the first gentleman of
his family seemed determined to keep up to the title: Misfortunes multiplied
upon poor Gemellus, and every thing conspired to put him in complete disgrace,
for he began to corrupt his brother, and was detected in debauching him to a
game at cricket, from which Geminus was brought home with a bruise on the shin,
that made a week's work for the surgeon; and what was still worse, there was
conviction of the blow being given by a ball from Gemellus's batt; this brought
on a severe interdiction of all further fellowship between the brothers, and
they were effectually kept apart for the future.

A suspicion now took place in the father's mind, that Gemellus had made as
little progress in his books, as he had in his manners; but as this was a
discovery he could not venture upon in person, he substituted his proxy for the
undertaking. Gemellus had so many evasions and alibis in resource, that it was
long before the clergyman could bring the case to a hearing, and the report was
not very favorable in any sense to the unlucky schoolboy, for Gemellus had
been seized with a violent fit of sneezing in the crisis of examination, to the
great annoyance of the worthy preceptor, who was forced to break up the
conference re infecta and in some disorder, for amongst other damages, which
had accrued to his person and apparel, he presented himself to the wondering
eyes of Euphorion with a huge black bush wig stuck full of paper darts, and as
thickly spiked as the back of a porcupine. The culprit was instantly summoned
and made no other defense, than that they slipped out of his hand, and he did not
go to do it. "Are these your Westminster tricks, sirrah?" cried the angry
father, and aiming a blow at his scull with his crutch, brought the wrong
person to the ground; for the nimble culprit had slipped out of the way, and
Euphorion, being weak and gouty, literally followed the blow and was laid
sprawling on the floor: Gemellus flew to his assistance, and jointly with the
parson got him on his legs, but his anger was now so enflamed, that Gemellus
was ordered out of the room under sentence of immediate dismission to school;
Euphorion declared he was so totally spoilt, that he would not be troubled with
him any longer in his family, else he would instantly have reversed his
education; it was now too late, (he observed to the parson, whilst he was
drawing the paper darts from his wig,) and therefore he should return to the
place from whence he came, and order was given for passing him off by the stage
next morning.

A question was asked about his holiday-task, but Geminus, who had now entered
his father's chamber, in a mild and pacifying tone assured Euphorion that his
brother was provided in that respect, for that he himself had done the task for
him: This was pouring oil upon flame, and the idle culprit was once more called
to the bar to receive a most severe reprimand for his meanness in imposing on
his brother's goodnature, with many dunces and blockheads cast in his teeth,
for not being able to do his own business. Gemellus was nettled with these
reproaches, but more than all with his brother for betraying him, and, drawing
the task out of his pocket, rolled it in his hand and threw it toward the
author, saying "he was a shabby fellow; and for his part he scorned to be
obliged to any body, that would do a favor and then boast of it." --
Recollecting himself in a moment afterward, he turned toward his father, and
begged his pardon for all offenses; "he hoped he was not such a blockhead, but
he could do his task, if he pleased, and he would instantly set about it and
send it down, to convince him, that he could do his own business without any
body's help." So saying, he went out of the room in great haste, and in less
time than could be expected brought down a portion of sacred exercise in
hexameter verse, which the parson heartily declared was admirably well
performed for his years, adding, that although it was not without faults, there
were some passages, that bespoke the dawning of genius -- "I am obliged to you,
Sir," said Gemellus, "it is more than I deserve, and I beg your pardon for the
impertinence I have been guilty of." -- The tears started in his eyes as he
said this, and he departed without any answer from his father.

He had no sooner left the room than he perceived Geminus had followed him,
and, being piqued with his late treatment, turned round and with a disdainful
look said -- "Brother Geminus, you ought to be ashamed of yourself; if you was
at Westminster, there is not a boy in the school would acknowledge you after so
scandalous a behavior." -- "I care neither for you nor your school," answered
the domestic youth, "it is you and not I should be ashamed of such reprobate
manners, and I shall report you to my father." -- "Do so," replied Gemellus,
"and take that with you into the bargain." -- This was immediately seconded
with a sound slap on the face with his open hand, which however drew the blood
in a stream from his nostrils, and he ran screaming to Euphorion, who came out
upon the alarm with all the speed he could muster. Gemellus stood his ground,
and after a severe caning was ordered to ask pardon of his brother: This he
peremptorily refused to do, alleging that he had been punished already, and to
be beaten and beg pardon too was more than he would submit to. No menaces being
able to bring this refractory spirit to submission, he was sent off to school
penniless, and a letter was written to the master, setting forth his offense,
and in strong terms censuring his want of discipline for not correcting so
stubborn a temper and so idle a disposition.

When he returned to school the master sent for him to his house, and
questioned him upon the matter of complaint in his father's letter, observing
that the charge being for offenses out of school he did not think it right to
call him publicly to account; but as he believed him to be a boy of honor, he
expected to hear the whole truth fairly related: This drew forth the whole
narrative, and Gemellus was dismissed with a gentle admonition, that could
hardly be construed into a rebuke.

When the next holidays were in approach, Gemellus received the following
letter from his brother.

BROTHER GEMELLUS,
If you have duly repented of your behavior to me, and will signify your
contrition, asking pardon as becomes you for the violence you have committed, I
will intercede with my father, and hope to obtain his permission for your
coming home in the ensuing holidays: If not, you must take the consequences and
remain where you are, for on this condition only I am to consider myself,

Your affectionate brother, GEMINUS.


To this letter Gemellus returned an answer as follows.

DEAR BROTHER,
I am sorry to find you still bear in mind a boyish quarrel so long past; be
assured I have entirely forgiven your behavior to me, but I cannot recollect
any thing in mine to you, which I ought to ask your pardon for: Whatever
consequences may befall me for not complying with your condition, I shall remain

Your affectionate brother, GEMELLUS.


No LXIII.
Natura tu illi pater es, consiliis ego.
(TERENT.) By nature you're his father; I by counsel.
(COLMAN.)
THIS letter fixed the fate of Gemellus: Resentments are not easily dislodged
from narrow minds; Euphorion had not penetration to distinguish between the
characters of his children; he saw no meanness in the sly insidious manners of
his homebred favorite, nor any sparks of generous pride in the steady
inflexibility of Gemellus; he little knew the high principle of honor, which
even the youngest spirits communicate to each other in the habits and manners
of a public school. He bitterly inveighed against his neighbor the lawyer for
persuading him to such a fatal system of education, and whenever they met in
company their conversation was engrossed with continual arguings and
reproachings; for neither party receded from his point, and Gemellus's advocate
was as little disposed to give him up, as his father was to excuse him. At last
they came to a compromise, by which Euphorion agreed to charge his estate with
an annuity for the education and support of Gemellus, which annuity during his
nonage was to be received and administered by the said awyer, and Geminus left
heir of his whole fortune, this moderate encumbrance excepted.

The disinterested and proscribed offender was now turned over to the care of
the lawyer, who regularly defrayed his school expenses, and never failed to
visit him at those periods, when country practitioners usually resort to town.
The boy, apprized of his situation, took no further pains to assuage his
father's resentment, but full of resources within himself, and possessed of an
active and aspiring genius, pressed forward in his business, and soon found
himself at the head of the school, with the reputation of being the best
scholar in it.

He had formed a close friendship, according to the custom of great schools,
with a boy of his own age, the son of a nobleman of high distinction, in whose
family Gemellus was a great favorite, and where he never failed to pass his
holidays, when the school adjourned. His good friend and guardian the lawyer
saw the advantages of this early connection in their proper light, and readily
consented to admit his ward of the same college in the university, when
Gemellus and his friend had completed their school education. Here the
attachment of these young men became more and more solid, as they advanced
nearer to manhood, and after a course of academical studies, in which Gemellus
still improved the reputation he brought from Westminster, it was proposed that
he should accompany his friend upon his travels, and a proper governor was
engaged for that service. This proposal rather staggered Gemellus's guardian on
the score of expense, and he now found it necessary for the first time to open
himself to Euphorion. With this intent he called upon him one morning, and
taking him aside, told him, he was come to confer with him on the subject of
Gemellus -- "I am sorry for it," interposed Euphorion. "Hold, Sir," answered
the lawyer, "interrupt me not, if you please; though Gemellus is my ward, he is
your son; and if you have the natural feelings of a father, you will be proud
to acknowledge your right in him as such." -- As he was speaking these words,
an awkward servant burst into the room, and staring with fright and confusion,
told his master there was a great lord in a fine equipage had actually driven
up to the hall door, and was asking to speak with him. Euphorion's surprise was
now little less than his servant's, and not being in the habit of receiving
visits from people of distinction, he eagerly demanded of the lawyer who this
visitor could possibly be, and casting an eye of embarrassment upon his gouty
foot -- "I am not fit to be seen," said he, "and cannot tell how to escape; for
heaven's fake! go and see who this visitor is, and keep him from the sight of
me, if it be possible."

Euphorion had scarce done speaking, when the door was thrown open, and the
noble stranger, who was no less a person than the father of Gemellus's friend,
made his approach, and having introduced himself to Euphorion, and apologized
for the abruptness of his visit, proceeded to explain the occasion of it in the
following words: -- "I wait upon you, Sir, with a request, in which I flatter
myself I shall be seconded by this worthy gentleman here present: You have the
honor to be father to one of the most amiable and accomplished young men I
ever knew; it may not become me to speak so warmly of my own son as perhaps I
might with truth, but I flatter myself it will be some recommendation of him to
your good opinion, when I tell you that he is the friend and intimate of your
Gemellus: They have now gone through school and college together, and according
to my notions of the world such early connections, when they are well chosen,
are amongst the chief advantages of a public education; but as I now purpose to
send my son upon his travels, and in such a manner as I flatter myself will be
for his benefit and improvement, I hope you will pardon this intrusion, when I
inform you that the object of it is to solicit your consent that Gemellus may
accompany him."

Euphorion's countenance, whilst this speech was addressed to him, underwent a
variety of changes; surprise at hearing such an unexpected character of his son
was strongly expressed; a gleam of joy seemed to break out, but was soon
dispelled by shame and vexation at the reflection of having abandoned him; he
attempted to speak, but confusion choked him; he cast a look of embarrassment
upon the lawyer, but the joy and triumph, which his features exhibited,
appeared to him like insult, and he turned his eyes on the ground in silence
and despair. No one emotion had escaped the observation of Gemellus's patron,
who, turning to the lawyer, said he believed he need not affect to be ignorant
of Gemellus's situation, and then addressing himself again to Euphorion -- "I
can readily understand," said he, "that such a proposal as I have now opened to
you, however advantageous it might promise to be to your son, would not
correspond with your ideas in point of expense, nor come within the compass of
that limited provision, which you have thought fit to appoint for him: This is
a matter, of which I have no pretensions to speak; you have disposed of your
fortune between your sons in the proportions you thought fit, and it must be
owned a youth, who has had a domestic education, stands the most in need of a
father's help, from the little chance there is of his being able to take care
of himself: Gemellus has talents that must secure his fortune, and if my
services can assist him, they shall never be wanting; in the mean time it is
very little for me to say that my purse will furnish their joint occasions,
whilst they are on their travels, and Gemellus's little fund, which is in
honest and friendly hands, will accumulate in the interim."

The length of this speech would have given Euphorion time to recollect
himself, if the matter of it had not presented some unpleasant truths to his
reflection, which incapacitated him from making a deliberate reply; he made a
shift however to hammer out some broken sentences, and with as good a grace as
he could, attempted to palliate his neglect of Gemellus by pleading his infirm
state of health, and retirement from the world -- he had put him into the hands
of his friend, who was present, and as he best knew what answer to give to the
proposal in question, he referred his lordship to him and would abide by his
decision -- he was glad to hear so favorable an account of him -- it was far
beyond his expectations; he hoped his lordship's partiality would not be
deceived in him, and he was thankful for the kind expressions he had thrown out
of his future good offices and protection. -- The noble visitor now desired
leave to introduce his son, who was waiting in the coach, and hoped Gemellus
might be allowed to pay his duty at the same time. This was a surprise upon
Euphorion, which he could not parry, and the young friends were immediately
ushered in by the exulting lawyer. Gemellus commanded himself with great
address; but the father's look, when be first discovered an elegant and manly
youth in the bloom of health and comeliness, with an open countenance, where
genius, courage and philanthropy were characterized, is not to be described: It
was a mixed expression of shame, conviction and repentance; nature had her share
in it; parental love seemed to catch a glance, as it were, by stealth; he was
silent, and his lips quivered with the suppressed emotions of his heart. Gemellus
approached and made an humble obeisance; Euphorion stretched forth his hand; he
seized it between his, and reverently pressed it to his lips. Their meeting was
not interrupted by a word, and the silence was only broken by my lord, who told
Gemellus in a low voice, that his father had consented to his request, and he
had no longer cause to apprehend a separation from his friend: The honest
lawyer now could no longer repress his ecstacy, but running to Gemellus, who
met his embrace with open arms, showered a flood of tears upon his neck, and
received the tribute of gratitude and affection in return upon his own.

When their spirits were a little composed, Gemellus requested to see his
brother; a summons was accordingly issued, and Geminus made his entrance. The
contrast which this meeting exhibited, spoke in stronger terms than language
can supply the decided preference of a public and liberal system of education,
to the narrow maxims of private and domestic tuition. On Gemellus's part all
was candor, openness and cordiality; he hoped all childish differences were
forgiven; for his share, if he called them to remembrance, it was only to
regret, that he had been so long separated from a brother, who was naturally so
dear to him; for the remainder of their lives he persuaded himself they should
be twins in affection, as well as in birth. On the side of Geminus there was
some acting, and some nature; but both were specimens of the worst sort;
hypocrisy played his part but awkwardly, and nature gave a sorry sample of her
performances.

A few words will suffice to wind up their histories, so far at least as they
need be explained: Euphorion died soon after this interview; Geminus inherited
his fortune, and upon his very first coming to London was cajoled into a
disgraceful marriage with a cast-off mistress, whom he became acquainted with;
duped by a profligate and plundered by sharpers, he made a miserable waste both
of money and reputation, and in the event became a pensioner of his brother.
Gemellus with great natural talents, improved by education and experience, with
an excellent nature and a laudable ambition, seconded by a very powerful
connection, soon rose to a distinguished situation in the state, where he yet
continues to act a conspicuous part, to the honor of his country, and with no
less reputation to himself.

No LXIV.
Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.
(LUCRETIUS.) Such cruelties religion could persuade.
(CREECH.)
I REMEMBER to have read an account in a foreign Gazette of a dreadful fire,
which broke out so suddenly in a house, where a great many people were
assembled, that five hundred persons perished miserably in the flames: The
compiler of this account subjoins at the foot of the above melancholy article,
that it is with satisfaction he can assure his readers, all the above persons
were Jews.

These poor people seem the butt, at which all sects and persuasions level
their contempt: They are sojourners and aliens in every kingdom on earth, and
yet few have the hospitality to give them a welcome. I do not know any good
reason why these unhappy wanderers are so treated, for they do not intrude upon
the labourer or manufacturer; they do not burden the state with their poor,
and here at least they neither till the earth, nor work at any craft, but
content themselves in general to hawk about a few refuse manufactures, and buy
up a few cast-off clothes, which no man methinks would envy them the monopoly
of.

It is to the honor of our nation, that we tolerate them in the exercise of
their religion, for which the Inquisition would tie them to a stake and commit
them to the flames. In some parts of the world the burning of a few makes a
festival for all good Christians; it brings rain and plenty in seasons of
drought and famine; it makes atonement for the sins of the people, and
mitigates the wrath of an avenging Providence. Wherever they are obliged to
conceal their religion, they generally overact their hypocrisy, and crowd their
houses with saints and virgins, whilst crucifixes, charms and relics are hung
in numbers round their necks. The son of Jewish parents is brought up in the
most rigid exercises of mortification and penance, and when the destined moment
is in near approach, when the parent must impart the dreadful secret of his
faith, every contrivance is put in practice to disgust and weary him with the
laborious functions of their ostensible religion: When this preparatory rigor
is perceived to take effect, and the age of the son is ripe for the occasion,
the father takes him into the inmost chamber of his house, fastens all the
doors, surveys every avenue with the most mysterious attention, and drawing his
sword with great solemnity, throws himself on his knees at his feet, and laying
open his breast, invites him to thrust the point to his heart -- For know, my
son, he cries, I am a Jew, as all my fathers were: Kill me therefore on the
spot, or conform to the religion of your ancestors, for you are damned as a
Catholic, if, knowing what you know, you neglect to betray me! This, as I have
reason to believe, is no feigned anecdote, but a true account of those secret
measures, which many Jewish families to this hour pursue for continuing the
practice of their religion and securing themselves from discovery, where the
consequences would be so fatal.

Having thus, by way of prelude, briefly informed my readers what these
miserable people are suffering in some countries, where they are secretly
settled, I shall now proceed to lay before them a letter, which I have lately
received from one of that persuasion, complaining of certain indignities and
vexations from the humors of our common people, which, although they are but
trifles compared to what I have been describing, are nevertheless unbecoming
the character of so illuminated and benevolent a nation as we have the honor
to belong to.

SIR,
I AM a man, who stick close to my business, and am married to a sober
industrious woman, whom I should be glad now and then to treat with a play,
which is the only public amusement she has ever expressed a wish to be indulged
in; but I am really under such difficulties, that I dare not carry her thither,
and at the same time do not like to discover my reasons for it, as I should be
sorry to give her a dislike to the country she is in.

You must know, Sir, I am a Jew, and probably have that national cast of
countenance, which a people so separate and unmixt may well be supposed to
have: The consequence of this is, that I no sooner enter a playhouse, than I
find all eyes turned upon me; if this were the worst, I would strive to put as
good a face upon it as I could; but this is sure to be followed up with a
thousand scurrilities, which I should blush to repeat, and which I cannot think
of subjecting my wife to hear.

As I should really take great pleasure in a good play, if I might be permitted
to sit it out in peace, I have tried every part of the house, but the front
boxes, where I observe such a line of bullies in the back, that even if I were
a Christian I would not venture amongst them; but I no sooner put my head into
an obscure corner of the gallery, than some fellow or other roars out to his
comrades -- Smoke the Jew! -- Smoke the cunning little Isaac! -- Throw him
over, says another, hand over the smoutch! -- Out with Shylock, cries a third,
out with the pound of man's flesh! -- Buckles and buttons! Spectacles! bawls
out a fourth -- and so on through the whole gallery, till I am forced to retire
out of the theater, amongst hootings and hissings, with a shower of rotten
apples and chewed oranges vollied at my head, when all the offense I have given
is an humble offer to be a peaceable spectator, jointly with them, of the same
common amusement.

I hope I shall not incur your displeasure if I venture to say this is not very
manly treatment in a great and generous people, which I always took the English
to be; I have lodged my property, which is not inconsiderable, in this country,
and having no abiding-place on this earth, which I could call my own, I have
made England my choice, thinking it the safest asylum that a wanderer and an
alien could fly to; I hope I have not been mistaken in my opinion of it: It has
frequently fallen in my way to show some kindnesses to your countrymen in
foreign parts, and some are yet living, who, if they would speak the truth,
must confess that their best friend in life is a Jew: But of these things I
scorn to boast; however, Sir, I must own it gave me some pain the other night
to find myself very roughly handled by a seafaring fellow, whom I remembered
well enough in a most piteous condition at Algiers, where I had the good will
to relieve him and set him at liberty with my own money: I hope he did not
recollect me; I say I hope not for the honor of human nature, but I am much
afraid he did: This I am sure would be called ingratitude even in a Heathen.

I observe with much concern that your great writers of plays take delight in
hanging us out to public ridicule and contempt on all occasions: If ever they
are in search of a rogue, an usurer or a buffoon, they are sure to make a Jew
serve the turn: I verily believe the odious character of Shylock has brought
little less persecution upon us poor scattered sons of Abraham, than the
Inquisition itself. As I am interested to know if this blood-thirsty villain
really existed in nature, and have no means to satisfy my curiosity but your
favor, I take the liberty humbly to request that you will tell me how the case
truly stands, and whether we must of necessity own this Shylock; also I should
be glad to know of which tribe this fellow was, for if such a monster did
exist, I have strong suspicion he will turn out a Samaritan. As I cannot doubt
but a gentleman of your great learning knows all these things correctly, I
shall wait your answer with the most anxious impatience; and pray be particular
as to the tribe of Judah, for if nothing less than half my fortune could oust
him there, I would pay it down to be rid of such a rascal.

Your compliance with the above will be the greatest obligation you can confer
upon, Sir,

Your most devoted humble servant, ABRAHAM ABRAHAM'S.
P. S. I hope I shall not give offense by adding a postscript, to say, that if
you could persuade one of the gentlemen or ladies, who write plays (with all of
whom I conclude you have great interest) to give us poor Jews a kind lift in a
new comedy, I am bold to promise we should not prove ungrateful on a third
night.

A. A.




If I had really that interest with my ingenious contemporaries, which Mr.
Abraham's gives me credit for, I would not hesitate to exert it in his service;
but as I am afraid this is not the case, I have taken the only method in my
power of being useful to him, and have published his letter.

As for Shylock, who is so obnoxious to my correspondent, I wish I could prove
him the son of a Samaritan as clearly as Simon Magus; but I flatter myself the
next best thing for his purpose is to prove him the son of a poet, and that I
will endeavor to do in my very next paper, with this further satisfaction to
Mr. Abraham's, that I do not despair of taking him down a step in his pedigree,
which for a poetical one is, as it now stands, of the very first family in the
kingdom.

As for the vulgar fun of smoking a Jew, which so prevails amongst us, I am
persuaded that my countrymen are much too generous and good-natured to sport
with the feelings of a fellow creature, if they were once fairly convinced that
a Jew is their fellow creature, and really has fellow-feelings with their own:
Satisfy them in this point, and their humanity will do the rest: I will
therefore hope that nothing more is wanting in behalf of my correspondent, (who
seems a very worthy man) than to put the following short questions to his
persecutors -- Has not a Jew eyes? Has not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions,
senses, affections, passions? Fed with the same food, hurt with the same
weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and
cooled by the same summer and winter, as a Christian is? If you prick them, do
they not bleed? If you tickle them, do they not laugh? If you poison them, do
they not die? -- The man, who can give a serious answer to these questions, and
yet persist in persecuting an unoffending being, because he is a Jew, whatever
country he may claim, or whatever religion he may profess, has the soul of an
inquisitor, and is fit for nothing else but to feed the fires of an Auto da Fe.

When I turn my thoughts to the past and present situation of this peculiar
people, I do not see how any Christian nation according to the spirit of their
religion can refuse admission to the Jews, who, in completion of those very
prophecies, on which Christianity rests, are to be scattered and disseminated
amongst all people and nations over the face of the earth. It seems therefore a
thing as inconsistent with the spirit of those prophecies for any one nation to
attempt to expel them, as it would be to incorporate them.

The sin and obduracy of their forefathers are amongst the undoubted records of
our gospel, but I doubt if this can be a sufficient reason, why we should hold
them in such general odium through so many ages, seeing how naturally the son
follows the faith of the father, and how much too general a thing it is amongst
mankind to profess any particular form of religion, that devolves upon them by
inheritance, rather than by free election and conviction of reason founded upon
examination.

Let me put the case of a man born a Jew and settled in a kingdom, where the
Inquisition is in force; can he reconcile his natural feelings to a conversion
in favor of that church, which denounces everlasting damnation against him, if
he does not betray the secrets of his parents, and impeach them to the
Inquisition for the concealed religion, which he knows they practice, though
they do not profess.

If we as Christians owe some respect to the Jews as the people chosen by God
to be the keepers of those prophetic records, which announce the coming of the
Messiah, we owe it also to the truth of history to confess, that the hope
indulged by them that his coming would bring temporal as well as spiritual
salvation, was general to all the nation. Their ancient sages had united the
military with the prophetic character; some had headed their armies; all had
gone forth with them, and even their women had contributed to the downfall of
their enemies and oppressors: They had been delivered from their Egyptian and
Babylonish thraldom by the arm of God; the yoke of Rome laid no less heavy on
their necks; and they regarded their former deliverances as types and
forerunners of the greater deliverance to come, when the Son of God should
descend upon earth in the plenitude of his power to rid them from their enemies
and oppressors.

In place of this glittering but delusive vision they beheld a meek and humble
man, a teacher of peaceful doctrines, who went about preaching forgiveness of
injuries and submission to authorities. They asked him (and the question was a
proving one) whether he would have them render tribute unto Caesar: He told
them in reply they should render unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's,
tribute to whom tribute was due: Mortifying reply! extinguishing at once their
hopes and their ambition. Still there was something about him that converted
many and staggered all; never man spoke as he spoke, never man did what he did;
he had evident power of working miracles; the hand of God was with him and the
operations of nature were under his control: His power was great, but was not
great to their purposes, and therefore they denied that it was derived from
God; they charged him with being a magician, and casting out devils by the aid
of the prince of the devils: A likely intercourse between the representatives
of light and of darkness; a notable collusion between heaven and hell; if
Beelzebub was to be charged with conspiring to cast out Beelzebub, it was at
least incumbent on the abettors of the charge to prove that any being, endowed
with such power could be so devoid of intelligence.

Conviction and rebuke only rendered them more furious and inveterate;
despairing at length of employing his power against Rome, they resolved upon
turning the power of Rome against him: They impeached him before Pilate the
Roman procurator; Pilate unwillingly at their urgent requisition sentenced him
to ignominious execution; disavowing in the strongest terms his share in the
act, and by the figurative exculpation of washing his hands in public view,
purifying, (as far as such a ceremony could purify) his tribunal from the guilt
of spilling innocent blood.

Can it be a wonder with us at this hour that the Jews should persist in
avowing their unbelief in the Messiah? If they admit the evidences of the
Christian religion, do they not become their own accusers? And this, although
it be no reason why a man should shut his eyes against the truth, will yet be a
motive, allowing for the imperfection of human nature, why he should not seek
for it.

No LXV.
I SLIGHTLY hinted in my former paper that the Jew of Venice would not turn out
to be the proper offspring of Shakespeare, and as the researches of his
commentators have settled this point so clearly against the legitimacy of
Shylock, I may leave it with the reader's judgment to decide, whether he formed
his drama immediately from the Pecorone of Fiorentina, borrowing the incident
of the caskets from Boccace; or at second hand, as some suppose, from an old
ballad formed upon that story.

But I had a further object in the hint I then dropped, suggested to me by the
perusal of a very curious old novel written by Thomas Nashe, and published in
1594, entitled The Unfortunate Traveller, or the Life of Jacke Wilton. The hero
is described to be one of the court-pages belonging to Henry the Eighth, and is
made to play a number of roguish pranks in the camp of that monarch before
Tournay. He travels to Munster in Germany, where he falls in with John of
Leyden the famous fanatic, and is present at his defeat by the Imperialists;
here he meets Lord Henry Howard, Earl of Surry, and accompanies him to Venice,
passing through Wittenberg, where he has an interview with Luther and
Carlostadius; from thence he repairs to Rome, where he relates a series of
strange adventures, by which he is thrown into the hands of a Jew named Zadock,
physician to Pope Clement VIII. and having forfeited his life to him by the
law, the Jew gets the person of Jack Wilton in limbo with an intent to
anatomize him, and whilst he is dieting and bleeding him for that purpose, the
Marchioness of Mantua, the Pope's mistress, spies him out from her balcony, and
being smitten with his appearance, contrives to get him out of Zadock's hands,
by persuading his holiness to banish all the Jews from Rome and confiscate
their effects, upon a charge she sets up against them.

With this intelligence Zadock is accosted by a brother Jew called Zachary,
"who comes running to him in sackcloth and ashes, presently after his goods
were confiscated, and tells him how he is served and what decree is coming out
against them all."

I have made an extract of this interview between Zadock and Zachary, which the
reader will observe by the date was published before Shakespeare wrote his
Merchant of Venice, and as the critics seem agreed that he was conversant in
other works of Nashe, it is highly probable that this history of Jacke Wilton
had also been in his hands: I do not mean to infer that Shakespeare took his
character of Shylock from this of Nashe's Zadock, for there is nothing that can
warrant such an inference; but I shall submit the following dialogue as an
extraordinary specimen of strong empassioned writing, which, though it will not
stand by Shakespeare's scene between Shylock and Tubal in dramatic terseness,
has nevertheless a force of expression, that will bear a comparison with that
or any other passage in our old dramatic writers.

Zachary having made his report as above, the author thus proceeds to the
introduction of his chief speaker -- Descriptions stand by! here is to be
expressed the fury of Lucifer, when he was turned over heaven's bar for a
wrangler: There is a toad-fish, which taken out of the water swells more than
one would think his skin could hold, and bursts in his face that touches him;
so swelled Zadock, and was ready to burst out of his skin, and shoot his bowels
like chain-shot full in Zachary's face, for bringing him such baleful tidings;
his eyes glared and burned blue like brimstone and aqua vitae set on fire in an
egg-shell; his very nose lightened glowworms; his teeth cracked and grated
together like the joints of a high building rocking like a cradle, when as a
tempest takes her full-butt against her broadside: He swore and cursed, and said
-- 'These be they that worship that crucified God of Nazareth; here is the
fruits of their newfound gospel; sulphur and gunpowder carry them all quick to
Gehennah! I would spend my soul willingly to have this triple-headed Pope, with
all his sin-absolved whores, and oil-greased priests, born like a black saint
on the devil's backs in procession to the pit of perdition. Would I might sink
presently into the earth, so I might blow up this Rome, this whore of Babylon
into the air with my breath! If I must be banished, if these heathen dogs will
needs rob me of my goods, I will poison their springs and conduit-heads, whence
they receive their water all about the city. I will 'tice all the young
children into my house, that I can get, and cutting their throats, barrel them
up in powdering beef tubs, and so send them to victual the Pope's galleys. Ere
the officers come to extend, I will bestow an hundred pounds on a dole of
bread, which I will cause to be kneaded with scorpion's oil, that may kill more
than the plague. I will hire them that make their wafers, or sacramentary Gods,
to mix them after the same sort, so in the zeal of their superstitious religion
shall they languish and drop like carrion. If there be ever a blasphemous
conjurer, that can call the winds from their brazen caves, and make the clouds
travel before their time, I will give him the other hundred pounds to disturb
the heavens a whole week together with thunder and lightning, if it be for
nothing but to sower all the wines in Rome, and turn them to vinegar: As long
as they have either oil or wine, this plague feeds but pinchingly upon them.'

'Zadock, Zadock,' said Zachary, cutting him off, 'thou threatenest the air,
whilst we perish here on earth: It is the countess Juliana, the Marquis of
Mantua's wife, and no other, that has complotted our confusion; ask not how,
but insist on my words, and assist in revenge.'

'As how, as how?' said Zadock, shrugging and shrubbing; 'More happy than the
patriarchs were I, if crushed to death with the greatest torments Rome's tyrants
have tried, there might be quintessenced out of me one quart of precious
poison. I have a leg with an issue, shall I cut it off, and from this fount of
corruption extract a venom worse than any serpent's? If thou will, I will go to
a house that is infected, where catching the plague, and having got a running
sore upon me, I will come and deliver her a supplication, and breathe upon her,
when I am perfected with more putrefaction.'



Zadock in conclusion is taken up and executed, and the description of his
tortures is terrible in the extreme; every circumstance attending them is
minutely delineated in colors full as strong as the above.

I persuade myself the reader will not be displeased, if I lay before him one
extract more, in which he ridicules the affected dress and manners of the
traveled gentlemen of his day: If we contemplate it as a painting of two
hundred years standing, I think it must be allowed to be a very curious sketch.

What is there in France to be learned more than in England, but falsehood in
friendship, perfect slovenry and to love no man, but for my pleasure? I have
known some that have continued there by the space of half a dozen years, and
when they come home, they have hid a little weerish lean face under a broad
French hat, kept a terrible coil with the dust in the street in their long
cloaks of gray paper, and spoken English strangely. Naught else have they
profited by their travel, but to distinguish the true Bourdeaux grape, and know
a cup of neat Gascoigne wine from wine of Orleans; yea and peradventure this
also, to esteem of the p -- x as a pimple, to wear a velvet patch on their
face, and walk melancholy with their arms folded.

From Spain what brings our traveller? A scull-crowned hat of the fashion of
an old deep porringer; a diminutive alderman's rust with short strings, like
the droppings of a man's nose; a close-bellied doublet coming down with a peake
behind as far as the crupper, and cut off before by the breast bone like a
partlet or neckercher; a wide pair of gascoynes, which ungathered would make a
couple of women's riding-kirtles; huge hangers, that have half a cow-hide in
them; a rapier that is lineally descended from half a dozen dukes at the least:
Let his cloak be as long or as short as you will; if long, it is faced with
Turkey grogeran ravelled; if short, it has a cape like a calf's tongue, and is
not so deep in his whole length, nor so much cloth in it I will justify as only
the standing cape of a Dutchman's cloak. I have not yet touched all, for he
has in either shoe as much taffaty for his tyings, as would serve for an
ancient; which serves him (if you would have the mystery of it) of the own
accord for a shoerag. If you talk with him, he makes a dishcloth of his own
country in comparison of Spain; but if you urge him particularly wherein it
exceeds, he can give no instance, but in Spain they have better bread than any
we have; when (poor hungry slaves!) they may crumble it into water well enough
and make misons with it, for they have not a good morsel of meat, except it be
salt pilchers, to eat with it, all the year long; and, which is more, they are
poor beggars, and lie in foul straw every night.

Italy, the paradise of the earth, and the epicure's heaven, how does it form
our young master? It makes him to kiss his hand like an ape, cringe his neck
like a starveling, and play at Hey-pass-repass-come-aloft, when he salutes a
man: From thence he brings the art of atheism, the art of epicurizing, the art
of whoring, the art of poisoning, the art of sodomitry: The only probable good
thing they have to keep us from utterly condemning it, is, that it makes a man
an excellent courtier, a curious carpet-knight; which is by interpretation a
fine close lecher, a glorious hypocrite: It is now a privy note amongst the
better sort of men, when they would set a singular mark or brand on a notorious
villain, to say he has been in Italy.

I hope I need not observe that these descriptions are not here quoted for the
truth they contain, but for the curiosity of them. Thomas Nashe was the
bitterest satirist and controversialist of the age he lived in.

No LXVI.
I WAS some nights ago much entertained with an excellent representation of Mr.
Congreve's comedy of The Double Dealer. When I reflected upon the youth of the
author and the merit of the play, I acknowledged the truth of what the late Dr.
Samuel Johnson says in his life of this poet, that amongst all the efforts of
early genius, which literary history records, I doubt whether any one can be
produced that more surpasses the common limits of nature than the plays of
Congreve.

The author of this comedy in his dedication informs us, that he designed the
moral first, and to that moral invented the fable; and does not know that he
has borrowed one hint of it any where. -- I made the plot, says he, as strong
as I could; because it was single; and I made it single because I would avoid
confusion, and was resolved to preserve the three unities of the drama. As it
is impossible not to give full credit to this assertion, I must consider the
resemblance which many circumstances in The Double Dealer bear to those in a
comedy of Beaumont and Fletcher, entitled Cupid's Revenge, as a casual
coincidence; and I think the learned biographer above quoted had good reason to
pronounce of Congreve, that he is an original writer, who borrowed neither the
models of his plot, nor the manner of his dialogue.

Mellafont, the nephew and heir of Lord Touchwood, being engaged to Cynthia,
daughter of Sir Paul Pliant, the traversing this match forms the object of the
plot, on which this comedy of The Double Dealer is constructed; the intrigue
consists in the various artifices employed by Lady Touchwood and her agents for
that purpose.

That the object is (as the author himself states it to be) singly this, will
appear upon considering, that, although the ruin of Mellafont's fortune is for
a time effected by these contrivances, that are employed for traversing his
marriage, yet it is rather a measure of necessity and self-defence in Lady
Touchwood, than of original design; it springs from the artifice of incident,
and belongs more properly to the intrigue, than to the object of the plot.

The making or obstructing marriages is the common hinge, on which most comic
fables are contrived to turn, but in this match of Mellafont's, which the
author has taken for the groundwork of his plot, I must observe that it would
have been better to have given more interest to an event, which he has made the
main object of the play: He has taken little pains to recommend the parties to
his spectators, or to paint their mutual attachment with any warmth of
coloring. Who will feel any concern whether Mellafont marries Cynthia or not,
if they themselves appear indifferent on the occasion, and upon the eve of
their nuptials converse in the following strain? Mel. You seem thoughtful,
Cynthia.


Cyn. I am thinking, though marriage makes man and wife one flesh, it leaves them
still two fools, and they become more conspicuous by setting off one another.


Mel. That Is only when two fools meet, and their follies are opposed.


Cyn. Nay, I have known two wits meet, and by the opposition of their wit,
render themselves as ridiculous as fools. It Is an odd game we are going to play
at; what think you of drawing stakes, and giving over in time?


Mel. No, hang it, that is not endeavoring to win, because it is possible we
may lose -- etc. etc.


This scene, which proceeds throughout in the same strain, seems to confirm Dr.
Johnson's remark, that Congreve formed a peculiar idea of comic excellence,
which he supposed to consist in gay remarks and unexpected answers -- that his
scenes exhibit not much of humor, imagery or passion; his personages are a
kind of intellectual gladiators; every sentence is toward or strike; the
contest of smartness is never intermitted; and his wit is a meteor playing to
and fro with alternate coruscations.

There is but one more interview between Cynthia and Mellafont, which is the
opening of the fourth act, and this is of so flat and insipid a sort, as to be
with reason omitted in representation: I think therefore it may be justly
observed, that this match, for the prevention of which artifices of so virulent
and diabolical a nature are practiced by Lady Touchwood and The Double Dealer,
is not pressed upon the feelings of the spectators in so interesting a manner,
as it should and might have been.

Having remarked upon the object of the plot, I shall next consider the
intrigue; and for this purpose we must methodically trace the conduct of Lady
Touchwood, who is the poet's chief engine, and that of her under-agent Maskwell.

The scene lies in Lord Touchwood's house, but whether in town or country does
not appear. Sir Paul Pliant, his lady and daughter, are naturally brought
thither, upon the day preceding Cynthia's marriage, to adjust the settlement:
Lord and Lady Froth, Careless and Brisk, are visiters on the occasion;
Mellafont and Maskwell are inmates: This disposition is as happy as can be
devised. The incident related by Mellafont to Careless, of the attempt upon him
made by Lady Touchwood, artfully prepares us to expect every thing that revenge
and passion can suggest for frustrating his happiness; and it is judicious to
represent Mellafont incredulous as to the criminality of Maskwell's intercourse
with Lady Touchwood; for if he had believed it upon Careless's suggestion, it
would have made his blindness to the character of Maskwell not only weak,
(which in fact it is) but unnatural and even guilty.

Maskwell in the first act makes general promises to Lady Touchwood that he
will defeat Mellafont's match -- You shall possess and ruin him too. -- The
lady presses him to explain particulars; he opens no other resource but that of
possessing Lady Pliant with an idea that Mellafont is fond of her -- She must
be thoroughly persuaded that Mellafont loves her. -- So shallow a contrivance
as this cannot escape the lady's penetration, and she naturally answers -- I
don't see what you can propose from so trifling a design; for her first
conversing with Mellafont will convince her of the contrary. -- In fact, the
author's good sense was well aware how weak this expedient is, and it seems
applied to no other purpose than as an incident to help on the under-plot, by
bringing forward the comic effect of Lady Pliant's character, and that of Sir
Paul: Maskwell himself is so fairly gravelled by the observation, that he
confesses he does not depend upon it; but he observes that it will prepare
something else, and gain him leisure to lay a stronger plot; if I gain a little
time, says he, I shall not want contrivance.

In the second act this design upon Lady Pliant is played off, and Maskwell in
an interview with Mellafont avows the plot, and says -- to tell you the truth,
I encouraged it for your diversion. He proceeds to say, that in order to gain
the confidence of Lady Touchwood, he had pretended to have been long secretly
in love with Cynthia; that thereby he had drawn forth the secrets of her heart,
and that if he accomplished her designs, she had engaged to put Cynthia with
all her fortune into his power: He then discloses by soliloquy that his motive
for double dealing was founded in his passion for Cynthia, and observes that
the name of rival cuts all ties asunder and is a general acquittance. This
proceeding is in nature and is good comedy.

The third act opens with a scene between Lord and Lady Touchwood, which is
admirably conceived and executed with great spirit; I question if there is any
thing of the author superior to this dialogue. The design of alarming the
jealousy and resentment of Lord Touchwood now appears to have originated with
the lady, although Maskwell was privy to it, and ready for a cue to come in and
confirm all, had there been occasion; he proposes to her to say that he was
privy to Mellafont's design, but that he used his utmost endeavors to dissuade
him from it; and on the credit, he thinks to establish by this proof of his
honor and honesty, he grounds another plot, which he keeps as his ultimate and
most secret resource, that of cheating her [Lady Touchwood] as well as the
rest. He now reveals to Mellafont a criminal assignation with Lady Touchwood in
her chamber at eight, and proposes to him to come and surprise them together,
and then, says he, it will be hard if you cannot bring her to any conditions.

This appears to me to be a very dangerous experiment, and scarce within the
bounds of nature and probability. If Maskwell, under cover of the proposal, had
in view nothing more than the introduction of Mellafont into Lady Touchwood's
bedchamber, there to put them together, and then to bring Lord Touchwood
secretly upon them in the moment of their interview, his contrivance could not
have been better laid for the purpose of confirming the impression, which that
lord had received against his nephew; in which Maskwell had nothing more to do
than to apprise the lady of his design, and she of course could have managed
the interview to the purposes of the plot, and effectually have completed the
ruin of Mellafont: This, it should seem, would have answered his object
completely, for he would have risen upon the ruin of Mellafont, possessed
himself of Lord Touchwood's favor, bound Lady Touchwood to concealment of his
villainy, and been as able to lay his train for the possession of Cynthia, as
by any other mode he could choose for obtaining her; but if he put it to the
issue of a surprise upon Lady Touchwood, when she was not prepared for the
management of that surprise, what was he to expect from the introduction of
Lord Touchwood, but discovery and defeat? Was it not natural to suppose
Mellafont would seize the opportunity of reproaching her with her criminality
with Maskwell? It was for that very purpose he brings him thither; he tells him
it will be hard if he cannot then bring her to any conditions; -- and if this
was to pass under the terror of his reproaches, how could Maskwell set Lord
Touchwood upon listening to their conversation and not apprehend for a
consequence apparently so unavoidable? He puts every thing to risque by
proposing to Mellafont to conceal himself in Lady Touchwood's bedchamber,
whilst she is in the closet; he then meets Lord Touchwood, appoints him to come
to the lobby by the bedchamber in a quarter of an hour's time; he keeps his
assignation with the lady, Mellafont starts from his hiding place, and Maskwell
escapes, but soon returns, secretly introducing Lord Touchwood to listen to the
dialogue between his lady and nephew: She accidentally discovers him without
his being seen by Mellafont, and turns that accidental discovery against
Mellafont. What a combination of improbabilities is here fortuitously thrown
together to produce this lucky incident! Could Maskwell reasonably presume upon
a chance so beyond expectation? Every thing is made to turn upon the precarious
point of a minute: If Lord Touchwood, who was appointed for a quarter of an
hour, had anticipated that appointment, if Lady Touchwood had been less
punctual to her assignation, if Mellafont had happened to have dropped one word
in his uncle's hearing, charging her with his discovery, as had been agreed, or
if either she had happened not to have seen Lord Touchwood, of Mellafont had
seen him; in short, if any one thing had turned up, which ought to have come to
pass, or otherwise than it was made to come to pass by the greatest violence to
probability, Maskwell was inevitably undone: It must be owned he laid a train
for his own destruction, but stage incident rescued him; and this, with the
lady's adroitness, effaces the improbability, when it passes in representation,
and keeps nature out of sight. Had Mellafont told the plain story to his uncle,
after Lady Touchwood had so unexpectedly turned it against him, it would at
least have put the plot to risque, and of this the author seems so conscious,
that he does not suffer him to attempt a single word in his defense; to save
his villain, he is compelled to sacrifice his hero.

It is not sufficient to say that a poet has his characters in his power, and
can fashion incidents according to his own discretion; he must do no violence
to nature and probability for the purposes of his plot.

Maskwell having in this manner escaped with success, begins next to put in
execution his plot for obtaining Cynthia, and this constitutes the intrigue and
catastrophe of the fifth act: His plan is as follows -- Having imparted to Lord
Touchwood his love for Cynthia by the vehicle of a soliloquy, which is to be
overheard by his lordship, he proposes to himself to carry off Cynthia to St.
Albans with the chaplain in the coach, there to be married; this she is to be
trepanned into by persuading her that the chaplain is Mellafont, and Mellafont
is brought to cooperate, by a promise that he shall elope with Cynthia under
that disguise, and that the chaplain shall be made to follow on the day after
and then marry him to Cynthia; with this view Mellafont is appointed to meet
Maskwell in one chamber, and Cynthia in another; the real chaplain is to be
passed upon the lady for Mellafont, and Mellafont is to be left in the lurch;
this plot upon Cynthia Maskwell confides to Lord Touchwood, telling him there
is no other way to possess himself of her but by surprise.

Though the author undoubtedly meant his villain should in the end outwit
himself, yet he did not mean him to attempt impossibilities, and the
absurdities of this contrivance are so many, that I know not which to mention
first. How was Maskwell to possess himself of Cynthia by this scheme? By what
force or fraud is he to accomplish the object of marrying her? We must conclude
he was not quite so desperate as to sacrifice all his hopes from Lord Touchwood
by any violence upon her person; there is nothing in his character to warrant
the conjecture. It is no less unaccountable how Mellafont could be caught by
this project, and induced to equip himself in the chaplain's gown to run off
with a lady, who had pledged herself to him never to marry any other man: There
was no want of consent on her part; a reconciliation with Lord Touchwood was
the only object he had to look to, and how was that to be effected by this
elopement with Cynthia?

The jealousy of Lady Touchwood was another rock on which Maskwell was sure to
split: It would have been natural for him to have provided against this danger
by binding my lord to secrecy, and the lady's pride of family was a ready plea
for that purpose; when he was talking to himself for the purpose of being
overheard by Lord Touchwood, he had nothing to do but to throw in this
observation amongst the rest to bar that point against discovery.

The reader will not suppose I would suggest a plan of operation for The Double
Dealer to secure him against discovery; I am only for adding probability and
common precaution to his projects: I allow that it is in character for him to
grow wanton with success; there is a moral in a villain outwitting himself; but
the catastrophe would in my opinion have been far more brilliant, if his
schemes had broke up with more force of contrivance; laid as they are, they
melt away and dissolve by their own weakness and inconsistency; Lord and Lady
Touchwood, Careless and Cynthia, all join in the discovery; every one but
Mellafont sees through the plot, and he is blindness itself.

Mr. Congreve, in his dedication above mentioned, defends himself against the
objection to soliloquies; but I conceive he is more open to criticism for the
frequent use he makes of listening; Lord Touchwood three times has recourse to
this expedient.

Of the characters in this comedy Lady Touchwood, though of an unfavourable
cast, seems to have been the chief care of the poet, and is well preserved
throughout; her elevation of tone, nearly approaching to the tragic, affords a
strong relief to the lighter sketches of the episodical persons, Sir Paul and
Lady Pliant, Lord and Lady Froth, who are highly entertaining, but much more
loose than the stage in its present state of reformation would endure: Nothing
more can be said of Careless and Brisk, than that they are the young men of the
theater, at the time when they were in representation. Of Maskwell enough has
been said in these remarks, nor need any thing be added to what has been
already observed upon Mellafont and Cynthia. As for the moral of the play,
which the author says he designed in the first place and then applied the fable
to it, it should seem to have been his principal object in the formation of the
comedy, and yet it is not made to reach several characters of very libertine
principles, who are left to reform themselves at leisure; and the plot, though
subordinate to the moral, seems to have drawn him off from executing his good
intentions so completely as those professions may be understood to engage for.

No LXVII.
Ulcera animi sananda magis quam corporis.
(EX SENTENT.) Can thou not minister to a mind diseased?
(MACBETH.)
IT seems as if most of the ancient writers of history thought no events worth
recording to posterity but accounts of battles and sieges and the overthrow of
empires; as if men were to be celebrated only in proportion to the devastation
they had made of the human species. As my respect, on the contrary, is directed
chiefly to those peaceable characters, who have been the benefactors of
mankind, it is with pleasure I discovered an anecdote of an ancient king of
Egypt of this description, named Osymanduas: This good prince, amongst other
praiseworthy actions, has the credit of making the first public library in
that learned nation, before books were collected at Athens by Pisistratus:
Osymanduas made no scruple to convert one of the chief temples to this generous
use, and gave it in charge to the priests belonging to it to digest and arrange
his collection; when this was done, he laid it open to the public, and by a
very apposite and ingenious device, which he caused to be inscribed upon the
front of the edifice, invited all his subjects to enter in and partake of his
benefaction: He considered it as the duty of a good king to provide against the
mental as well as bodily ailments of his people; it appeared to him that books
were the best medicines for the mind of man, and consequently that a collection
of books, such as his library contained, might well be entitled a magazine or
warehouse of medicines for the mind; with this idea he directed the following
words to be engraved over the door of his library in conspicuous characters --
(...). There is a beautiful simplicity in the thought, which seems to give an
insight into the benevolent design of the donor; and as I hold it a more noble
office to preserve the mind in health, than to keep the body after death from
corruption, I cannot hesitate to give Osymanduas more credit for this
benefaction of a library, than if he had been fo^der of the pyramids.

As the distempers of the mind may be figuratively classed under the several
characters of those maladies, which are incidental to the body, so the several
descriptions of books may very well be sorted into the various genera of
medicines, which practice has applied to those respective distempers. A
library, thus pharmaceutically disposed, would have the appearance of a
dispensatory, and might be properly enough so called; and when I recollect how
many of our eminent collectors of books have been of the medical faculty, I
cannot but think it probable that those great benefactors to literature,
Ratcliffe, Mead, Sloane, Hunter and others have had this very idea of
Osymanduas in their minds, when they founded their libraries. If therefore it
should be thought agreeable to the will of the donors, and a proper mark of
respect to their memories, so to arrange their collections, now in the
repositories of Oxford and the British Museum, it will be necessary to find out
a different set of titles, and instead of sorting them as they now are into the
compartments of The Historians; The Poets; The Divines, it will be right to set
up new inscriptions in their places, and entitle them, The Alteratives; The
Stimulatives; The Narcotics. I need not point out to the learned keepers of
these libraries how to proceed in an arrangement, to which their own judgments
are so fully competent; nothing more will be required of them, but to ascertain
the particular species of disease, which the mind of the patient is affected
with, and send him forthwith to the proper class of authors for his cure.

For instance; if the complaint arises from cold humors and a want of free
perspiration by a stoppage and constipation of the pores of the mind, by which
the feelings are rendered inert, and deprived of that proper emanation and
expansion, which the health of the soul requires; let such an one be shut into
the warm bath of the Sudorifics, which I need not explain to be the Satyrists,
and they will soon open his pores and disperse all obstructions. If the mental
disease be of the inflammatory and feverish sort, attended with fits and
paroxysms of anger, envy, revenge, and other atrabilious symptoms, which cannot
be mistaken, it will be proper to turn the patient into the cell of the
Moralists, who will naturally be found under the title of The Coolers and
Sedatives: On the contrary, where the complaint is of the lethargic nature, in
which Irritation is necessary, the Controversialists will furnish him a remedy:
In short, we need only say, that when the several authors are properly
arranged, every case may find its cure. The comic writers will act as
Carminatives to dispel the vapors; books of travels as Cathartics to procure a
motion; memoirs and novels will operate as Provocatives, politics as
Corrosives, and panegyrics as Emetics. Two compartments should be kept apart
and specially distinguished, viz. the sacred writings under the title of
Restoratives, and the works of the infidels under the denominations of deadly
Poisons: The former will be sovereign in all galloping consumptions of
dissipation, and the latter will be resorted to by none but suicides and
desperadoes.

I should now dismiss the subject, but that I had forgotten to speak of the
Essayists, who from their miscellaneous properties certainly come under the
class of Compounds, and cannot therefore be so precisely specified; as they are
applicable to chronic diseases rather than acute ones, they may very well stand
in the list of Correctors, which taken in a regular course and under proper
regimen are found very efficacious in all cases, where the constitution is
impaired by excess and bad habits of living: They seem most to resemble those
medicinal springs, which are impregnated with a variety of properties, and,
when critically analyzed, are found to contain salt, nitre, steel, sulphur,
chalk and other calcareous particles: When the more respectable names of Bath,
Spa, Pyrmont, Seltzer, and others, are disposed of, I am not without hopes
these humbler essays, which my candid readers are now in the course of taking,
may be found to have the wholesome properties of Tunbridge Waters.

It is supposed that this library of the venerable Osymanduas descended to the
Ptolemies, augmented probably by the intermediate monarchs, and ultimately
brought to perfection by the learned and munificent Philadelphus, son of
Ptolemy Lagus, so well known for his Greek translation of the Hebrew Septuagint.

Little attention was paid to literature by the Romans in the early and more
martial ages: I read of no collections antecedent to those made by Aemilius
Paulus and Lucullus, the latter of whom, being a man of great magnificence,
allowed the learned men of his time to have free access to his library, but
neither in his life time, nor at his death, made it public property. Cornelius
Sylla before his dictatorship plundered Athens of a great collection of books,
which had been accumulating from the time of the tyranny, and these he brought
to Rome, but did not build or endow any library for public use. This was at
last undertaken by Julius Caesar upon an imperial scale not long before his
death, and the learned M. Varro was employed to collect and arrange the books
for the foundation of an ample library; its completion, which was interrupted
by the death of Julius and the civil wars subsequent thereto, was left for
Augustus, who assigned a fund out of the Dalmatian booty for this purpose,
which he put into the hands of the celebrated Asinius Pollio, who therewith
founded a temple to Liberty on Mount Aventine, and with the help of Sylla's and
Varro's collections in addition to his own purchases, opened the first public
library in Rome in an apartment annexed to the temple above mentioned. Two
others were afterward instituted by the same emperor, which he called the
Octavian and Palatine Libraries; the first, so named in honor of his sister,
was placed in the temple of Juno; the latter, as its title specifies, was in
the imperial palace: These libraries were royally endowed with establishments
of Greek and Latin librarians, of which C. Julius Hyginus the grammarian was
one.

The emperor Tiberius added another library to the palace, and attached his new
building to that front which looked toward the Via sacra, in which quarter he
himself resided. Vespasian endowed a public library in the temple of peace.
Trajan founded the famous Ulpian Library in his new forum, from whence it was
at last removed to the Collis Viminalis to furnish the baths of Dioclesian. The
Capitoline Library is supposed to have been founded by Domitian, and was
consumed, together with the noble edifice to which it was attached, by a stroke
of lightning in the time of Commodus. The emperor Hadrian enriched his
favorite villa with a superb collection of books, and lodged them in a temple
dedicated to Hercules. These were in succeeding times so multiplied by the
munificence and emulation of the several emperors, that in the reign of
Constantine, Rome contained no less than twenty-nine public libraries, of which
the principal were the Palatine and Ulpian.

Though books were then collected at an immense expense, several private
citizens of fortune made considerable libraries. Tyrannio the grammarian even
in the time of Sylla was possessed of three thousand volumes; Epaphroditus, a
grammarian also, had in later times collected thirty thousand of the most
select and valuable books; but Sammonicus Serenus bequeathed to the emperor
Gordian a library containing no less than sixty-two thousand volumes. It was
not always a love of literature that tempted people to these expenses, for
Seneca complains of the vanity of the age in furnishing their banqueting rooms
with books, not for use, but for show, and in a mere spirit of profusion. Their
baths, both hot and cold, were always supplied with books to fill up an idle
hour amongst the other recreations of the place; in like manner their country
houses and even public offices were provided for the use and amusement of their
guests or clients.

The Roman libraries in point of disposition much resembled the present fashion
observed in our public ones, for the books were not placed against the walls,
but brought into the area of the room in separate cells and compartments, where
they were lodged in presses: The intervals between these compartments were
richly ornamented with inlaid plates of glass and ivory, and marble
basso-relievos. In these compartments, which were furnished with desks and
couches for the accommodation of readers, it was usual to place the statues of
learned men, one in each; and this we may observe is one of the few elegancies,
which Rome was not indebted to Greece for, the first idea having been started
by the accomplished Pollio, who in his library on Mount Aventine set up the
statue of his illustrious contemporary Varro, even whilst he was living: It was
usual also to ornament the press, where any considerable author's works were
contained, with his figure in brass or plaster of a small size.

There is one more circumstance attending these public libraries, which ought
not to be omitted, as it marks the liberal spirit of their institution: It was
usual to appropriate an adjoining building for the use and accommodation of
students, where every thing was furnished at the emperor's cost; they were
lodged, dieted and attended by servants specially appointed, and supplied with
every thing, under the eye of the chief librarian, that could be wanting,
whilst they were engaged in their studies and had occasion to consult the
books: This establishment was kept up in a very princely style at Alexandria in
particular, where a college was endowed and a special fund appointed for its
support, with a president, and proper officers under him, for the entertainment
of learned strangers, who resorted thither from various parts to consult those
invaluable collections, which that famous library contained in all branches of
science.

No LXVIII.
PEOPLE have a custom of excusing the enormities of their conduct by talking of
their passions, as if they were under the control of a blind necessity, and
sinned because they could not help it. Before any man resorts to this kind of
excuse it behooves him to examine the justice of it, and to be sure that these
passions, which he thus attempts to palliate, are strictly natural, and do not
spring either from the neglect of education or the crime of self-indulgence.

Of our infancy, properly so called, we either remember nothing, or few things
faintly and imperfectly; some passions however make their appearance in this
stage of human life, and appear to be born with us, others are born after us;
some follow us to the grave, others forsake us in the decline of age.

The life of man is to be reviewed under three periods, infancy, youth, and
manhood; the first includes that portion of time before reason shows itself; in
the second it appears indeed, but being incompetent to the proper government of
the creature, requires the aid, support and correction of education; in the
third it attains to its maturity.

Now as a person's responsibility bears respect to his reason, so do human
punishments bear respect to his responsibility: Infants and boys are chastised
by the hand of the parent or the master; rational adults are amenable to the
laws, and what is termed mischief in the first case becomes a crime in the
other. It will not avail the man to plead loss of reason by temporary
intoxication, nor can he excuse himself by the plea of any sudden impulse of
passion. If a prisoner tells his judge that it is his nature to be cruel, that
anger, lust or malice are inherent in his constitution, no human tribunal will
admit the defense; yet thus it is that all people deal with God and the world,
when they attempt to palliate their enormities, by pleading the uncontrollable
propensity of their natural desires, as if the Creator had set up a tyrant in
their hearts, which they were necessitated to obey.

This miserable subterfuge is no less abject than impious; for what can be more
degrading to a being, whose inherent attribute is free-agency and whose
distinguishing faculty is reason, than to shelter himself from the dread of
responsibility under the humiliating apology of mental slavery? It is as if he
should say -- Excuse the irregularities of my conduct, for I am a brute and not
a man; I follow instinct and renounce all claim to reason; my actions govern
me, not I my actions; -- and yet the people, to whom I allude, generally set up
this plea in excuse for those passions in particular, which have their origin
in that stage of life, when the human mind is in the use and possession of
reason; an imposition so glaring that it convicts itself; notwithstanding this
it is too often seen, that whilst the sensualist is avowing the irresistible
violence of his propensities, vanity shall receive it not only as an atonement
for the basest attempts, but as an expected tribute to the tempting charms of
beauty; nay such is the perversion of principle in some men, that it shall pass
with them as a recommendation even of that sex, the purity of whose minds
should be their sovereign grace and ornament.

The passion of fear seems coaeval with our nature; if they, who have our
infancy in charge, suffer this passion to fix and increase upon us; if they
augment our infant fears by invented terrors, and present to our sight
frightful objects to scare us; if they practice on our natural and defenseless
timidity by blows and menaces, and crush us into absolute subjection of spirit
in our early years, a human creature thus abused has enough to plead in excuse
for cowardice; and yet this, which is the strongest defense we can make upon
the impulse of passion, is perhaps the only one we never resort to: In most
other passions we call that constitution, which is only habit.

When we reflect upon the variety of passions, to which the human mind is
liable, it should seem as if reason, which is expressly implanted in us for
their correction and control, was greatly overmatched by such a host of
turbulent insurgents; but upon a closer examination we may find that reason has
many aids and allies, and though her antagonists are also many and mighty, yet
that they are divided and distracted, whilst she can in all cases turn one
passion against another, so as to counterbalance any power by its opposite, and
make evil instruments in her hands conducive to moral ends: Avarice for
instance will act as a counterpoise to lust and intemperance, whilst vanity on
the other hand will check avarice; fear will keep a bad man honest, and pride
will sometimes make a coward brave.

Observe the manners of Palpatius in company with his patron; assiduous,
humble, obliging; for ever smiling, and so supple and obsequious, you would
think he had no will of his own, and was born for the uses and occasions of
others: Follow Palpatius to his house, see him with his wife and children, hear
him dictate to his servants and the needy dependants, who make suit through him
to his principal, you will find all things reversed; the sycophant turns out a
tyrant, and he is only indebted to his hypocrisy for keeping his insolence out
of sight.

Frocax is one of the most dissolute men living; he is handsome, impudent, and
insinuating, qualifications that ensure his success with the ladies: He professed
the most vehement passion for Fulvia; but Fulvia was on the point of marrying
Vetulus, a rich old man, who wanted an heir, and till that event took place she
held out against Procax upon motives of convenience only: Fulvia soon became
the wife of Vetulus; she had no longer any repugnance to be the mistress of
Procax; but the same man, who had pleaded the irresistible violence of his
desires before marriage, now pretended conscience, and drew back from her
advances; nay he did more, he put Vetulus upon his guard, and Fulvia's virtue
was too closely watched to be in any future danger: What sudden change was this
in Procax? Vetulus had no heirs, and Procax had a contingent interest in the
entail of his estate.

Splendida, in one of her morning airings, was solicited for charity by a poor
woman with an infant in her arms. -- It is not for myself, madam, said the
wretched creature, it is for my husband, who lies under that hedge tormented
with a fever, and dying for want of relief. -- Splendida directed her eyes
toward the spot, and saw a sickly object stretched upon the ground, clad in
the tattered regimental of a foot soldier: Her heart was touched, and she drew
out her purse, which was full of guineas: The blood rushed into the beggar's
meagre visage at the sight; Splendida turned over the gold; her hand delayed
for a moment, and the impulse was lost; unhappily for the suppliant, Splendida
was alone and without a witness: She put her hand once more into her pocket,
and, taking out a solitary shilling, dropped it into the shrivelled palm that was
streched out to receive it, and drove on. Splendida returned home, dressed
herself, and went to a certain great lady's assembly; a subscription was put
about for the benefit of a celebrated actress; the lady condescended to receive
subscriptions in person, and delivered a ticket to each contributor: Splendida
drew forth the same purse, and wrapping twenty guineas in a paper, put them
into the hand of the noble beggar: The room rang with applauses of her charity
-- I give it, says she, to her virtues, rather than to her talents; I bestow it
on the wife and mother, not upon the actress. Splendida on her return home took
out her accompt-book, and set down twenty-one pounds one shilling to the
article of charity; the shilling indeed Heaven audited on the score of alms,
the pounds were posted to the account of vanity.

No LXIX.
Favete linguis!
(HORAT.)
AN ingenious author, who some years ago published a volume under the title of
Maxims, Characters, and Reflections, has the following remark: -- You would
know how a man talks to judge of his understanding, and yet possibly (however
great the paradox) the very contrary method might be less fallible; the knowing
how he hears might show it you much better. As I had not seen this book when I
gave my account of Mr. Jedediah Fish's Academy for Hearing, it gave me great
pleasure to fall in with the sentiment of a contemporary, who whilst he mixes
with the world as a man of fashion, reviews the living manners with the
sagacity of a philosopher. I transcribed the whole article, from which the
above passage is extracted, and sent it to Mr. Fish: It will be found in the
author's volume, No LXXI. and is aptly illustrated by two sketches of
character; one of which, called Cleon, is a talker, and Theocles, the other, is
a hearer.

I have been favored with the following answer from Mr. Fish.

SIR,
Yours is received: I approve of the extract, and like the author's manner
well: He deals in ideas rather than in words; some men talk more than they
hear; others write more than they read. As benevolence should act without
display, so good advice should be given in few words.

I send you the following cases according to desire.

A young man, known to his familiars by the name of Jack Chatter, came under my
hands: The symptoms of his disorder may be thus described -- Garrulitas vix
intermissa cum cachinno tantum non continuo. -- Garrulity, attended with
immoderate fits of laughing, is no uncommon case, when the provocation
thereunto springs from jokes of a man's own making; but there was this
peculiarity in Mr. Chatter's disease, that he would laugh where no jest was, or
even at the jests of other people, rather than not laugh at all. I soon
perceived this to be occasioned by exceedingly weak intellects, and an even row
of very white teeth. As his malady would not yield to the ordinary
prescriptions, I was forced to throw him into a regimen of skating, for which
the season was then favorable: The operation succeeded to my warmest wishes,
and the patient was effectually silenced by a happy dislocation of two of his
fore-teeth from a fall on the ice.

Miss Kitty Scandal was put into my hands by her acquaintance in a very
deplorable condition; it was the Cacoethes defamationis scabiosum: The common
antidotes had no effect upon her; I administered detergents out of Miss
Carter's Epictetus and Mrs. Chapone's Letters, but the dose would not stay upon
her stomach; I tried the Pythagorean pill, but with no better success. As the
patient had a remarkable swelling about the waist, which I conceived might
arise from an overflowing of the spleen, I called in my excellent friend Dr.
Ford: The Doctor delivered her of her swelling, and Miss Kitty Scandal has not
been known to open her lips since.

Tom Belfry was the nuisance of society; he applied to me when he was far gone
indeed; he had been black-balled by half the clubs in town, and sent to
Coventry by the other half. I examined his case, and found it under the
following class -- Vox stentoria, sempiterna, cum cerebello vacuo, necnon
auribus obtusis admodum ac inertibus. -- As his organs of speech seemed in want
of immediate modulation, I tried the pitchpipe upon him repeatedly, but the
vehemence of his complaint baffled all my efforts; I could never bring him down
within a full octave of sound health. I was unwilling to proceed to
extremities, till I had done all that my more regular practice could suggest
for his relief; but when I found none but desperate remedies could save him, I
caused a vein to be opened in his right arm, and drew out fourteen ounces of
blood: This was in the month of March last, and the wind was then in the east
with sleet and rain: I immediately ordered the patient to take boat at
Black-friars, and be rowed to Chelsea-Reach and back again in an open wherry:
The expected consequence ensued; a total deprivation of voice took place, and
Mr. Belfry, being no longer able to articulate, is become a very companiable
man, and is now in as much request with his club, as heretofore he was in
disgrace with it.

Counselor Clack is a young man of quick parts, ready wit, and strong
imagination, but sorely troubled with the disease called Lingua volubilis cum
sui ipsius amore nimio et praegravante. -- This patient was radically cured by
a strong dose of his own praises, which I took from his mouth, and made him
swallow grain for grain as he had uttered them: The nausea, occasioned by this
dose, operated so strongly on his constitution, as totally to eradicate all
seeds of self-consequence, and the counselor is become one of the modestest
men, and best hearers in his profession.

Captain Swagger was continually talking of battles, and fieges, and campaigns,
though he had never seen either: He arraigned the conduct of every enterprise;
and proved to demonstration, by the force of oaths, how much better it would
have been managed, had he been the commander: The symptoms were too apparent to
be mistaken -- Os grandiloquum, rotundum, cum dextra bello frigida. -- In this
state of his disorder he was recommended to my care by the officers of his
mess. I found the tumefaction so vehement, that I prescribed an opening by
incision. The captain was accordingly sent out by his commanding officer upon a
scouting-party, and suffered a surprise, which effectually repelled the
tumefaction: Mr. Swagger threw up his commission, and has been a very silent
member of the civil community ever since.

I have sent you these cases out of many, as being peculiar; in common cases,
the general method I take to bring any gentleman to a patient hearing, is to
entertain him with his own commendations: If this simple medicine will not
serve, I am forced to dash it with a few drops of slander, which is the best
appeaser I know; for many of my patients will listen to that, when nothing else
can silence them. This recipe however is not palatable, nor ought it to be used
but with caution and discretion; I keep it therefore in reserve like laudanum
for special occasions. When a patient is far advanced toward his cure, I take
him with me to the gallery of the House of Commons, when certain orators, whom
I have in my eye, are upon their legs to harangue; and I have always found if a
convalescent can hear that, he can hear any thing.

I am, Sir, yours to command, JEDEDIAH FISH.


I am not so partial to my correspondent, as to defend him in all his
proceedings, and I suspect, that, whilst he is laboring to restore his
patients to their ears, he may chance to take away their lives. Men, who act
upon system, are apt to strain it too far; and as prevention is always to be
preferred to remedy, I could wish that parents would take early care to
instruct their children in the art of hearing, if it were only to guard them
against falling into Mr. Fish's hands, when the malady may become stubborn.

I shall suggest one hint in the way of advice to fathers and mothers, which,
if they are pleased to attend to it, may perhaps save some future trouble and
vexation.

I would wish all parents to believe, that the human character begins to fix
itself much earlier in life, than they are generally aware of. There is
something very captivating in the dawning ideas of our children; we are apt to
flatter and caress them for their early vivacity; we tell their smart sayings
and repartees with a kind of triumph even in their presence, and the company we
tell them to are always polite enough to applaud and admire them. By these
means we instill our own vanity into their infant minds, and push their genius
into prematurity. The forwardness, which this practice of our's is sure to
create, passes off agreeably for a time; but, when infancy ceases, it begins to
annoy us, and Miss or Master appear insupportably pert. The parent then finds
himself obliged to turn the other side of his countenance upon the witticisms
of his child; this is not only a painful task, but probably a fruitless one;
for the child by this time has made its party, and can find its admirers
elsewhere: Every obliging visitor makes interest with the clever little
creature; the nursery, the kitchen, the stables echo with applause; it can
chatter, or mimic, or act its tricks before the servants, and be sure of an
audience: The mischief is done, and the parent may snub to no purpose.

Let parents therefore first correct themselves, before they undertake that
office for their children: Education is incompatible with self-indulgence, and
the impulse of vanity is too often mistaken for the impulse of nature: When
Miss is a wit, I am apt to suspect that her mother is not over-wise.

No LXX.
-- Mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur --
(HORAT.) -- The story slily points at you.

PRIDE is never more offensive, than when it condescends to be civil; whereas
vanity, whenever it forgets itself, naturally assumes good humor. Nothing was
ever more agreeable than Vanessa the other night, when I found her in a small
circle over her fireside, where a certain gentleman had taken the whole task
of talking on himself, and left Vanessa nothing else to do, but to show him
just as much attention as served to make him believe she was listening, and
left her at liberty to rest her own imagination in the mean-time.

I found this gentleman at the close of a pathetic narrative he had been giving
of some adventure, which he had met with in his travels, and which he wound up
with saying -- "I am afraid, ladies, this story has made you melancholy." If he
had said weary, he had been nearer to the truth: Methought Vanessa once in her
life forgot her usual politeness, when she answered him -- "Oh! no; not at all"
-- but she was thinking of something else, and the story I should guess had
been very circumstantial; so that I heartily forgave her. The talking gentleman
however was not disposed to take her word, but stuck to his opinion, and had so
much consideration for the company, as to promise them another story, which
should be altogether as diverting, as the former one had been mournful. There
was an effort in the countenance of Vanessa, which convinced me of her
good humor; she strove to welcome this promise with a smile; but it was a
smile, that cost her some pains to produce, and if the talker had possessed but
one grain of intuition, he must have discovered that all such promises out up
performance, and that no story will endure a preface. I felt at that moment all
the awkward embarrassment of his situation, as if it had been my own; and it
was a sensible relief to me, when Vanessa gave a little hitch to her chair, as
if drawing nearer to the story-teller, and at the same time stooping forward,
put herself into a listening attitude. She never appeared so amiable in my
eyes, and I began to take heart -- What pains and trouble, thought I, does this
poor man take to make himself agreeable, when every struggle carries him
further from his point! And how little does he know what an easy thing it is to
those, who have the secret of succeeding without any effort at all! -- I use
almost the very words of a contemporary author, and I am obliged to him for
them.

As for the story, which now followed, there is no occasion to repeat it; if it
had made its entrance without a herald; if it had grown out of the conversation
naturally, and not been grafted in against nature; and if it had been less
prolix, or told with more point, the story had not been amiss; it was a good
one in its own country, but it was lamed in its journey, and Vanessa did not
seem exactly to know when it was finished, until the relater made a second
apostrophe, hoping he had now repaired all former damages, and reinstated the
ladies in their usual good spirits. Vanessa now found it necessary to say
something, and well knowing, without doubt, that people like to be treated as
if they had sensibility, although they have none, she passed a few compliments
upon the story very neatly turned; when an elderly gentleman (who, as I
afterward found out, was father to the talking gentleman) observed to him,
that as he had made us grave, and made us merry, nothing now remained but to
make us wise. -- "And who so fit for that purpose," added he, "as the lady of
the house herself?" Vanessa very aptly replied, that she knew but one way to
impose that belief on the company, and that was by keeping silence. -- "And
what is so edifying," resumed he, "as to keep silence? What is so good a lesson
of wisdom, as to see one, who can talk so well, forbear to do it, until other
tongues have run their course?" -- I stole a glance at the talkative gentleman,
and to my utter surprise he was so far from being sensible of the rebuff, that
he was actually preparing for another onset. -- "What you remark upon silence,"
cried he, "puts me in mind of an admirable story." -- "That may well be,"
answered the old gentleman; "but give me leave first to tell you a story, that
may put you in mind of silence." -- Jupiter and Apollo came down from Olympus
upon a visit to king Midas: Mercury had been dispatched to apprise him of the
guests he was to entertain, and to signify to him, that it was the pleasure of
the gods to be received with no extraordinary honors, but to be considered
only as travelers, who came to pay a visit to his court, and take a view of
his capital. On the day appointed, Jupiter, in the person of an elderly
Athenian gentleman, and Apollo as his son, presented themselves in the great
saloon of the palace: Midas, surrounded by his courtiers, and glittering in his
richest robes, received the gods habited in this simple attire, and unattended.
The injunctions of Mercury were neglected, for the feast was the most sumptuous
that art and luxury could devise; and the gods were disgusted with the vanity
of their host, and the profusion of his entertainment. When Midas had thus
contrived to display the wealth and splendour of his court to his celestial
guests, his next study was to impress them with an opinion of his talents and
accomplishments: He discoursed to Jupiter, without ceasing, upon his maxims and
rules of government; he treated him with innumerable anecdotes and events,
calculated to set off his own wisdom, consequence, and good policy, and of
every tale he made himself the hero. The courtiers kept silence through fear,
the deities through contempt; no voice was heard but the voice of Midas. He had
not the sense to discern the impropriety of his being an incessant talker, when
he ought only to have been a respectful hearer; and so consummate was his
vanity, that having possessed Jupiter with impressions, as he foolishly
imagined, of his wisdom and science, he flattered himself nothing was wanting
but to recommend himself to Apollo by a specimen of his accomplishments in
music and poetry. A band of minstrels were summoned, who performed a kind of
prelude on their harps by way of flourish before the master-artist began, when
Midas, starting from his seat as if with sudden inspiration, seized his lyre,
and struck up a strain, which he accompanied with his voice, whilst his
self-conceit inspired him to believe he could rival Apollo himself in harmony,
and even provoke him to envy.

As soon as Midas laid down his lyre, the gods rose up to depart; when instead
of those applauses which he looked for, and expected as a tribute due to his
art even from the immortals themselves, Jupiter, turning toward him with a
frown, which brought into his countenance the inherent majesty of the
thunderer, thus accosted him -- 'Had you entertained us, O Midas, in the manner
I prescribed, and met the condescension of the gods with the modesty that
becomes a mortal, we had left a blessing with our host, instead of a reproof:
But when you affected to dazzle me, who am myself the dispenser of all mortal
seize, with the vain display of your wealth and wisdom; and when you
rashly assailed the ears of Apollo himself, who presides over music and poetry,
with the barbarous jingle of your lyre, and the hoarse untuneable dissonance of
your voice, you foolishly forgot both yourself and us; and by talking and
singing without intermission, when you should rather have listened to us with
attention, you reverse the application of those faculties I have bestowed upon
you, not considering that when I gave to man two organs of hearing, and only
one of speech, I marked out the use he was to make of those dispensations: To
remind you therefore of my design, and your duty, I shall curtail your tongue,
and lengthen your ears.' -- Jupiter ceased speaking; and whilst the deities
reascended to Olympus, the ears of the monarch sprouted up into the ears of an
ass.



The moral of the fable, and the personal application of it, were too obvious
to be mistaken by any of the company. Vanessa's sensibility suffered visibly on
the occasion; but she soon broke the painful silence, and addressing herself to
the old gentleman -- "I am obliged to you for your fable," says she, "and shall
edify by the moral; but still I cannot help the weakness of a woman, and must
feel a compassion for poor Midas, whose trespass, being of a good-humoured
sort, deserved more mercy than it met with. -- I confess the art of being:
agreeable, frequently miscarries through the ambition which accompanies it.
Wit, learning, wisdom -- what can more effectually conduce to the profit and
delight of society? Yet I am sensible that a man may be too invariably wise,
learned, or witty to be agreeable: And I take the reason of this to be, that
pleasure cannot be bestowed by the simple and unmixed exertion of any one
faculty or accomplishment; if every word a man speaks is to be wit or wisdom,
if he is never to relax either in look or utterance from his superiority of
character, society cannot endure it: The happy gift of being agreeable seems to
consist not in one, but in an assemblage of talents tending to communicate
delight; and how many are there, who by easy manners, sweetness of temper, and
a variety of other undefinable qualities, possess the power of pleasing without
any visible effort, without the aids of wit, wisdom, or learning, nay, as it
should seem, in their defiance; and this without appearing even to know that
they possess it? Whilst another, by laboring to entertain us too well,
entertains us as poor Midas did his visitors."

When Vanessa had done speaking, the hour reminded me that I ought to take my
leave, which I did with regret, repeating to myself as I walked homewards --
This lady should never be seen in a circle.

No LXXI.
AS I was turning over a parcel of old papers some time ago, I discovered an
original letter from Mr. Caswell, the mathematician, to the learned Dr.
Bentley, when he was living in Bishop Stillingfleet's family, enclosing an
account of an apparition taken from the mouth of a clergyman who saw it: In
this account there are some curious particulars, and I shall therefore copy the
whole narrative without any omission, except of the name of the deceased person
who is supposed to have appeared, for reasons that will be obvious.

To the Rev. Mr. Richard Bentley, at my Lord Bishop of Worcester's House in
Park Street, in Westminster, London.
SIR,
When I was in London, April last, I fully intended to have waited upon you
again, as I said, but a cold and lameness seized me next day; the cold took
away my voice, and the other my power of walking, so I presently took coach for
Oxford. I am much your debtor, and in particular for your good intentions in
relation to Mr. D. though that, as it has proved, would not have turned to my
advantage: However, I am obliged to you upon that and other accounts, and if I
had opportunity to show it, you should find how much I am your faithful servant.

I have sent you enclosed a relation of an apparition; the story I had from two
persons, who each had it from the author, and yet their accounts somewhat
varied, and passing through more mouths has varied much more; therefore I got a
friend to bring me to the author at a chamber, where I wrote it down from the
author's mouth; after which I read it to him, and gave him another copy; he
said he could swear to the truth of it, as far as he is concerned: He is the
Curate of Warblington, Batchelour of Arts of Trinity College in Oxford, about
six years standing in the University; I hear no ill report of his behavior
here: He is now gone to his Curacy; he has promised to send up the hands of the
tenant and his man, who is a smith by trade, and the farmer's men, as far as
they are concerned. Mr. Brereton, the Rector, would have him say nothing of the
story, for that he can get no tenant, though he has offered the house for ten
pounds a year less. Mr. P. the former incumbent, whom the apparition
represented, was a man of a very ill report, supposed to have got children of
his maid, and to have murdered them; but I advised the Curate to say nothing
himself of this last part of P. but leave that to the parishioners, who knew
him. Those who knew this P. say he had exactly such a gown, and that he used to
whistle.

Yours, J. CASWELL.
I desire you not to suffer any copy of this to be taken, lest some Mercury
news-teller should print it, till the Curate has sent up the testimony of
others and self.

H. H. Dec. 15, 1695.



NARRATIVE.
At Warblington, near Havant in Hampshire, within six miles of Portsmouth, in
the parsonage house dwelt Thomas Perce the tenant, with his wife and a child, a
manservant Thomas.... and a maidservant. About the beginning of August, Anno
1695, on a Monday, about nine or ten at night, all being gone to bed, except
the maid with the child, the maid being in the kitchen, and having raked up the
fire, took a candle in one hand, and the child in the other arm, and turning
about saw one in a black gown walking through the room, and thence out of the
door into the orchard: Upon this the maid, hasting up stairs, having recovered
but two steps, cried out; on which the master and mistress ran down, found the
candle in her hand, she grasping the child about its neck with the other arm:
She told them the reason of her crying out; she would not that night tarry in
the house, but removed to another belonging to one Henry Salter, farmer; where
she cried out all the night from the terror she was in, and she could not be
persuaded to go any more to the house upon any terms.

On the morrow, (i. e. Tuesday) the tenant's wife came to me, lodging then at
Havant, to desire my advice, and have consult with some friends about it; I
told her I thought it was a flam, and that they had a mind to abuse Mr.
Brereton the Rector, whose house it was; she desired me to come up; I told her
I would come up and sit up or lie there, as she pleased; for then as to all
stories of ghosts and apparitions I was an infidel: I went thither and sat up
the Tuesday night with the tenant and his manservant: About twelve or one
o'clock I searched all the rooms in the house to see if any body were hid there
to impose upon me: At last we came into a lumber-room, there I smiling told the
tenant that was with me, that I would call for the apparition, if there was
any, and oblige him to come: The tenant then seemed to be afraid, but I told
him I would defend him from harm! and then I repeated Barbara, celarent Darii,
etc. jestingly; on this the tenant's countenance changed, so that he was ready
to drop down with fear: Then I told him I perceived he was afraid, and I would
prevent its coming, and repeated Baralipton, etc. then he recovered his spirits
pretty well and we left the room and went down into the kitchen, where we were
before, and sat up there the remaining part of the night and had no manner of
disturbance.

Thursday night the tenant and I lay together in one room and the man in
another room, and he saw something walk along in a black gown and place itself
against a window, and there stood for some time, and then walked off. Friday
morning the man relating this, I asked him why he did not call me, and I told
him I thought that was a trick or flam; he told me the reason why he did not
call me was, that he was not able to speak or move. Friday night we lay as
before, and Saturday night, and had no disturbance either of the nights.

Sunday night I lay by myself in one room (not that where the man saw the
apparition) and the tenant and his man in one bed in another room; and betwixt
twelve and two the man heard something walk in their room at the bed's foot,
and whistling very well; at last it came to the bed's side, drew the curtain
and looked on them; after some time it moved off; then the man called to me,
desired me to come, for that there was something in the room went about
whistling: I asked him whether he had any light or could strike one, he told me
no; then I leapt out of bed, and, not staying to put on my clothes, went out of
my room and along a gallery to the door, which I found locked or bolted; I
desired him to unlock the door, for that I could not get in; then he got out of
bed and opened the door, which was near, and went immediately to bed again; I
went in three or four steps, and, it being a moonshine night, I saw the
apparition move from the bed side, and clap up against the wall that divided
their room and mine: I went and stood directly against it within my arm's
length of it, and asked it in the name of God what it was, that made it come
disturbing of us; I stood some time expecting an answer, and receiving none,
and thinking it might be some fellow hid in the room to fright me, I put out my
arm to feel it, and my hand seemingly went through the body of it, and felt no
manner of substance, till it came to the wall; then I drew back my hand, and
still it was in the same place: Till now I had not the least fear, and even now
had very little; then I adjured it to tell me what it was: When I had said
those words, it, keeping its back against the wall, moved gently along toward
the door: I followed it, and it, going out at the door, turned its back toward
me: It went a little along the gallery; I followed it a little into the
gallery, and it disappeared, where there was no corner for it to turn, and
before it came to the end of the gallery, where was the stairs. Then I found
myself very cold from my feet as high as my middle, though I was not in great
fear; I went into the bed betwixt the tenant and his man, and they complained
of my being exceeding cold. The tenant's man leaned over his master in the bed,
and saw me stretch out my hand toward the apparition, and heard me speak the
words; the tenant also heard the words. The apparition seemed to have a morning
gown of a darkish color, no hat nor cap, short black hair, a thin meagre
visage of a pale swarthy color, seemed to be of about forty-five or fifty
years old; the eyes half shut, the arms hanging down; the hands visible beneath
the sleeve; of a middle stature. I related this description to Mr. John
Lardner, rector of Havant, and to Major Battin of Langstone in Havant parish;
they both said the description agreed very well to Mr. P. a former rector of
the place, who has been dead above twenty years: Upon this the tenant and his
wife left the house, which has remained void since.

The Monday after last Michaelmas-day, a man of Chodson in Warwickshire having
been at Havant fair, passed by the foresaid parsonage-house about nine or ten
at night, and saw a light in most of the rooms of the house; his pathway being
close by the house, he, wondering at the light, looked into the kitchen window,
and saw only a light, but turning himself to go away, he saw the appearance of
a man in a long gown; he made haste away; the apparition followed him over a
piece of glebe land of several acres, to a lane, which he crossed, and over a
little meadow, then over another lane to some pales, which belong to farmer
Henry Salter my landlord, near a barn, in which were some of the farmer's men
and some others; this man went into the barn, told them how he was frighted and
followed from the parsonage-house by an apparition, which they might see
standing against the pales, if they went out; they went out, and saw it scratch
against the pales, and make a hideous noise; it stood there some time and then
disappeared; their description agreed with what I saw. This last account I had
from the man himself, whom it followed, and also from the farmer's men.

THO. WILKINS, Curate of W.
Dec. 11, 1695, Oxon.
I shall make no remark upon this genuine account, except as to the passage
which I have put in italics: If Mr. Wilkins was thoroughly possessed of himself
at that moment, as he deposes, and is strictly correct in his fact, the
narrative is established.

No LXXII.
I SHALL now proceed to lay before the public, such an account as I have been
enabled to collect of the several Greek writers of comedy.

The learned reader needs not to be informed, how little is to be found in
Aristotle's Poetics on the subject of comedy; that treatise by no means answers
to the general profession of its title; if it had come down to us as perfect
and entire, as it probably was when the author put the last hand to it, and
presented a correct copy of his work to Alexander, we might conclude otherwise
of it; but to speak of it as it is, we can call it nothing more than a
dissertation upon tragedy, in which many things are evidently out of place and
order, some no doubt lost, and others mutilated: It is thus considered by the
learned commentator Daniel Heinsius, who in his supplementary treatise annexed
to his edition, professedly speaks only of the construction of tragedy, and
endeavors with great diligence and perspicuity to methodize the whole work,
and dispose his author's system into some order and regularity.

With the exception of a few obvious remarks upon the epic, as tending to
illustrate the drama, and two or three passages where comedy is spoken of only
as contrasted with tragedy, the whole of this celebrated dissertation is
nothing more than a set of rules for the drama, which are mere transcripts from
the compositions of the great writers of the Homeric tragedy, Aeschylus,
Sophocles, and Euripides: He analyzes and defines a poem, then actually carried
to its perfection; but gives no new lights, no leading instructions, for the
furtherance and improvement of what had not arrived to the like state of
maturity.

With the remains of the three tragic poets above mentioned in our hands, I
profess I do not see how we are edified by Aristotle's dissertation, which
offers nothing but what occurs upon the reading of their dramas; unless
posterity had seen fit to abide by the same laws, which they observed, and the
modern tragedy had been made exactly to conform to the Greek model.

Aristotle, as we have before remarked, speaks of no comedy antecedent to the
comedy of Epicharmus: There is reason to think that this author did not fall in
with the personal comedy in the licentious manner it prevailed upon the
Athenian stage, even to the time of Aristotle; for it was not reformed there,
till the personal satirists were awed into better respect by the Macedonian
princes, who succeeded to Alexander; whereas Epicharmus wrote for the court of
an absolute prince.

Now it is remarkable, that Aristotle makes no strictures upon the
licentiousness of the Athenian comedy, nor offers any rules for the correction
of the stage, though the schools proscribed it, and the tribunals were at open
hostility with it. It is plain he states things as they were, not as they ought
to have been; for he pronounces of comedy -- that it is a picture of human
nature, worse and more deformed than the original.

I cannot hold this to be a just character of comedy, as it stood at the time
when Aristotle pronounced it: The only entire comedies we have to refer to, are
a contradiction to the assertion; for no one will contend that the corrupt and
abominable manners of the times in which Aristophanes wrote, did not fully
warrant the severity of his satire, or that his characters of depravity are in
general overcharged, and his pictures of human nature more deformed than their
originals. As for the rest of the comic fraternity, their fragments only can
plead for them; but they are fragments of such a nature, as prove them to have
been moralists of the sublimest sort, and they have been collected, translated,
and applauded, by the gravest and most sententious of the Christian writers for
many ages. I will venture to say, that in these scattered relics of the comic
stage, more useful knowledge and good sense, better maxims for right conduct in
life, and a more generous display of benevolence, justice, public spirit, and
all the moral virtues of natural religion are to be found, than in all the
writings of the philosophers, which are so much more entire.

Socrates, it is true, could hardly be prevailed upon to enter the comic
theater, but I infer very little against the poets on that account; Plato, I am
aware, though an intimate of Aristophanes, banished the drama out of his
visionary republic; but what is that more than to say, that if all men were
virtuous there would be no need of satirists? The comic poets in return lashed
the philosophers over the stage, and they had what they merited, the public
applause on their side; the schools and academies of sophists furnished an
inexhaustible fund for wholesome ridicule; their contradictory first
principles, their demons and clouds, and water and fire, with all their idle
systems and hypotheses, their fabulous conceits, dreams and devices to catch
the vulgar, and the affected rigor of their manners, whilst in secret they
were addicted to the grossest debauchery and impurity, were continual subjects
of satire; and if hypocrisy is not the comic poet's lawful game, what is? There
is not a play of Aristophanes to be named, in which these sanctified sinners
have not their share in the ridicule; and amongst the fragments above
mentioned, a very large proportion falls to their lot.

Aristotle, who had very little feeling for Plato and his academy, or indeed
for practical philosophy in general (which he seems to have professed only in
opposition to Xenocrates) concerned himself no further about the state of the
stage, than to comment and remark upon the tragedies of the three chief writers
above mentioned; and it is humiliating enough to the pride of criticism to
observe, that tragedy, after all his pains to hold it up to the standard of
Sophocles and Euripides, sunk with those authors, and was no more heard of;
whilst comedy, without his help, and in defiance of his neglect, rose in credit
with the world, till it attained perfection under the auspices of Menander.

I have spoken of tragedy as a written poem before comedy of the same
description, because I think that Susarion did not write comedy, though he
acted it so early as the fiftieth Olympiad; and I also think that Thespis did
write tragedy in the sixty-first Olympiad, if not sooner; in other words,
although the complexion of the original drama was comic in the most extravagant
degree, yet it appears probable that tragedy had the start in point of
publication. The nature of the first comedy, compared with that of the first
tragedy, seems to warrant this opinion; for it is easy to suppose that the
raillery and satire of the village masks, which would pass off at a lawless
festival, spoken off-hand and without the malice of premeditation, would not so
readily have been committed to writing by the poet, as the tragic drama; which
being composed in honor of deceased heroes, or on religious and grave
subjects, not only called for greater deliberation on the part of the author,
but would also be made public without danger or offense.

It now remains to enquire into the chronology of the written comedy.

I have already observed, that Aristotle ascribes the first written comedy to
Epicharmus.

Both Aristotle and Horace call him a Sicilian, but in what particular place he
was born is not agreed; some contend that he was a Syracusan, some that he was
a native of Crastum, others of Megara in Sicily: Diomedes the grammarian says
he was born in Cos, and derives the word comedy from the name of that island, a
derivation that sets aside his authority altogether. The father of Epicharmus
was named Chimarus, or according to others Tityrus, and his mother Sicida.
Cicero in his Tusculans calls him, acutum nec insulsum hominem: Demetrius
Phaleraeus celebrates him for the elegant and apposite choice of his epithets,
on which account the Greeks gave the name of Epicharmion to his style, making
it proverbial for its beauty and purity. It is difficult to fix the precise
time when he began to write comedy, especially as he lived to the great age of
ninety-seven: It is certain however he was still writing in the reign of Hiero,
in or about Olymp. LXXIV. at which time Phormis also wrote comedy in Sicily;
and Chionides, Dinolochus and Magnes, comic poets, flourished at Athens.

Suidas's chronology does not agree with Aristotle's, for he makes Chionides
antecedent to Epicharmus, and calls him the first writer of comedy; adding,
that Evetes, Euxenides and Mylus, all Athenians, were his contemporaries; he
allows, however, that Epicharmus and Phormis were the first writers in the
island of Sicily; but this is in the vague manner of his dates, and not to be
relied upon: He takes no notice of Aristotle's express assertion, that
Epicharmus was long senior to Chionides; and yet he might have recollected,
that facts are so far in favor of Aristotle's chronology of these poets, that
there is a title upon record of one of Chionides's plays called The Persians,
which must have been posterior to the Persian era, when it is on all hands
agreed that Epicharmus was living.

Amongst the epigrams of Theocritus, published by Henry Stevens in 1579, there
are some lines upon Epicharmus, which appear to have been inscribed upon the
pedestal of a statue of brass, which the Syracusans had set up in his honor as
their fellow-citizen: It consists of ten lines in the Doric dialect, which he
used; it settles the point of his birth, expressly saying he was a Syracusan,
and ascribes to him the invention of Comedy -- -- (...)
(...)
Epicharmus, the man who invented Comedy. In the conclusion, it celebrates him
for the many useful maxims which he gave for the instruction of youth; but this
I am disposed to think may apply to the circumstance of his having been a
schoolmaster at Syracuse; for if we are to take our judgment of Epicharmus's
drama from his imitator Plautus, perhaps its morality, though not to be
overlooked amongst other excellencies, is nevertheless not the most striking
feature in its character. And though it is probable that Epicharmus did not
launch out into that personality, which the freer Athenians indulged to such
excess, yet I can suppose him to have been not very chaste in his dialogue,
from the anecdote which Plutarch gives us, of his being heavily fined and
compelled to manual labor by order of Hiero for certain obscene jests, which
he suffered to pass in hearing of his queen: I must ground another remark upon
this anecdote, respecting the time in which he is generally thought to have
struck out his comedy, as being long antecedent to the time of Hiero; which
being admitted, it will follow that he was near the close of his life, when
this sentence of manual labor was executed upon him; a kind of punishment so
very unlikely to be inflicted on a man of ninety-six years by a prince of
Hiero's magnanimity and benevolence, that if I am to take the anecdote for
granted, I cannot assent to those authorities that have placed him so high in
time, for the purpose only of putting his title of first founder of comedy out
of dispute.

Upon the whole, I think it likely the Athenians wrote comedy as soon as the
Sicilians, but that Epicharmus was the first, who formed his drama upon the
poems of Homer: It is also clear, that his countryman and contemporary Phormis
wrote comedy as soon, or nearly as soon as he did; for although Theocritus, in
the epigram above cited, says expressly that Epicharmus struck out comedy, yet
it must be remarked that Theocritus was a Syracusan by birth, living in the
time of Ptolemy Lagus; and in giving this testimony for his fellow-citizen, it
is more than probable he spoke locally of the Sicilian comedy only, as Suidas
did in after times, when he said that Epicharmus and Phormis first struck out
comedy in Sicily.

I would therefore fix Epicharmus's first comedy antecedent to Olymp. LXXV. at
the lowest date, because we have it from good authority that he was teaching
scholars at Syracuse four years before the Persian era; and this date is
confirmed by the age of Phormis, who certainly flourished in the time of Gelon,
and was in great favor in the court of that prince, who was predecessor to
Hiero, and was succeeded by him in Olymp. LXXVII.

No LXXIII.
EPICHARMUS was a liberal benefactor to the stage. Porphyry says that
Apollodorus the grammarian made a collection of his plays in ten volumes;
Suidas reckons fifty-two; Lycon only thirty-five; but modern philologists have
given the titles of forty, with the authorities by which they are ascertained.

It is not my purpose in these papers to make a practice of loading the page
with lists of titles, which may too truly be called dead names; but in the
instance of an author like Epicharmus, who stands at the head of his
department, every relic seems an object of some curiosity; and therefore,
although the following catalogue may strike the dramatic reader as what may
properly enough be called a beggarly account of empty boxes, yet I shall
proceed to enumerate the titles of forty comedies, all of which are, upon good
grounds of criticism, ascribed to this celebrated author.

TITLES OF THE COMEDIES OF EPICHARMUS.
The Husbandman. The Halcyon. Amycus, Son of Neptune. The Banditti. Atalanta.
The Bacchae. Busiris. Earth and Sea. The Fathers of the People. The
Bacchanalians. Diphilus. Hope. The Festival. The Celebration of the Victory.
Hebe's Wedding. Juno's Nuptials. Vulcan, or The Revells. The Ambassadors to the
Oracle. The Cyclops. The Reasoner. The Megarensian. The Muses. The Islands.
Niobe's Wedding. Ulysses the Deserter. Ulysses Shipwreckt. The Chitterlings.
The Paedagogues. The Paragon. The Persians. The Statesman. Prometheus, the
Fire-stealer. Pyrrha, the Wife of Deucalion. The Sirens. The Isle of Scyros.
The Sphynx. The Trojans. Philoctetes. The Chorus Troop. The Potters.
The same respect, which led me to insert these titles, led me also to search
with all possible diligence for every fragment which I could find of
Epicharmus. I wish they had been more in number, and of greater importance than
they are; but such as they are, I have reason to believe they are the whole
amount of what can be picked up from the wreck of this once valuable poet. The
reader must not expect, that either in this author's instance, or that of any
other Greek comedian, except in very few cases, that the particular play can be
ascertained, to which the fragments belong; for the grammarians and others, who
quote them, only give the name of the author, and not that of the comedy from
which they extract them. I must in this place once for all give vent to an
anxiety, which presses on my mind respecting these fragments of the Greek
comedy, whether the insertion of them will or will not be approved of by the
generality of my readers: My sole object is to furnish them with rational and
moral amusement, and if I fail of that object in these my hearty endeavors, I
have taken a great deal of pains to render these passages into English in the
best manner my capacity enabled me to do, to a very unfortunate purpose indeed.
The learned reader will bear me witness, that these fragments have been the
admiration of ages; and I am sensible that very many of them possess intrinsic
beauty both of style and sentiment; and if my translations have not robbed them
of their original merit, some pleasure, and let me hope some profit, may attend
their perusal. I have studied so to class them, as not to burden or distract
the reader with a mere succession of miscellaneous quotations without any
reference or connection, which I am sensible could not be an agreeable mode of
publication, though Stobaeus, Hertelius and some others have taken it up; but
on the contrary, I have endeavored to introduce them with some anecdote or
other, which serves to weave them into the thread of the work. Most of the
translations will be found in meter, in which I have strove to copy the free
style of our old metrical comic poets: Some I have turned into rhyme, where the
thought allowed it, and the expressions were terse and epigrammatical: Others I
have put into prose; and in all I have been as close and faithful to the
original, as the language and my construction of the author would permit. If
the candid reader will accept this preface in apology, I shall give him no
further trouble on the subject.

Epicharmus, in one of his comedies (we may suppose The Statesman) introduces
the following retort from some man of low birth to a prating old woman, who is
vapouring about her ancestry.

Good gossip, if you love me, prate no more:
What are your genealogies to me?
Away to those, who have more need of them!
Let the degenerate wretches, if they can,
Dig up dead honor from their father's tombs,
And boast it for their own -- Vain, empty boast!
When every common fellow, that they meet,
If accident has not cut off the scroll,
Can show a list of ancestry as long.
You call the Scythians barbarous, and despise them;
Yet Anacharsis was a Scythian born;
And every man of a like noble nature,
Though he were molded from an Aethiop's loins,
Is nobler than your pedigrees can make him.

The following is a false antithesis, in which bodily strength is substituted
for mental -- It demands the strength of a lion to subdue the weakness of love.

MORAL MAXIMS.
Be sober in thought! be slow in belief! These are the sinews of wisdom.

It is the part of a wise man to foresee what ought to be done, so shall he not
repent of what is done.

Throw not away thine anger upon trifles! Reason, and not rage, should govern.

Mankind are more indebted to industry than to ingenuity: The gods set up their
favors at a price, and industry is the purchaser.

A man without merit, shall live without envy; but who would wish to escape on
these terms?

Live so as to hold yourself prepared either for a long life, or for a short
one!

There is no subject, which the comic poets whet their wits upon more
frequently than marriage. The wives of Syracuse were not much obliged to
Epicharmus for the following sally.

Marriage is like a cast of the dice: If you get a wife of good morals and a
quiet temper withal, happy is your lot: If you light upon a gadding,
gossipping, extravagant hussy, it is not a wife you wed, but an eternal plague
in the apparel of a woman. There is not in the habitable globe so dire a
torment; I feel it to my sorrow; the better luck is his, who has never tried
it. Mr. Congreve, in his Double Dealer, has the following passage between
Mellafont and Cynthia upon the very eve of their nuptials.

Cynth. Then I find marriage is like cards; if either of us have a good hand,
it is an accident of fortune.


Mell. No, marriage is rather like a game at bowls: Fortune indeed makes the
match, and the two nearest, and sometimes the two farthest are together; but
the game depends entirely upon judgment.


Cynth. Still it is a game, and consequently one of us must be a loser.


Mell. Not at all; only a friendly trial of skill, and the winnings to be laid
out in an entertainment.


Neither this, nor any part of the scene to which it appertains, is in Mr.
Congreve's best manner: The wit does not flow, but is pumped up with labor,
and not very clean when it comes.

Of Phormis, the contemporary of Epicharmus, no fragments are to be found.

Chionides of Athens wrote comedy before the Persian era, and is the oldest
writer of the Athenian stage. All the memorials I can obtain of him are, that
he wrote three plays, entitled, The Heroes, The Liars and The Poor Men.

Magnes was an Athenian, and began to appear as a writer of comedy, whilst
Chionides was living: Aristophanes makes mention of him in his play of The
Knights. The Scholiast in his comment on the passage observes, that all his
works are perished, nothing remaining but the titles of nine comedies, of which
two bear the same names with two of Aristophanes, viz. The Frogs, and The
Birds; the same Scholiast informs us that Magnes bore away two prizes.

Dinolochus was contemporary with Magnes: He used the Doric dialect, and is
said to have produced fourteen plays. Some place his birth at Syracuse, others
at Agrigentum. Suidas says he flourished so early as Olymp. LXXIII. but this
ill agrees with the circumstance of his being the son, or as others contend,
the scholar of Epicharmus. His works have totally perished.

These five poets, three of whom were Sicilians, must be called The Fathers of
Comedy, and all that now remains of them is comprised in the few short passages
here inserted.

Whilst their comedies were in representation, tragedy was advancing under
Pratinas and Chaerilus, and Aeschylus had already taken possession of the
stage: Sophocles and Euripides were born, the former six years before the
latter: Ion, surnamed Xuthis, son of Orthomenes of Chios, began to write
tragedy in the first year of Olymp. LXXXII. Aeschylus being then dead.
Theognis, (from the coldness of his drama nicknamed Snow) was contemporary with
Ion.

The magistracy of Athens in Olymp. LXXXV. when Myrrichides was archon,
published a decree, prohibiting the representation of comedies in Athens: This
decree held in force only two years under Glaucides and Theopompus; for when
Euthymenes succeeded to that annual dignity, he found it expedient to gratify
the people by a revocation of the edict, and the comic muse was reinstated on
the stage by the celebrated triumvirate of Eupolis, Cratinus and Aristophanes;
Cratinus opening the theater with his celebrated comedy of The Winter
Amusements, Eupolis with The New Moons, and Aristophanes with The Acharnensians.

No LXXIV.
CRATINUS, Eupolis and Aristophanes are generally classed together as rivals
and principals in what is called The Old Comedy. Cratinus was senior in age to
both his competitors, and Eupolis is charged by the old annotator upon
Aristophanes of having copied from him very freely: I confess this is stubborn
authority, and yet it seems hard to believe that Eupolis, who was so constantly
engaged in competition with his rival, should expose himself to certain
detection of so disgraceful a sort; and had it been so, I should rather have
expected to meet with the charge in the text of Aristophanes, than in the
comment; I must add, that upon the closest search I can find nothing that
favors this imputation in any other author which speaks of Eupolis, but many
circumstances on the contrary which seem to place his pretensions to
originality on as good ground, as that of his contemporaries, with whom he is
equally celebrated.

These poets were in high favor with the people on account of the boldness and
personality of their satire, and for the same reason proportionably obnoxious
to the nobles and magistrates, whom they lashed without mercy. Aristophanes was
much the least bitter of the three, and yet we have some smart specimens of his
severity. Persius seems to make this distinction in the following passage --
Audaci quicunque afflate Cratino,
Iratum Eupolidem praegrandi cum seen palles,
Aspice et haec.
In these lines he characterizes Cratinus and Eupolis by the epithets of audax
and iratus, whereas he introduces Aristophanes under the description only of
praegrandis senex, which is interpreted to refer to the superior gravity and
dignity of his style.

Horace, in the fourth satire of his first book, instances these three poets by
pre-eminence from amongst all the writers of the old comedy. Eupolis atque
Cratinus Aristophanesque poetae,
Atque alii, quorum comoedia prisca virorum est,
Si quis erat dignus describi, quod malus ac fur,
Quod maechus foret, aut sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabant.
The comic poets, in its earliest age,
Who formed the manners of the Grecian stage,
Was there a villain, who might justly claim
A better right of being damned to fame,
Rake, cutthroat, thief, whatever was his crime,
They freely stigmatized the wretch in rhyme.
(FRANCIS.) It appears by this quotation, that Horace does not consider their
comedy in the same light with Aristotle, as if they represented human nature in
worse colors than it deserved.

Quintilian expressly says, that these are the chief writers of the old comedy
-- Plures ejus auctores; Aristophanes tamen e^ Eupolis, Cratinusque praecipui:
-- And he recommends the old Greek comedy, and these authors in particular, as
the best model (Homer only excepted) for his orator to form himself upon;
inasmuch as it is there only he will find the Attic style in its purity and
perfection; and though the old comedy, as he observes, is chiefly occupied in
wit and sarcasm for the purpose of chastising vice, yet it has many excellences
of a more general sort: It is energetic, elegant, and full of graces; so that
if Homer alone (who like his own Achilles has the privilege of being always put
above comparison) be excepted, no other school for oratory can come in
competition with this.

CRATINUS.
Cratinus was the son of Callimedes an Athenian; we have the titles of at least
thirty comedies of his writing, so that Suidas is mistaken in ascribing to him
only twenty-one; he was a poet of strong imagination, and a florid lively
style; he carried away no less than nine prizes, which is a large proportion of
success, compared with others, who rank amongst the highest both in the comic
and tragic line. A second edict came out in his time for restraining the
licentiousness of the stage in point of personality, and Cratinus, in common
with the rest of his contemporaries, found himself obliged to divert his satire
from the living to the dead: Sarcasms were now levelled at men's productions,
not at their persons; the tragic authors felt the chief weight of the attack,
though even Homer did not escape, as may be gathered from The Ulysses of
Cratinus, in which he parodies and ridicules the Odyssey.

Cratinus lived to an extreme old age, though according to the loose morals of
the Greeks he indulged his passions both natural and unnatural without
restraint: He carried his love of wine to such excess, that he got the name of
(...), launching out in praise of drinking, and rallying all sobriety out of
countenance, asserting that no author can be good for any thing, who does not
love his bottle, and that dramatic poets in particular ought to drink hard, as
a duty due to Bacchus for his peculiar patronage and protection of the stage.
Horace, who was not very averse from his doctrine, quotes his authority in the
first lines of an epistle to Mecaenas.

Prisco si credis, Mecaenas docte, Cratino,
Nulla placere diu nec vivere carmina possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.
O learned Mecaenas, hear Cratinus speak,
And take this maxim from the gay old Greek;
No verse shall please, or lasting honors gain,
Which coldly flows from water-drinker's brain.
As for the love of wine, it seems to have stood in the place of a merit with
the Greeks; but Cratinus's excess was attended in his old age with some marks
of weakness and want of retention, incidental to an exhausted constitution,
which gave a handle to Aristophanes, who was a younger man (and not much more
abstemious) to bring his old competitor on the stage, and hold him up to
ridicule for this infirmity. The charge was unmanly, and roused the aged
veteran to return the attack: Cratinus, then nearly approaching to an hundred,
had left off writing, but he was not yet superannuated, and lived to complete a
comedy, which he appositely entitled The Flaggon. In the plot of this piece he
feigns himself married to Comedy, whom he personifies, and represents the lady
in disgust with her husband for his unconjugal neglect, on which account she
states her charge, and roundly sues for an actual divorce: Upon this hearing,
certain friends and advocates are introduced on the scene in behalf of the
party accused, who make suit to the dame to stay her proceedings, and not be
overhasty in throwing off an old spouse; but on the contrary recommend to her
to enter calmly into an amicable discussion of her grievances: To this proposal
she at length accedes, and this gives occasion to take up the charge of
Aristophanes, accusing the old bard of drunkenness and the concomitant
circumstances, which had been published with so much ill nature to make him
ridiculous at the end of life. Then follows a very pleasant refutation of all
these libels, by which he contrives to turn the laugh against Aristophanes, and
so concludes the comedy. One feels a satisfaction even at this distance of ages
to know, that the old poet bore away the prize with this very comedy, and soon
after expired in the arms of victory at the age of ninety-seven, in the first
year of Olymp. LXXXIX.

The Athenians gave him a monument, and an epitaph, in which they omit all
mention of his fine talents, and record nothing but his drunkenness. He spared
no man when living, and even death itself could not protect him from
retaliation.

(...)
(STESICHORUS.) The evil that he did lived after him,
The good was all interred with his bones.
(SHAKESPEARE.) There is scarce a fragment of this poet, once so great a
favorite, that is now to be found; the very few scraps of sentences remaining
are too imperfect to merit a translation: One little spark of his genius
however will be seen in the following epigrammatic turn of thought upon the
loss of a statue, which being the workmanship of Daedalus, he supposes to have
made use of its privilege, and escaped from its pedestal.

My statue's gone! By Daedalus 'twas made.
It is not stolen therefore; it has strayed.
EUPOLIS.
Eupolis became a very popular author some years before the death of Cratinus:
The bold strong spirit of his satire recommended him to the public more than
the beauties and graces of his style, which he was not studious to polish. He
attacked the most obnoxious and profligate characters in Athens, without any
regard to his personal safety; to expose the cheat, and ridicule the impostor
was the glory of his muse, and neither the terrors of the magistracy, nor the
mysteries of superstition could divert him from it. He wrote two comedies
professedly against Autolycus the Areopagite, whose misbehaviour in the
Chaeronensian war had made him infamous, and he called them after his name The
first and second Autolycus. In his famous comedy called The Baptae he inveighs
against the effeminate turpitude of his countrymen, whom he exhibits dancing
after the manner of the lascivious priests of Cotytto (viz. the Baptae) in the
habits and fashion of female minstrels.

Talia secreta coluerunt orgia teda
Cecropiam soliti Baptae lassare Cotytto.
(JUVEN.) The prevailing account of his death is, that the persons, whom he had
satirized in this play of the Baptae, suborned certain assassins to throw him
into the sea, as he was passing the Hellespont with the Athenian forces then on
an expedition against the Lacedaemonians; and several authorities impute this
revengeful deed to Alcibiades, who had been severely handled in that piece; but
Cicero in his first epistle of the sixth book to Atticus speaks of this report
as a vulgar error, and quotes Eratosthenes for the fact of Eupolis having
written certain comedies after the time, when the event of his death is dated
-- redarguit Eratosthenes; affert enim quas ille post id tempus fabulas
docuerit.

Pausanias tells us, that his tomb was erected upon the banks of the Aesopus in
Sicyonia, and as it is not likely this honor should be paid to his memory by
the Sicyonians, he being an Athenian born, unless he had died in their country;
the authority of Pausanias seems to confirm the account of Eratosthenes, and
discredit the fable of his being thrown into the Hellespont.

In his comedy called The People, by the fiction of the scene he raises the
shades of their departed orators and daemagogues from the dead; and when
Pericles, last of the troop, arises, the poet demands, "Who it is that
appears?" The question being answered, and the spirit of Pericles dismissed, he
pronounces his encomium -- "That he was pre-eminent as an orator, for man never
spoke as he spoke: When he started like a courser in the race, he threw all
competitors out of sight, so rapid was the torrent of his eloquence; but with
that rapidity there slowed such sweetness and persuasion from his lips, that He
alone of all orators struck a sting into the very souls of his hearers, and
left it there to remain for ever."

I think it probable the following fragment has been the opening speech of this
very comedy; for in it he addresses the People, and complains of the preference
they are apt to bestow upon foreigners, to the neglect of their own countrymen
-- "Receiving every thing with favor that falls from their lips, and
applauding them as oracles of human wisdom; whereas, if any one of your own
countrymen addresses you (though in no respect their inferior) you look down
upon him with contempt; nay, you are ready to pronounce that the man is in his
dotage; a fool who never had senses, or a madman who has lost them -- but hark
ye, gentlemen! let me have a word with you at starting; let me prevail with you
to revoke these unjust proceedings, and give a fellow-citizen and your humble
servant a fair hearing and impartial judgment."

I suspect this to be a fly blow at Aristophanes, who was not an Athenian born,
and perhaps at this time had not his adoption. He proceeds to lament the state
of public affairs, and the degeneracy of the times; for in the old comedy it
was usual for the poet to harangue the theater, either in the opening of the
piece, or at any convenient interval between the scenes, sometimes in his own
person, sometimes by the mouth of the chorus. We cannot wonder if such
sentiments as the following, delivered from the stage, should render Eupolis
obnoxious to men in power.

Address to the Audience by Eupolis.
Of many things, which offer themselves to my consideration, I cannot find
words to speak, so penetrated am I with affliction, when I turn my thoughts to
the condition of the commonwealth; for you must be conscious, O citizens, it
was not so administered in times past, when men of high birth, men, whose rank,
fortune and merit gave them a consideration in the state, filled the first
offices of government: To such we deferred, as to the deities themselves; for
they merited our respect, and under their protection we enjoyed security: Now
we have no other guide in our election but blind ignoble chance, and on
whatsoever head it falls, though he be the worst and meanest of mankind, he
starts up a great man at once, and is installed with all proper solemnity a
rogue in state.

Here the poet speaks out of the rostrum rather than from the stage: This is
plain bold language; and tempts me to call our countryman Ben Jonson on the
scene, who was deep in all these remnants of the old Greek poets, and
frequently talks the very language of the Athenian theater.

Asper, in character of Presenter of the play, thus opens the comedy of Every
Man out of his Humor. Address to the Audience by B. Jonson.
Away!
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or rein his tongue? --
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? Not I; my soul
Was never ground into such oily colors,
To flatter vice and dawb iniquity:
But with an armed and resolved hand
I Will strip the ragged follies of the time,
Naked as at their birth --
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased to unmask a public vice.
I fear no strumpet's drugs, nor ruffian's stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries:
No broker's, usurer's, or lawyer's gripe,
Were I disposed to say, They Are all corrupt.
I fear no courtier's frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hams.
Tut! these are so innate and popular,
That drunken custom would not shame to laugh
In scorn at him, that should not dare to tax them.
etc. etc.
This is the very spirit of the old Greek comedy, speaking through the organs
of our English Aristophanes, and old Ben fills the character of the praegrandis
senex, as well as he for whom it was designed. It is the Comoedia, vocem
tollens, and asserting her determination to keep up her rights according to
ancient custom of her founders -- Siquis erat dignus describi. -- In the third
year of Olymp. LXXXIX. which was two years after the decease of Cratinus,
Eupolis acted his comedy called The Flatterers, Alcaeus being archon. I cannot
doubt but the following is a fragment of this comedy; it is a part of the
speech of a parasite, and runs over a few of the arts, by which he gulls the
rich boobies that fall in his way.

The Parasite of Eupolis.
Mark now, and learn of me the thriving arts,
By which we parasites contrive to live:
Fine rogues we are, my friend (of that be sure)
And daintily we gull mankind. -- Observe!
First I provide myself a nimble thing
To be my page, a varlet of all crafts;
Next two new suits for feasts and gala-days,
Which I promote by turns, when I walk forth
To sun myself upon the public square:
There if perchance I spy some rich dull knave,
Strait I accost him, do him reverence,
And, saunt'ring up and down, with idle chat
Hold him awhile in play; at every word,
Which his wise worship utters, I stop short
And bless myself for wonder; if he ventures
On some vile joke, I blow it to the skies,
And hold my sides for laughter -- Then to supper
With others of our brotherhood to mess
In some night-cellar on our barley cakes,
And club inventions for the next day's shift.

The Parasite of Ben Jonson.
MOSCA. -- Oh! your parasite
Is a most precious thing, dropped from above,
Not bred amongst clods and clot-poles here on earth.
I muse the mystery was not made a science,
It is so liberally professed. Almost
All the wise world is little else in nature
But parasites and sub-parasites. And yet
I mean not those, that have your bare town-art,
To know who is fit to feed them; have no house,
No family, no care, and therefore mould
Tales for men's ears, to bait that sense -- nor those,
With their court dog-tricks, that can fawn and fleer,
Make their revenue out of legs and faces,
Echo, My Lord, and lick away a moth;
But your fine elegant rascal, that can rise,
And stoop almost together like an arrow,
Shoot through the air as nimbly as a star,
Turn short as does a swallow, and be here,
And there, and here, and yonder all at once;
Present to any humor, all occasion,
And change a visor swifter than a thought;
This is the creature had the art born with him.

Lucian's Parasite, which is a masterpiece of character and comic writing, and
Horace's dialogue between Tiresias and Ulysses (which is the fifth satire of
the second book) might perhaps be traced in passages of this comedy of Eupolis,
if we had it entire.

Eupolis in his Lacedaemonians attacks both the public and private character of
Cimon, charging him with improper partiality for the Lacedaemonians, with
drunkenness, and even with an incestuous commerce with his own sister Pnyce:
Plutarch takes notice of this attack, and says it had a great effect in
stirring up the populace against this celebrated commander.

He wrote his comedy, entitled Marica, against the orator Hyperbolus, whom
Thucydides mentions to have been banished by Ostracism.

We have the titles of upwards of twenty plays of this author's composition.

No LXXV.
ARISTOPHANES.
Ut templum charites, quod non labatur, haberent, invenere tuum pectus,
Aristophanes.

(JOS. SCALIGER EX PLATONE.)
THIS is an eulogy the more honorable to Aristophanes, as it fell from Plato,
the disciple of Socrates. If I were to collect all the testimonies, that are
scattered through the works of the learned in behalf of the author we are now
about to review, I should fill my pages with panegyric; but this I am the less
concerned to do, as the reader has a part of him in possession, which as it is
near a fourth of the whole man, he has more than the foot by which to measure
this Hercules.

Both the parentage and birthplace of Aristophanes are doubtful: He was an
adopted, not a natural, citizen of Athens, and I incline to think he was the
son of Philippus, a native of Aegina, where our poet had some patrimony. He was
in person very tall, bony and robust, and we have his own authority for his
baldness; but whether this was as disgraceful at Athens, as it was amongst the
Romans, I have not been anxious to enquire. He was in private life of a free,
open and companiable temper, and his company was sought after by the greatest
characters of the age with all possible avidity: Plato, and even Socrates,
shared many social hours with him; he was much the most popular character in
Athens, as the great daemagogue Cleon experienced to his cost, not to mention
Socrates himself: Every honor that could be paid to a poet was publicly
bestowed upon Aristophanes by the Athenian people; nor did they confine their
rewards to honorary prizes only, but decreed him fines and pecuniary
confiscations from those, who ventured to attack him with suits and
prosecutions: Dionysius of Syracuse in vain made overtures to him of the most
flattering sort, at the time when Aeschines and Aristippus, Socratic
philosophers, were retained in his court with so much infamy to their private
characters, and when even Plato himself had solicited his notice by three
several visits to Syracuse, where he had not the good fortune to render himself
very agreeable. The fame of Aristophanes had reached to the court of Persia,
and his praises were there sounded by the great king himself, who considered
him not only as the first poet, but as the most conspicuous personage at
Athens. I do not find him marked with any other immorality, than that of
intemperance with regard to wine, the fashionable excess of the time, and in
some degree a kind of prerogative of his profession, a licentia poetica:
Athenaeus the Deipnosophist says he was drunk when he composed, but this is a
charge that will not pass upon any man who is sober; and if we rejected it from
Sophocles in the case of Aeschylus, we shall not receive it but with contempt
from such an accuser as Athenaeus. He was not happy in his domestic
connections, for he naturally declares that he was ashamed of his wife -- (...)
-- and as for his two sons, Philippus and Ararotes, they did him as little
credit, and he considered them accordingly. He was blessed with a good
constitution, and lived to turn above seventy years, though the date of his
death is not precisely laid down.

Though he was resolute in opposing himself to the torrent of vice and
corruption, which overspread the manners of his country, yet he was far more
temperate in his personal invective than his contemporaries. He was too
sensitive in his nature to undertake the performance of his own parts in
person, which was general with all the comic poets of his time; and he stood
their raillery for not venturing to tread the stage as they did. Amipsias and
Aristonymus, both rival authors, charged him with availing himself of the
talents of other people from consciousness of his own insufficiency: Their
raillery could not draw him out, till his favorite actor Callistratus declined
undertaking the part of Cleon in his personal comedy of The Knights, dreading
the resentment of that powerful daemagogue, who was as unforgiving as he was
imperious: In this dilemma Aristophanes conquered his repugnance, and
determined upon presenting himself on the stage for the first time in his life:
He dressed himself in the character of this formidable tribune; and having
colored his face with vermilion up to the hue of the brutal person he was to
resemble, he entered on the part in such a style of energy, and with such
natural expression, that the effect was irresistible; and the proud factious
Cleon was stripped of his popularity, and sentenced in a fine of five talents by
the knight's decree, as damages for the charge he had preferred against the
author touching his right of citizenship, which was awarded and secured to him
by the same instrument.

Such was Aristophanes in person, manners and character: As a poet I might
refer the learned reader to his works, which speak so ably for themselves: They
are not only valuable as his remains, but when we consider them as the only
remains, which give us any complete specimens of the Greek comedy, they become
inestimable through the misfortunes of all the rest. We receive them as
treasures thrown up from a wreck, or more properly as one passenger escaped out
of a fleet, whose narrative we listen to with the more eagerness and curiosity,
because it is from this alone we can gain intelligence of the nature of the
expedition, the quality of the armament, and the characters and talents of the
commanders, who have perished and gone down into the abyss together.

The comedies of Aristophanes are universally esteemed to be the standard of
Attic writing in its greatest purity; if any man would wish to know the
language as it was spoken by Pericles, he must seek it in the scenes of
Aristophanes, where he is not using a foreign or affected diction, for the
purpose of accommodating it to some particular or extravagant character. The
ancient authors, both Greek and Roman, who had all the productions of the
Athenian stage before them, speak of him with such rapture and admiration, as
to give him a decided preference before all other comic poets, with an
exception as I believe of Plutarch only, who brings him into comparison with
Menander, and after discussing their different pretensions decides peremptorily
for Menander: This criticism of Plutarch's I shall reserve for future
consideration; and when I said that he is single in his preference of Menander,
perhaps I ought to recall the expression, as that poet has his admirers, but
none that I know of, who have deliberately given judgment in his favor upon a
critical comparison with Aristophanes, except Plutarch above mentioned.

The drama of Aristophanes is of a mixed species; sometimes personal, at other
times inclining to parody, according to the character of the middle comedy: He
varies and accommodates his style to his subject and the speakers on the scene;
on some occasions it is elevated, grave, sublime and polished to a wonderful
degree of brilliancy and beauty; on others it sinks and descends into humble
dialogue, provincial rusticity, coarse naked obscenity, and even puns and
quibbles: The versatility of his genius is admirable; for he gives us every
rank and description of men in his scenes, and in every one is strictly
characteristic. In some passages, and frequently in his chorusses, he starts
out of the ordinary province of comedy into the loftiest flights of poetry, and
in these I doubt if Aeschylus or Pindar have surpassed him: In sentiment and
good sense he is not inferior to Euripides, and in the acuteness of his
criticisms equalled by none: In the general purport of his moral he seldom, if
ever, fails; but he works occasionally with unclean tools, and, like Juvenal in
the lower ages, chastises vice by an open exposure of its turpitude, offending
the ear, whilst he aims to mend the heart. This habit of plain speaking was the
fashion of the times he wrote in, and the audience demanded and would have it;
that he may be studied by the purest readers we should conclude, when we are
told he was the pillow companion of a Christian saint, as the well-known
anecdote of Chrysostom will testify. If we cannot entirely defend the
indelicacy of his muse, we cannot deny but that a great share of the blame
rests with the spectators: A dramatic poet cannot model his audience, but in a
certain degree must of necessity conform to their taste and humor: It can be
proved that Aristophanes himself laments the hard task imposed upon him of
gratifying the public at the expense of decency; but with the example of the
poet Cratinus before his eyes, who was driven from the stage because he
scrupled to amuse the public ear with tawdry jests, it is not to be wondered
at, if an author, emulous of applause, should fall in with the wishes of the
theater, unbecoming as they were: Let me add in further palliation of this
fault, that he never puts obscenity but in the mouths of obscene characters,
and so applies it as to give his hearers a disgust for such unseemly habits.
Morality I confess deserves a purer vehicle, yet I contend that his purpose was
honest, and I dare believe went farther toward reforming the loose Athenians,
than all the indecisive positions of the philosophers, who being enlisted into
sects and factions scarce agreed in any one point of common morality.

This part of his defense would have been very easily handled a century or two
ago; Ben Jonson for instance could have helped his argument out with his own
example, if occasion had required; but the task falls very heavy upon an
advocate in this age, which is of purer ears than to listen to obscenity; and
though my particular difficulties have thereby been increased, I shall never
repine under the weight of any burden, which the merit of my contemporaries
lays upon me.

His wit is of various kinds; much is of a general and permanent stamp; much is
local, personal and untransferable to posterity: No author still retains so
many brilliant passages, yet none has suffered such injury by the depredations
of time: Of his powers in ridicule and humor, whether of character or
dialogue, there might be no end to instances: If Plautus gives us the model of
Epicharmus, he does not equal him; and if Ter^nce translates Menander, his
original does not approach him in these particulars: I doubt if the sum total
of wit and humor in all their stage-lacqueys would together balance the single
character of Cario in the Plutus. His satire, whether levelled against the
vices and follies of the people at large, against the corruption of the
daemagogues, the turpitude and chicanery of the philosophers, or the arrogant
self-sufficiency of the tragic poets, cuts with an edge that penetrates the
character, and leaves no shelter for either ignorance or criminality.

Aristophanes was author of above sixty comedies, though they are erroneously
stated under that amount. The Plutus now in our hands (which is the second he
wrote of that title) has been twice published in our language by two different
translators; one of these I have seen, which was jointly executed by the
celebrated Henry Fielding and the Rev. Mr. Young: There is an English
translation, as I am told, of The Clouds, but this has never been in my hands,
and also a very late one of The Frogs in meter, which I have perused. Much
praise is due to the labors of learned men, who thus endeavor to make his wit
current amongst us; and every man who knows the difficulties of their task,
will find his candor strongly called upon to excuse any errors or
inequalities, that may appear in their performances.

No LXXVI.
I SAID in my former Paper that Plutarch had made a comparison between
Aristophanes and Menander, and given his decided judgment for the latter. It
might well be expected, that a Greek of the lower ages, living in the time of
Trajan, and in court-favour with that emperor, should prefer a polished elegant
author like Menander to one so bold, personal and sarcastic as the poet he
compares with him. Horace even in the time of Augustus had begun to decry the
Plautinos Sales, and the manners were much more refined in Plutarch's time than
in his. As we can take little estimate of Menander from the fragments only of
his comedies which now remain, we cannot see what general reasons Plutarch, or
any other critic of his time, might have for preferring him; but as far as he
has entered into strictures and objections in his examination of Aristophanes,
so far we can follow him; this part at least of his criticism is still open to
be controverted, and if it shall appear that he has condemned one party without
reason, it may be presumed he has preferred the other without justice.

Plutarch asserts that Aristophanes is a punster, a quibbler upon words, and
ridiculously given to parody. It is unfortunate for this charge that he follows
it up with quotations, in every one of which Aristophanes is not only to be
defended but applauded; he could not have selected passages less to the
purpose; and the accusation has accordingly been turned against him by
Frischlinus and other advocates of the poet.

He arraigns the style of Aristophanes on account of its inequalities and
variations, observing that it is sometimes high and sometimes low, now turgid
and inflated, now grovelling and depressed -- as if he had not been aware that
the great variety of characters, which his comedy exhibits, naturally demands
as great a variety of style: He applauds Menander for the uniform and equal
tenor of his style, not seeming to recollect that his comedy on the contrary
had one uniform complexion, contained no chorusses and introduced no living
characters; whereas Aristophanes, according to the spirit of the old comedy,
makes use of chorusses, many of which are of so fanciful and imaginary a
nature, that it is necessary to employ all the powers of poetry in their
display, and in some cases even to create a new style (and almost language) for
the occasion: He also introduces gods, heroes, poets, orators, philosophers,
ambassadors, priests on his scene; some of these professedly demand a swelling
tragic pomp of words, for instance Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides: In
short, the very excellence of Aristophanes is discrimination of style and
character. Should Socrates and a slave speak in the same phrase? Should
Lamachus (a mere miles gloriosus) talk in the tone of a beggarly Megarensian
pedlar? Certainly not; nor is there any need to dwell longer on this criticism
of Plutarch's, in which the ingenious author has shown little of his usual
candor or judgment. That he should be prepossessed in favor of the new comedy
is very natural; elegant and moral fictions are both more pleasing and more
proper subjects for the drama, than bold and coarse truths and living
realities: The even suavity of Menander's style might be more to his taste than
the irregular sublimity of Aristophanes's; but when I see him manage the
argument in a manner so much below his usual sagacity, I cannot help suspecting
there might be some other besides general prejudice in his mind against
Aristophanes, and I make no doubt he had fostered strong resentments against
him for his attacks upon Socrates; I also see some grounds for believing that
he had been opposed by Pliny in his partiality for Menander, whom that author
calls omnis luxuriae interpres; a charge which was resented by Plutarch, who
nevertheless was compelled to admit it: It is not improbable therefore that
this might have given some occasion to him for entering into a more formal
comparison between the two authors, and for publishing his strictures upon
Aristophanes. Upon looking over the titles of the comedies of the last-named
author, which are lost, I find one entitled Boeotia, which play was translated
and brought upon the Roman stage by Plautus, as it is generally thought, though
we are told that M. Varro gave it to one Aquilius; be this as it may, the
comedy was produced by one or the other, and there is a fragment of it in
proof, which will be found in Pareus's edition of Plautus: Here is fresh reason
for Plutarch (who was a Boeotian) to take up a resentment against Aristophanes;
and, if it were a subject worth following, I could show that Plutarch's
national prejudices were uncommonly strong: The comedy indeed is not in
existence, both original and translation being perished; but we can easily
believe that Boeotia did not escape out of Aristophanes's hands without a
pretty smart flagellation; and this was the more galling to Plutarch, because
it was naturalized on the Roman stage, and, if it was still in representation,
might give a handle to the wits of the time for a run upon his native country.
But I perceive my zeal is carrying me into an unprofitable research, and I
proceed with my subject.

Aristophanes has sometimes been reproached for his attacks upon Euripides; but
this author was a fair subject for satire in his literary character, and,
though he was the friend of Socrates, his private morals were no less open to
reproof. The voice of the heathen world has been so loud in the praise of
Socrates; he is so decidedly the hero of all the Ciceros and declaimers upon
morality, that even now, after so many centuries of Christianity, it is with a
kind of superstitious reverence we approach his character. His contemporaries,
who saw him in the nearest light, treat him with the least respect:
Aristophanes (as Ben Jonson expresses it) hoisted him up with a pulley, and
made him play the philosopher in a basket; measure how many foot a flea could
skip geometrically by a just scale, and edify the people from the engine. --
Time and prejudice have since cast a veil before him, that it would be a hardy
deed to attempt to withdraw.

This attack of Aristophanes has doomed him to almost universal detestation;
the praise we give him is no more than his superior genius extorts, and it is
paid grudgingly, like a tax, without cordiality or good will: We admire him for
his bold attacks upon Cleon, and we can find some palliation for his strictures
upon Euripides; the languid affectation of the poet, and the turbulent ferocity
of the daemagogue, justify the satirist; but when he assaults the sacred
character of Socrates, when he arraigns the unspotted purity of the great
master of morality, it is no longer satire, it is sacrilege. But is all this to
pass without one word for the poet? Was he given up by his contemporaries for
this atrocious act? was he given up by the friends and disciples of Socrates?
By none; not even by Plato himself, who on the contrary caressed, admired and
extolled him both in verse and prose; he adopted his sentiments on the subject
of Love, and engrafted them into his own Symposium: He applauded him to
Dionysius of Syracuse, and put his comedies into his hands as the only pure and
perfect model of Attic elegance: The tyrant read them, admired them and even
rehearsed them by heart; nay he did more, he turned poet himself, and wrote a
play for the Athenian stage, which of course was honored with a prize. And now
why should we be more angry than Plato was? What have we discovered, which he
did not know, that we should take the matter up so high? We have discovered
that Aristophanes took a bribe of Melitus and his faction to attack Socrates,
and pave the way for their criminal charge, by which he suffered; and this we
take upon credit from Aelian's insinuations in an article of his Various
History, which for its authority in this case is about as good an evidence, as
any story out of the Incredibilia of Palaephatus Heraclitus. Aelian however
does not hardily advance this as a fact, but hooks it in by way of question --
Where is the absurdity, he asks, of supposing that the poet, who was known to
be needy, had taken a bribe? -- This is a mere insinuation, by which he tries
the credulity of his readers: If they will believe it, so much the better for
his purpose; if not, he has nothing else to offer; he has done his best to
blacken the character of Aristophanes in this case, as he did in that of his
intemperance: He has accused him of writing plays when he was drunk, and now he
accuses him of taking a bribe for writing them: The man who believes the one,
may take the other into the bargain; for his own part, the improbability stares
him so fully in the face, that he immediately subjoins to his insinuation above
quoted -- That for the truth of this, it was best known to Aristophanes
himself. -- This can never pass with any candid reader. As for the success of
the attack, that he confesses was beyond all example; the comedy was applauded
to the skies; never did any poet receive such honors from the public, as
Aristophanes for this play of The Clouds.

As to the charge of the bribe, I need not observe, that if it was not an easy
thing for any advocate of the poet to prove the negative in Hadrian's days,
when Aelian threw it out, it cannot be less difficult now to do it, when more
than two millenniums have interposed between the fact and our examination of
it: And yet we know that Aristophanes, in a short time after the representation
of his Clouds, brought this very Melitus, who is supposed to have suborned him
by a bribe, before the audience, and exposed his vicious character with the
most unsparing severity. If this is not proving a negative, it is as near it as
circumstance and presumption can go.

But there is another part of Aelian's charge which can be more clearly
disproved than the above, and this is the assertion he advances, that this
attack upon Socrates from the stage was contrived by Anytus and Melitus as a
prelude to their criminal accusation of him: This Aelian expressly asserts,
adding that the faction were afraid of his popularity, and therefore set
Aristophanes upon him to feel the pulse of the people, before they ventured to
bring their public charge against him. Here he ^atly confutes himself; for had
this been the proving attack, what experiment could answer more completely,
when even by his own account all Athens was in raptures with the poet, and the
comedy went off with more general applause than any was ever known to receive?
nay, more than this, Socrates himself according to Aelian's own account was
present in the theater, and stood up in view of the people all the while; yet
in spite of his presence, in defiance of this bold appeal, the theater rung
with plaudits, and the philosopher only stood up to be a more conspicuous mark
of raillery and contempt. Why then did not the faction seize the opportunity
and second the blow? Could any thing answer more fully to their wishes? or
rather, could any event turn out more beyond their expectation? From Aelian's
account we are left to conclude that this was the case, and that this attack
was literally a prelude to their charge; but this inference is alike
disingenuous with all the rest, for we know from indubitable dates that The
Clouds were acted at least eighteen years before the death of Socrates: It was
in the first year of Olymp. LXXXIX. when Isarchus was archon, that Aristophanes
acted his first comedy of The Clouds, which was driven off the stage by
Alcibiades and his party: In the year immediately following, when Aminias was
archon, he brought out the second of that name, which is the comedy in
question, now in our hands: These are authentic records; take the earliest date
for the death of Socrates, and it will not fall till the first year of Olymp.
XCV. when Laches was archon; the interval is as I state it; a pretty reasonable
time for such a plot to be ripening: And who now will give credit to Aelian and
his Various History?

Having taken some pains to prove what Aristophanes's motives were not, it now
remains to show what they were; but this will be the subject of another Paper.

No LXXVII.
THE Clouds is a satirical and personal comedy, the moral of which is to show
how the sophistry of the schools may be employed as an instrument of fraud and
evasion in matters of right and property; this is its principal object: But it
touches also upon other points by the way, and humorously exposes certain new
and chimerical notions about the relation of children to their parents, and of
the influence of The Clouds, as superior to the superintending power of Jupiter.

Of its moral therefore, separately considered (comprehending the chief duties
and relations of men, whether to the gods, to their parents or to society at
large) there can be no doubt; its excellence and importance speak for
themselves.

The comedy being written before the practice was restrained of bringing living
characters on the stage, a school is here introduced, and the greatest
philosopher of the time is represented in person on the stage: This philosopher
is Socrates himself, and the school is the school of Socrates.

Socrates is made to advance the hypothesis of The Clouds before mentioned; but
it should be constantly kept in remembrance, that he lays down no doctrines, as
principles of fraud or injustice: It is not the teacher who recommends, but his
disciples who pervert his instructions to the evil purpose of defrauding and
cluding their creditors: The like remark holds good in the case of the natural
duty of children to their parents: The son in the play it is true strikes and
beats his father on the stage, and he quotes the maxims of Socrates in
justification; but he does not quote them as positive rules and injunctions for
an act so atrocious; he only shows that sophistry may be turned to defend that,
or any other thing equally violent and outrageous.

There are two lights in which Socrates is to be viewed; first, in his public
character as a teacher; secondly, in his private one as a man. It is chiefly in
the former of these that Aristophanes has attacked him; and (as I before
observed) it is to expose the evil uses rather than the evil nature of his
doctrines, that he brings his school upon the stage; for when the disciple is
questioned about the studies which his master is employed in, he makes report
of some frivolous and minute researches, which are introduced only for the
purpose of raising a harmless laugh, and so far there can be no offense in this
scene.

After all it must be allowed, that these seminaries of sophistry, which the
state of Athens thought it necessary to put down by public edict, could not
have been improper subjects for dramatic ridicule; for if the schools were
found so detrimental to the morals of youth, that the archons and their
council, after due deliberation, resolved upon a general expulsion of all
masters and teachers thereunto belonging, and effectually did expel them,
surely the poet may be acquitted, when he satirizes those obnoxious parties,
whom the laws of his country in a short time after cut off from the community.

There can be little doubt but this was a public measure founded in wisdom, if
it were for no other reason, than that the Lacedaemonians never suffered a
master of philosophy to open school within their realm and jurisdiction,
holding them in abhorrence, and proscribing their academies as seminaries of
evil manners; and tending to the corruption of youth: It is well known what
peculiar care and attention were bestowed upon the education of the Spartan
youth, and how much more moral this people was, who admitted no philosophers to
settle amongst them, than their Athenian neighbors, in whose dissolute capital
they swarmed. In fact, the enormity became too great to be redressed; the whole
community was infected with the enthusiasm of these sectaries; and the
liberties of Athens, which depended on the public virtue of her citizens, fell
a sacrifice to the corruptions of false philosophy: The wiser Lacedaemonians
saw the fatal error of their rivals, and availed themselves of its
consequences; they rose upon the ruins of Athens, and it was the triumph of
wisdom over wit: These philosophers were ingenious men, but execrable citizens;
and when the raillery of the stage was turned against them, the weapons of
ridicule could not be more laudably employed.

As for the school of Socrates in particular, though it may be a fashion to
extol it, there is no reason to believe it was in better credit than any other;
on the contrary, it was in such public disrepute on account of the infamous
characters of many of his disciples, and of the disgraceful attachments he was
known to have, that it was at one time deserted by every body except Aeschines,
the parasite of the tyrant Dionysius, and the most worthless man living: This
Aeschines, his sole and favorite disciple, was arraigned by the pleader
Lysias, and convicted of the vilest frauds, and branded as a public cheat: He
was a wretch, who employed the sophistry and cunning argumentation, which he
learnt of his master, to the purpose only of evading his debts, contracted by
the most profligate extravagancies: He afterwaads went over to the school of
Plato, and when Socrates was dead, had influence enough with Xantippe to obtain
of her some dialogues from her husband's papers, which he published as his own,
and set up for an author and preceptor in philosophy. It is very probable
Aristophanes had in view the character of this very Aeschines, when he brings
his old man on the scene, consulting Socrates for sophistical evasions how to
elude his creditors.

Another of the scholars of Socrates was Simon the sophist, a man whose
rapacity became a proverb ((...), Simoni rapacior). This Simon was such a
plunderer of the public money, that Aristophanes in his strong manner says, The
very wolves run off upon the sight of Simon.

The despicable Cleonymus, whose cowardice was as proverbial as Simon's
rapacity, and the profligate Theorus, who buried himself in the stews at
Corinth, were also fellow students under Socrates, and it is with just
indignation against such execrable characters that Aristophanes exclaims -- O
Jupiter, if thy bolts are aimed at perjury, why do these wretches, of all most
perjured, Simon, Cleonymus and Theorus, escape the stroke?

(...)
(...)
Aristippus, the Cyrenaic founder, was a distinguished disciple of the Socratic
school, a parasite also in the court of Dionysius, a buffoon and drunkard, the
avowed opposer of every thing virtuous, a master and professor of immorality,
who laid down institutes of sensuality and reduced it to a system.

Of Alcibiades I shall briefly speak, for the stories of Socrates's attachment
to him are such as need not be enlarged upon; they obtained so generally, that
he was vulgarly called Alcibiades's Silesius: When I glance at these reports in
disfavour of a character, which probably stands so high in the opinion of the
learned reader, I must hope for a candid interpretation of my motives for
collecting these anecdotes, which I do not wish to apply to any other purpose
than merely to show that Aristophanes was not singular in his attack upon this
celebrated philosopher; neither did this attack bear so hard against him, as
many stories, then in general circulation, otherwise did: Great authorities
have ascribed his attachment to Alcibiades to the most virtuous principle;
common fame, or perhaps (more properly speaking) common defamation, turned it
into a charge of the impurest nature: In like manner we find him ridiculed for
his devotion to the noted Aspasia, in whose company he is said to have passed
much of his time; and Athenaeus quotes some passages of his dialogues with her,
which he tells us were published by Herodicus, and which we must either totally
reject, or allow him to have been subject to such private weaknesses and
frailties, as were very unsuitable to his public character: What were the real
motives for his frequent visits to Aspasia, as well as for his seeming
attachment to the strumpet Theodote, must be left to conjecture; of the fact
there is no room to doubt. He is stigmatized for his guilty connections in his
youth with his preceptor Archelaus, and yet this charge (however improbable it
may seem) rests upon the authority of Aristoxenus, a man of the most candid
character, and whose credit stands high with all true critics. Herodicus the
historian, whom I have before mentioned, and who lived about three hundred and
fifty years before the Christian era, seems to have treated Socrates with the
greatest severity, charging him with sitting up all night drinking and
carousing with Agatho and others, whom when he had left drunk and asleep, he
reeled into the Lyceum, more fit (in the words quoted from the relater) for the
society of Homer's cannibals, than of those he found there: In this debauch it
is pretended, that although Phedrus, Eryximachus and many other potent drinkers
fled the company, Socrates sat to the last, swallowing drenches of wine out of
enormous goblets of silver: He describes him sitting amongst lascivious
revellers at a banquet, where dancing-girls and boys were exhibiting their
indecent attitudes to the music of harpers and minstrels: He exposes this
master of morality entering into a controversy with his scholar Critobulus upon
the subject of male beauty; and because Critobulus had ridiculed him for his
ugliness, he asserts that Socrates challenged him to a naked exhibition, and
that he actually exposed his unseemly person to a Pathic and a dancing-girl,
the appointed umpires of the dispute; the conqueror was to be rewarded with an
embrace from each of these umpires, as the prize of superior beauty, and the
decision was of consequence given ex absurdo to the philosopher, in preference
to one of the handsomest young men in Greece, and he enjoyed the prize annexed
to the decree. If we can believe this anecdote to have been gravely related by
an historian, who lived so near to him in point of time, we shall cease to
wonder that Aristophanes had the whole theater on his side, when such stories
were in circulation against the character of Socrates.

As I have no other object in view but to offer what occurs to me in defense of
Aristophanes, who appears to have been most unjustly accused of taking bribes
for his attack upon Socrates, and of having paved the way for the cruel
sentence by which he suffered death, I shall here conclude an invidious task,
which my subject, not my choice, has laid upon me.

In our volume of Aristophanes, the comedies are not placed according to the
order of time in which they were produced: There is reason to think that The
Acharnensians was the first of its author; it was acted in the last year of
Olymp. LXXXV. when the edict was reversed which prohibited the representation
of comedies; and it is said that Aristophanes brought it out in the name of
Callistratus the comedian.

In the last year of Olymp. LXXXVIII. he produced his comedy of The Knights, in
which he personally attacks the tribune Cleon.

In the first year of Olymp. LXXXIX. he produced his first comedy of The
Clouds, and in the year following his second of that title, which is now in our
hands, and ranks as third in the volume.

In the same year was acted his comedy of The Wasps, in which he satirizes the
General Chares for his conduct in the unfortunate expedition to Sicily.

In the fourth year of Olymp. XC. we may place his comedy entitled The Peace.
In the first of Olymp. XCI. The Lysistrata; and in the second of the same
Olympiad that of The Birds.

The Thesmophoriagusae, or Cerealia Celebrantes, and Concionatrices, fall
within the period of Olymp. XCII. before the death of Euripides, who is
satirized in the former of these pieces.

The Frogs were performed in the last year of Olymp. XCIII. after the death of
Euripides.

The Plutus, which completes the eleven comedies still remaining, and the last,
to which he prefixed his own name, was produced in the fourth year of Olymp.
XCVII.

It is generally supposed that we owe these remains of Aristophanes to St.
Chrysostom, who happily rescued this valuable, though small, portion of his
favorite author from his more scrupulous Christian contemporaries, whose zeal
was fatally too successful in destroying every other comic author, out of a
very numerous collection, of which no one entire scene now remains.

No LXXVIII.
I SHALL now proceed to mention some other principal writers of the old comedy,
of whose works, though once the favorites of the Athenian stage, few memorials
survive, and these so small and imperfect, and withal so separated from each
other (consisting only of short quotations in the scholiasts and grammarians)
that it is a task to collect them, which nothing would compensate but the hope
of being in some degree the instrument of saving from absolute extinction the
names of authors once so illustrious.

AMIPSIAS was a contemporary of Aristophanes, and no mean rival; we have the
titles of ten comedies of this author. In some of these his satire was
personal, but all of them seem by their titles to have been levelled against
the reigning vices of his time, such as The Gamesters, The Glutton, The Beard
(in which he inveighed against the hypocrisy and affectation of the priests and
philosophers), The Adulterers, The Sappho (wherein the morals of the fair sex
were exposed), The Purse, a second attack upon the gamesters, and The
Philosopher's Cloak, in which it is understood he glanced pretty severely at
Socrates.

PLATO was a comic poet, high in time and character; a collection of no less
than forty titles of his comedies has been made by the learned Meursius, but
very few fragments of these are remaining. Clemens asserts that Aristophanes
and Plato were mutually charged of borrowing from each other, which in one
sense makes greatly to the reputation of our poet. He is quoted by Plutarch in
his Alcibiades, and very honorably mentioned by the famous Galen, by
Athenaeus, Clemens, Julius Pollux and Suidas. There is a fragment containing
four lines and a half, upon a statue of Mercury cut by Daedalus, which has an
epigrammatic neatness and point in it, that induced me to render it in rhyme:
He addresses the statue, mistaking it for a living figure: Hoa there! who art
thou? Answer me -- Art dumb?
-- Warm from the hand of Daedalus I come;
My name Mercurius, and, as you may prove,
A statue; but his statues speak and move.


Plato wrote a comedy personally against the General Cleophon, and called it by
his name; there are others of the same description in his catalogue, and some
of the middle sort: There are a few lines upon the tomb of Themistocles, which
have a turn of elegant and pathetic simplicity in them, that deserves a better
translation than I can give.

On the Tomb of Themistocles.
By the sea's margin, on the watery strand,
Thy monument, Themistocles, shall stand:
By this directed to thy native shore
The merchant shall convey his freighted store;
And when our fleets are summoned to the fight,
Athens shall conquer with thy tomb in sight.
The following fragment of a dialogue, between a father and a sophist, under
whose tuition he had placed his son, probably belonged either to the comedy
called The Beard, or The Philosopher's Cloak: It is pretty much in the spirit
of our old English drama.

FATHER. Thou have destroyed the morals of my son,
And turned his mind, not so disposed, to vice,
Unholy pedagogue! With morning drams,
A filthy custom which he caught from thee,
Clean from his former practice, now he saps
His youthful vigor. Is it thus you school him?

SOPHIST. And if I did, what harms him? Why complain you?
He does but follow what the wise prescribe,
The great voluptuous law of Epicurus,
Pleasure, the best of all good things on earth;
And how but thus can pleasure be obtained?

FATHER. Virtue will give it him.

SOPHIST. And what but virtue
Is our philosophy? When have you met
One of our sect flushed and disguised with wine?
Or one, but one of those you tax so roundly,
On whom to fix a fault?

FATHER. Not one, but all,
All who march forth with supercilious brow
High-arch'd with pride, beating the city-rounds,
Like constables in quest of rogues and outlaws,
To find that prodigy in human nature,
A wise and perfect man! What is your science
But kitchen-science? wisely to descant
Upon the choice bits of a savoury carp,
And prove by logic that his summum bonum
Lies in his head; there you can lecture well,
And, whilst your gray beards wag, the gaping guest
Sits wondering with a foolish face of praise.

(PLATO, COM.) CRATES, by birth an Athenian, was first an actor, and afterward
a writer of the old comedy; he performed the principal characters in Cratinus's
plays, and was the great rival of Aristophanes's favorite actors Callistratus
and Philonides; we have the titles of more than twenty comedies, and but four
small fragments of this author: I have searched for his remains more
diligently, from the circumstance of his having been so celebrated an actor; a
profession which centers in itself more gifts of nature, education, art and
study, than any other. His comedies are said to have been of a very gay and
facetious cast; and the author of the Prolegomena to Aristophanes informs us,
that he was the first who introduced a drunken character on the Athenian stage;
to this anecdote I give credit, because no one could better know how entirely
such an attempt depends upon the discretion and address of the actor, who has
such a part in his keeping: It is plain the experiment succeeded, because even
the tragedians exhibited such characters in succeeding times. Modern experience
shows us, how subject such representations are to be outraged; the performer
generally forgetting, or not knowing, that his own sobriety should keep the
drunkenness he counterfeits within its proper bounds. Aristotle ascribes to
Crates another innovation with respect to the iambic meter of the old comedy,
which he made more free and apposite to familiar dialogue; this also
corresponds with the natural and facetious character of his drama. I cannot say
the four small fragments which I have collected bear that stamp; on the
contrary, they are of a grave and sententious cast: One of them is an
observation on the effects of poverty, which Horace has either literally
translated, or struck upon the very same thoughts in the following passage: Non
habet infelix paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.


I find a short stricture upon the gluttony of the Thessalians; a remark upon
the indecorum of inviting women to wedding suppers, and making riotous
entertainments at a ceremony which modesty would recommend to pass in private,
and within the respective family where it occurs.

The last fragment is a short but touching picture of old age, and the vanity
of human wishes: I think the turn of thought and expression extremely beautiful.

ON OLD AGE.
These shrivelled sinews and this bending frame,
The workmanship of Time's strong hand proclaim;
Skilled to reverse whatever the gods create,
And make that crooked which they fashion straight.
Hard choice for man, to die -- or else to be
That tottering, wretched, wrinkled thing you see:
Age then we all prefer; for age we pray,
And travel on to life's last lingering day;
Then sinking slowly down from worse to worse,
Find heaven's extorted boon our greatest curse.
(CRATES.) PHRYNICHUS was a contemporary of Eupolis, and a writer of the old
comedy; a dramatic poet of the first class in reputation as well as in time. He
was an Athenian by birth, and must not be confounded with the tragic poet of
that name. I find the titles of ten comedies of his writing; these are The
Ephialtes; The Beard, (the same title with that of Plato); Saturn; The
Revellers; The Satyrs; The Tragedians; The Recluse; The Muses; The Priest, and
The Weeding-Women, We have no other guides but these titles to guess at the
comedies themselves; we see however by some of them what subjects his satire
pointed out to the spectators, in which the philosophers had their share as
usual; and by certain fragments it appears, that Alcibiades was also treated
with some personal severity.

PHERECRATES is the next author I shall notice, a poet famous in his time, and
whose character as well as genius descends to us with the warmest testimonies
of high authority. His style was of that sort, which has been proverbially
dignified as Most Attic: He acquired such reputation by his poems as well as
plays, that the meter he used was called by pre-eminence the Pherecratian
Meter. He was no less excellent in his private character than in his poetical
one; he was attached to Alexander of Macedon, and accompanied that great
conqueror in his expeditions; he lived in intimacy with Plato at Athens, and in
some of his comedies was engaged in warm competition with Crates, the actor and
author, of whom I have already spoken. Suidas says he wrote seventeen comedies,
and the titles of these are still extant: One of them, viz. The Peasants, is
mentioned by Plato in his Protagoras: Clemens quotes a passage from his
Deserters of great elegance, in which the gods are introduced making heavy
complaints of the frauds put upon them by mankind in their sacrifices and
oblations: This poet also has a personal stroke at the immoral character of
Alcibiades.

Having quoted a passage from Crates on the subject of old age, I shall now
select one from this author on the same; and if the reader is curious to
observe how these celebrated rivals expressed themselves on a similar
sentiment, he has an opportunity of making the comparison.

ON OLD AGE.
Age is the heaviest burden man can bear,
Compound of disappointment, pain and care;
For when the mind's experience comes at length,
It comes to mourn the body's loss of strength:
Resigned to ignorance all our better days,
Knowledge just ripens when the man decays;
One ray of light the closing eye receives,
And wisdom only takes what folly leaves.
(PHERECRATES.) Pherecrates entitled one of his comedies The Tyranny; it does
not appear what particular object he had in view under this title, but from the
following fragment he seems to have levelled some share of his satire against
the fair sex -- Remark how wisely ancient art provides
The broad-brimm'd cup with flat expanded sides;
A cup contrived for man's discreeter use,
And sober potions of the generous juice:
But woman's more ambitious thirsty soul
Soon longed to revel in the plenteous bowl;
Deep and capacious as the swelling hold
Of some stout bark she shaped the hollow mould,
Then turning out a vessel like a tun,
Simp'ring exclaimed -- Observe! I drink but one.
(PHERECRATES.)

Athenaeus has preserved a considerable fragment from this author, extracted
from his comedy of The Miners, which I look upon to be as curious a specimen of
the old comedy as I have met with. It is a very luxuriant description of the
riches and abundance of some former times to which he alludes, strongly dashed
with comic strokes of wild extravagance and hyperbole. These Miners were
probably the chorus of the drama, which no doubt was of a satirical sort, and
pointed at the luxuries of the rich. By the mention made of Plutus in the first
line, we may suppose that these Mines were of gold, and probably the deity of
that precious metal was one of the persons of the drama.

FROM THE MINERS OF PHERECRATES.
The days of Plutus were the days of gold;
The season of high feeding and good cheer:
Rivers of goodly beef and brewis ran
Boiling and bubbling through the steaming streets,
With islands of fat dumplings, cut in sops
And slippery gobbets, molded into mouthfuls,
That dead men might have swallowed; floating tripes
And fleets of sausages in luscious morsels
Stuck to the banks like oysters: Here and there,
For relishers, a salt-fish seasoned high
Swam down the savoury tide: When soon behold!
The portly gammon sailing in full state
Upon his smoking platter heaves in sight,
Encompassed with his bandoliers like guards,
And convoyed by huge bowls of frumenty,
That with their generous odours scent the air.
-- You stagger me to tell of these good days,
And yet to live with us on our hard fare,
When death's a deed as easy as to drink.
If your mouth waters now, what had it done,
Could you have seen our delicate fine thrushes
Hot from the spit, with myrtle-berries crammed,
And larded well with celandine and parsley,
Bob at your hungry lips, crying -- Come eat me!
Nor was this all; for pendant over-head
The fairest choicest fruits in clusters hung;
Girls too, young girls just budding into bloom,
Clad in transparent vests, stood near at hand
To serve us with fresh roses and full cups
Of rich and fragrant wine, of which one glass
No sooner was dispatched, than strait behold!
Two goblets, fresh and sparkling as the first,
Provoked us to repeat the increasing draught.
Away then with your ploughs, we need them not,
Your scythes, your sickles, and your pruning hooks!
Away with all your trumpery at once!
Seed-time and harvest-home and vintage wakes --
Your holidays are nothing worth to us.
Our rivers roll with luxury, our vats
Overflow with nectar, which providing Jove
Showers down by cataracts; the very gutters
From our house-tops spout wine, vast forests wave
Whose very leaves drop fatness, smoking viands
Like mountains rise -- All nature's one great feast.
AMPHIS, the son of Amphicrates an Athenian, was a celebrated comic poet: We
have the titles of one and twenty comedies, and he probably wrote many more: By
these titles it appears that he wrote in the satirical vein of the old comedy,
and I meet with a stroke at his contemporary Plato the philosopher. He has a
play entitled The Seven Chiefs against Thebes, which is probably a parody upon
Aeschylus, and proves that he wrote after the personal drama was prohibited:
There is another called The Dicers; and by several scattered passages he
appears to have exposed the persons of drunkards, gamesters, courtesans,
parasites, and other vicious characters of his time, with great moral severity:
There are also two comedies, entitled Women's Love and Women's Tyranny.

HERMIPPUS was a writer of the old comedy, and an Athenian. No less than forty
comedies are given to this author by Suidas; he attacks Pericles for his
dissolute morals, and in one of his plays calls him King of the Satyrs,
advising him to assume the proper attributes of his lascivious character: He
was the son of Lysides, and the brother of Myrtilus, a comic writer also.

HIPPARCHUS, PHILONIDES and THEOPOMPUS complete the list of poets of the old
comedy. Philonides, before he became a votary of the muse, followed the trade
of a fuller, and, if we are to take the word of Aristophanes, was a very silly
vulgar fellow, illiterate to a proverb. Athenaeus and Stobaeus have however
given us some short quotations, which by no means favor this account, and it
is probable there was more satire than truth in Aristophanes's character of
him. Theopompus is described as a man of excellent morals, and though he was
long afflicted with a defluxion in his eyes, which put him from his studies,
time has preserved the titles of twenty-four comedies of his composing: Very
little remains upon record either of him or his works.

One short fragment of Philonides is all that remains of his works, and it is a
specimen which convinces me that we must not always take the character of a
poet from a contemporary wit, engaged in the same studies. FRAGMENT OF
PHILONIDES.
Because I hold the laws in due respect,
And fear to be unjust, am I a coward?
Meek let me be to all the friends of truth,
And only terrible amongst its foes.
-- Soli aequus virtuti atque ejus amicis.
I now take leave of what is properly called The Old Comedy: In the further
prosecution of this work (if that shall be permitted to me) it is my intention
to review the writers of the Middle, and conclude with those of the New Comedy.

No LXXIX.
PREJUDICE is so wide a word, that if we would have ourselves understood, we
must always use some auxiliary term with it to define our meaning: Thus when we
speak of national prejudices, prejudices of education, or religious prejudices,
by compounding our expression we convey ideas very different from each other.

National prejudice is by some called a virtue, but the virtue of it consists
only in the proper application and moderate degree of it. It must be confessed
a happy attachment, which can reconcile the Laplander to his freezing snows,
and the African to his scorching sun. There are some portions of the globe so
partially endowed by Providence with climate and productions, that were it not
for this prejudice to the natale solum, the greater part of the habitable world
would be a scene of envy and repining. National predilection is in this sense a
blessing, and perhaps a virtue; but if it operates otherwise than in the best
sense of its definition, it perverts the judgment, and in some cases vitiates
the heart. It is an old saying, that charity begins at home, but this is no
reason it should not go abroad: A man should live with the world as a citizen
of the world; he may have a preference for the particular quarter, or square,
or even alley in which he lives, but he should have a generous feeling for the
welfare of the whole; and if in his rambles through this great city (the world)
he may chance upon a man of a different habit, language or complexion from his
own, still he is a fellow-citizen, a short sojourner in common with himself,
subject to the same wants, infirmities and necessities, and one that has a
brother's claim upon him for his charity, candor and relief. It were to be
wished no traveller would leave his own country without these impressions, and
it would be still better if all who live in it would adopt them; but as an
Observer of mankind (let me speak it to the honor of my countrymen) I have
very little to reproach them with on this account: It would be hard if a
nation, more addicted to travel than any other in Europe, had not rubbed off
this rust of the soul in their excursions and collisions; it would be an
indelible reproach, if a people, so blessed at home, were not benevolent abroad.
Our ingenious neighbors the French are less agreeable guests than hosts: I am
afraid their national prejudices reach a little beyond candor in most cases,
and they are too apt to indulge a vanity, which does not become so enlightened
a nation, by shutting their eyes against every light except their own; but I do
a violence to my feelings, when I express myself unfavourably of a people, with
whom we have long been implicated in the most honorable of all connections,
the mutual pursuits of literary fame, and a glorious emulation in arts and
sciences.

Prejudices of education are less dangerous than religious prejudices, less
common than national ones, and more excusable than any; in general they are
little else than ridiculous habits, which cannot obtain much in a country where
public education prevails, and such as a commerce with the world can hardly
fail to cure: They are characteristic of seraglio princes; the property of
sequestered beings, who live in celibacy and retirement, contracted in
childhood and confirmed by age: A man, who has passed his life on shipboard,
will pace the length of his quarter deck on the terrace before his house, were
it a mile in length.

These are harmless peculiarities, but it is obvious to experience that
prejudices of a very evil nature may be contracted by habits of education; and
the very defective state of the police, which is suffered yet to go on without
reform in and about our capital, furnishes too many examples of our fatal
inattention to the morals of our infant poor: Amongst the many wretched
culprits who suffer death by the law, how many are there, who, when standing at
the bar to receive sentence of execution, might urge this plea in extenuation
of their guilt!

This action, which you are pleased to term criminal, I have been taught to
consider as meritorious: The arts of fraud and thieving, by which I gained my
living, are arts instilled into me by my parents, habits wherein I was educated
from my infancy, a trade to which I was regularly bred: If these are things not
to be allowed of, and a violation of the laws, it behoved the laws to prevent
them, rather than to punish them; for I cannot see the equity of putting me to
death for actions, which, if your police had taken any charge of me in my
infancy, I never had committed. If you would secure yourselves from receiving
wrong, you should teach us not to do wrong; and this might easily be effected,
if you had any eye upon your parish poor. For my part, I was born and bred in
the parish of Saint Giles; my parents kept a shop for the retail of gin, and
old rags; christening I had none; a church I never entered, and no parish
officer ever visited our habitation: If he had done so, he would have found a
seminary of thieves and pick-pockets, a magazine of stolen goods, a house of
call where nightly depredators met together to compare accounts, and make merry
over their plunder: Amongst these and by these I was educated; I obeyed them as
my masters, and I looked up to them as my examples: I believed them to be great
men; I heard them recount their actions with glory; I saw them die like heroes,
and I attended their executions with triumph. It is now my turn to suffer, and
I hope I shall not prove myself unworthy of the calling in which I have been
brought up: If there be any fault in my conduct, the fault is yours; for, being
the child of poverty, I was the son of the public: If there be any honor, it
is my own; for I have acted up to my instructions in all things, and faithfully
fulfilled the purposes of my education. I cannot excuse myself from touching
upon one more prejudice, which may be called natural, or self-prejudice: Under
correction of the Dampers I hope I may be allowed to say, that a certain
portion of this is a good quickener in all constitutions; being seasonably
applied, it acts like the spur in the wing of the ostrich, and keeps industry
awake: Being of the nature of all volatiles and provocatives, the merit of it
consists in the moderation and discretion which administer it: If a man rightly
knows himself, he may be called wise; if he justly confides in himself, he may
be accounted happy; but if he keeps both this knowledge and this confidence to
himself, he will neither be less wise nor less happy for so doing: If there are
any secrets, which a man ought to keep from his nearest friends, this is one of
them. If there were no better reason why a man should not vaunt himself, but
because it is robbing the poor mountebanks of their livelihood, methinks it
would be reason enough: If he must think aloud upon such occasions, let him
lock himself into his closet, and take it out in soliloquy: If he likes the
sound of his own praises there, and can reconcile himself to the belief of
them, it will then be time enough to try their effect upon other people.

Ventidius is the modestest of all men; he blushes when he sees himself
applauded in the public papers; he has a better reason for blushing than the
world is aware of; he knows himself to be the author of what he reads.

It seems a matter pretty generally agreed between all tellers and hearers of
stories, that one party shall work by the rule of addition, and the other by
that of substraction: In most narratives, where the relater is a party in the
scene, I have remarked that the says-I has a decided advantage in a dialogue
over the says-he; few people take an under-part in their own fable. There is a
salvo, however, which some gentlemen make use of (but I cannot recommend it) of
hooking in a word to their own advantage, with the preface of I think I may say
without vanity -- and after all, if it was not for the vanity of it, there
would be no need to say it at all.

I knew a gentleman who possessed more real accomplishments, than fall to one
man's lot in a thousand; he was an excellent painter, a fine musician, a good
scholar, and more than all a very worthy man -- but he could not ride: It so
happened, that upon a morning's airing I detected him in the attempt of
mounting on the back of a little pony, no taller than his whip, and as quiet as
a lamb: Two stout fellows held the animal by the head, whilst my friend was
performing a variety of very ingenious maneuvers for lodging himself upon the
saddle by the aid of a stirrup, which nearly touched the ground: I am afraid I
smiled, when I ought not so to have done, for it is certain it gave offense to
my worthy friend, who soon after joined me on his pony, which he assured me was
remarkably vicious, particularly at mounting; but that he had been giving him
some proper discipline, which he doubted not would cure him of his evil tricks;
"for you may think what you please," adds he, "of my painting, or my music, or
any other little talent you are pleased to credit me for; the only art, which I
really pique myself upon -- is the art of riding."

No LXXX.
TO THE OBSERVER.
SIR,
I AM a plain man without pretensions, and lead a retired life in the country:
The sports of the season, a small farm, which I hold in my own hands, and a
pretty good kitchen garden, in which I take amusement, with the help of a few
English books, have hitherto made my life, though it is that of a bachelor,
pass off with more than tolerable comfort. By this account of my time you will
perceive that most of my enjoyments depend upon the weather; and though the
wear-and-tear of age may have made me more sensible to the seasons than I have
been, yet I cannot help thinking that our climate in England is as much altered
for the worse, as my constitution may be. I do not pretend to reason upon
natural causes, but speak upon observation only; for by an exact journal of my
time (which I keep more for a check upon my actions than for any importance
which appertains to them) I can find that I am obliged to my books for helping
me through more rainy hours in the course of years last past, than I have been
accustomed to be, or indeed than I could wish; for you must know I never read,
when I can amuse myself out of doors.

My studies are but trifling, for I am no scholar, but in bad weather and dark
evenings they have served to fill up time; a very little discouragement however
suffices to put me out of conceit with my books, and I have thoughts of laying
them totally on the shelf, as soon as ever I can provide some harmless
substitute in their place: This you see is not so easy for me to do, being a
solitary man, and one that hates drinking, especially by myself; add to this
that I smoke no tobacco, and have more reasons than I choose to explain against
engaging in the nuptial state: My housekeeper it is true is a decent
conversible woman, and plays a good game at all-fours; and I had begun to fill
up an hour in her company, till I was surprised unawares by a neighbor, who is
a wag and has never ceased jeering me upon it ever since: I took next to making
nets for my current bushes, but alas! I have worked myself out of all employ
and am got weary of the trade: I have thought of making fishing-rods; but I
have a neighbor so tenacious of his trout, that I should only breed a quarrel,
and fish in troubled waters, were I to attempt it. To make short of my story,
Sir, I have been obliged after many efforts to go back to my books, though I have
lost all the little relish I had for them ever since I have been honored with
the visits of a learned gentleman, who is lately settled in my neighborhood.
He must be a prodigious scholar, for I believe in my conscience he knows every
thing that ever was written, and every body that ever writes. He has taken a
world of kind pains I must confess to set me right in a thousand things, that I
was ignorant enough to be pleased with: He is a fine-spoken man, and in spite
of my stupidity has the patience to convince me of the faults and blunders of
every author in his turn: When he shows them to me, I see them as clear as day,
and never take up the book again; he has now gone pretty nearly through my
whole nest of shelves, pointing out, as he proceeds, what I like a fool never
saw before, nor ever should have seen but for him. I used to like a Spectator
now and then, and generally sought out for Clio, which I was told were Mr.
Addison's papers; but I have been in a gross mistake, to lose my time with a
man that cannot write common English; for my friend has proved this to me out
of a fine book, three times as big as the Spectator; and, which is more, this
great book is made by a foreign gentleman, who writes and speaks clear another
language from Mr. Addison; surely he must be a dunce indeed, who is to be
taught his mother tongue by a stranger! I was apt to be tickled with some of
our English poets, Dryden and Pope and Milton, and one Gray, that turns out to
be a very contemptible fellow truly, for he has shown me all their secret
histories in print, written by a learned man greater than them all put
together, and now I would not give a rush for one of them; I could find in my
heart to send Bell and all his books to the devil. As for all the writers now
living, my neighbor, who by the way has a hand in reviewing their works,
assures me he can make nothing of them, and indeed I wonder that a man of his
genius will have any thing to say to them. It was my custom to read a chapter
or two in the Bible on a Sunday night; but there I am wrong again; I shall not
enter upon the subject here, but it will not do, that I am convinced of, Sir; it
positively will not do.

The reason of my writing to you at all is only to let you know, that I
received a volume of your Observer by the coach; my friend has cast his eye
over it, and I have returned it by the wagon, which he says is the fittest
conveyance for waste paper.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, RUSTICUS.


I shall give no other answer to my correspondent but to lament his loss of so
innocent a resource as reading, which I suspect his new acquirements will
hardly compensate. I still think that half an hour passed with Mr. Addison over
a Spectator, notwithstanding all his false grammar, or even with one of the
poets, notwithstanding their infirmities, might be as well employed as in
weaving nets for the currant-bushes, or playing at all-fours with his
housekeeper. No man has a right to complain of the critic, whose sagacity
discovers inaccuracies in a favorite author, and some readers may probably be
edified by such discoveries; but the bulk of them, like my correspondent
Rusticus, will get nothing but disgust by the information: Every man's work is
fair game for the critic; but let the critic beware that his own production is
not open to retaliation. As for our late ingenious biographer of the poets,
when I compare his life of Savage with that of Gray, I must own he has exalted
the low, and brought down the lofty; with what justice he has done this the
world must judge. On the part of our authors now living, whom the learned
gentleman in the letter condemns in the lump, I have only this to observe, that
the worse they fare now, the better they will succeed with posterity; for the
critics love the sport too well to hunt any but those, who can stand a good
chase; and authors are the only objects in nature, which are magnified by
distance and diminished by approach: Let the illustrious dead change places
with the illustrious living, and they shall escape no better than they have
done who make room for them; the more merit they bring amongst us, the heavier
the tax they shall pay for it.

Let us suppose for a moment that Shakespeare was now an untried poet, and
opened his career with any one of his best plays: The next morning ushers into
the world the following, or something like the following, critique.

Last night was presented for the first time a tragedy called Othello or the
Moor of Venice, avowedly the production of Mr. William Shakespeare, the actor.
This gentleman's reputation in his profession is of the mediocre sort, and we
predict that his present tragedy will not add much to it in any way. --
Mediocribus esse poetis -- the reader can supply the rest -- verb. sap. As we
profess ourselves to be friendly to the players in general, we shall reserve
our fuller critique of this piece, till after its third night; for we hold it
very stuff of the conscience (to use Mr. Shakespeare's own words) not to war
against the poet's purse; though we might apply the author's quaint conceit to
himself -- Who steals his purse, steals trash; it is something; nothing. In this
last reply we agree with Mr. Shakespeare that it is nothing, and our philosophy
tells us ex nihilo nihil fit.

For the plot of this tragedy the most we can say is, that it is certainly of
the moving sort, for it is here and there and every where; a kind of theatrical
hocus-pocus; a creature of the pye-ball breed, like Jacob's muttons, between a
black ram and a white ewe. It brought to our mind the children's game of -- I
love my love with an A -- with this difference only, that the young lady in
this play loves her love with a B, because he is black. -- Risum teneatis?

There is one Iago, a bloody-minded fellow, who stabs men in the dark behind
their backs; now this is a thing we hold to be most vile and ever-to-be
abhorred. Othello smothers his white wife in bed; our readers may think this a
shabby kind of an action for a general of his high calling; but we beg leave to
observe that it shows some spirit at least in Othello to attack the enemy in
her strong quarters at once. There was an incident of a pocket-handkerchief,
which Othello called out for most lustily, and we were rather sorry that his
lady could not produce it, as we might then have seen one handkerchief at least
employed in the tragedy. There were some vernacular phrases, which caught our
ear, such as where the black damns his wife twice in a breath -- Oh damn her,
damn her! -- which we thought savoured more of the language spoken at the
doors, than within the doors of the theater; but when we recollect that the
author used to amuse a leisure hour with calling up gentlemen's coaches after
the play was over, before he was promoted to take a part in it, we could
readily account for old habits. Though we have seen many gentlemen and ladies
kill themselves on the stage, yet we must give the author credit for the new
way in which his hero puts himself out of the world: Othello, having smothered
his wife, and being taken up by the officers of the state, prepares to dispatch
himself and escape from the hands of justice; to bring this about, he begins a
story about his killing a man in Aleppo, which he illustrates par example by
stabbing himself, and so winds up his story and his life in the same moment.
The author made his appearance in the person of one Brabantio an old man, who
makes his first entry from a window; this occasioned some risibility in the
audience: The part is of an inferior kind, and Mr. Shakespeare was more indebted
to the exertions of his brethren, than to his own, for carrying his play
through. Upon the whole, we do not think the passion of jealousy, on which the
plot turns, so proper for tragedy as comedy, and we would recommend to the
author, if his piece survives its nine nights, to cut it down to a farce and
serve it up to the public cum mica salis in that shape. After this specimen of
Mr. William Shakespeare's tragic powers, we cannot encourage him to pursue his
attempts upon Melpomene; for there is a good old proverb, which we would advise
him to bear in mind -- ne suitor ultra crepidam -- If he applies to his friend
Ben, he will turn it into English for him.

No LXXXI.
THE conduct of a young lady, who is the only daughter of a very worthy father,
and some alarming particulars respecting her situation which had come to my
knowledge, gave occasion to me for writing my Paper, No XLVI. in which I
endeavor to point out the consequences parents have to apprehend from novels,
which, though written upon moral plans, may be apt to take too strong a hold
upon young and susceptible minds, especially in the softer sex, and produce an
affected character, where we wish to find a natural one.

As the young person in question is now happily extricated from all danger, and
has seen her error, I shall relate her story, not only as it contains some
incidents which are amusing, but as it tends to illustrate by example the
several instructions, which in my Paper before mentioned I endeavored to
convey.

Sappho is the only child of Clemens, who is a widower; a passionate fondness
for this daughter, tempered with a very small share of observation or knowledge
of the world, determined Clemens to an attempt (which has seldom been found to
succeed) of rendering Sappho a miracle of accomplishments, by putting her under
the instructions of masters in almost every art and science at one and the same
time: His house now became an academy of musicians, dancing-masters,
language-masters, drawing-masters, geographers, historians, and a variety of
inferior artists male and female; all these studies appeared the more desirable
to Clemens, from his own ignorance of them, having devoted his life to business
of a very different nature. Sappho made just as much progress in each, as is
usual with young ladies so attended; she could do a little of most of them, and
talk of all: She could play a concerto by heart with every grace her master had
taught her, note for note, with the precise repetition of a barrelorgan: She
had stuck the room round with drawings, which Clemens praised to the skies, and
which Sappho assured him had been only touched up a little by her master: She
could tell the capital of every country, when he questioned her out of the
newspaper, and would point out the very spot upon the terrestrial globe, where
Paris, Madrid, Naples and Constantinople actually were to be found: She had as
much French as puzzled Clemens, and would have served her to buy blonde-lace
and Paris netting at a French milliner's; nay, she had gone so far as to pen a
letter in that language to a young lady of her acquaintance, which her master,
who stood over her whilst she wrote it, declared to be little inferior in style
to Madame Sevigne's: In history, both ancient and modern, her progress was
proportionable; for she could run through the twelve Caesar's in a breath, and
reckon up all the kings from the conquest upon her fingers without putting one
out of place; this appeared a prodigy to Clemens, and in the warmth of his
heart he fairly told her she was one of the world's wonders; Sappho aptly set
him right in this mistake, by assuring him that there were but seven wonders in
the world, all of which she repeated to him, and only left him more convinced
that she herself was deservedly the eighth.

There was a gentleman about fifty years old, a friend of Clemens, who came
frequently to his house, and, being a man of talents and leisure, was so kind
as to take great pains in directing and bringing Sappho forward in her studies:
This was a very acceptable service to Clemens, and the visits of Musidorus were
always joyfully welcomed both by him and Sappho herself: Musidorus declared
himself overpaid by the delight it gave him to contemplate the opening talents
of so promising a young lady; and as Sappho was now of years to establish her
pretensions to taste and sentiment, Musidorus made such a selection of authors
for her reading, as were best calculated to accomplish her in those
particulars: In settling this important choice, he was careful to put none but
writers of delicacy and sensibility into her hands; interesting and affecting
tales or novels were the books he chiefly recommended, which by exhibiting the
fairest patterns of female purity (suffering distress and even death itself
from the attacks of licentious passion in the grosser sex) might inspire her
sympathetic heart with pity, and guard it from seduction by displaying
profligacy in its most odious colors.

Sappho's propensity to these studies fully answered the intentions of her kind
director, and she became more and more attached to works of sentiment and
pathos. Musidorus's next solicitude was to form her style, and with this view
he took upon himself the trouble of carrying on a kind of probationary
correspondence with her; this happy expedient succeeded beyond expectation, for
as two people, who saw each other every day, could have very little matter to
write upon, there was so much the more exercise for invention; and such was the
copiousness and fluency of expression which she became mistress of by this
ingenious practice, that she could fill four sides of letter paper with what
other people express upon the back of a card: Clemens once, in the exultation
of his heart, put a bundle of these manuscripts into my hands, which he
confessed he did not clearly understand, but nevertheless believed them to be
the most elegant things in the language; I shall give the reader a sample of
two of them, which I drew out of the number, not by choice, but by chance; they
were carefully folded, and labelled at the back in Sappho's own hand as
follows, Musidorus to Sappho of the 10 th of June; underneath she had wrote
with a pencil these words: PICTURESQUE!

Here follows the note, and I cannot doubt but the reader will confess that its
contents deserve all that the label expresses.

June the 10th 1785.
As soon as I arose this morning, I directed my eyes to the east, and demanded
of the sun, if he had given you my good morrow: This was my parting injunction
last night, when I took leave of him in the west, and he this moment plays his
beams with so particular a luster, that I am satisfied he has fulfilled my
commission, and saluted the eyelids of Sappho: If he is described to come forth
as a bridegroom out of his chamber, how much rather may it be said of him, when
he comes forth out of yours? I shall look for him to perform his journey this
day with a peculiar glee; I expect he will not suffer a cloud to come near him,
and I shall not be surprised, if through his eagerness to repeat his next
morning's salutation, he should whip his fiery-footed steeds to the west some
hours before their time; unless indeed you should walk forth whilst he is
descending, and he should delay the wheels of his chariot to look back upon an
object so pleasing. You see therefore, most amiable Sappho, that unless you
fulfill your engagement, and consent to repeat our usual ramble in the cool of
the evening, our part of the world is likely to be in darkness before it is
expected, and that nature herself will be put out of course, if Sappho forfeits
her promise to Musidorus.


SAPPHO IN REPLY TO MUSIDORUS.
If nature holds her course till Sappho forfeits her word to Musidorus, neither
the setting nor the rising sun shall vary from his appointed time. But why does
Musidorus ascribe to me so flattering an influence, when, if I have any
interest with Apollo, it must be to his good offices only that I owe it? If he
bears the messages of Musidorus to me, is it not a mark of his respect to the
person who sends him, rather than to her he is sent to? And whom should he so
willingly obey, as one whom he so copiously inspires? I shall walk as usual in
the cool hour of even-tide, listening with greedy ear to that discourse, which,
by the refined and elevated sentiments it inspires, has taught me to look down
with silent pity and contempt upon those frivolous beings, who talk the mere
language of the senses, not of the soul, and to whose silly prattle I neither
condescend to lend an ear, or to subscribe a word. Know then that Sappho will
reserve her attention for Musidorus, and if Apollo shall delay the wheels of
his chariot to wait upon us in our evening ramble, believe me he will not stop
for the unworthy purpose of looking back upon Sappho, but for the nobler
gratification of listening to Musidorus.


The evening walk took place as usual, but it was a walk in the dusty purlieus
of London, and Sappho sighed for a cottage and the country: Musidorus seconded
the sigh, and he had abundance of fine things to say on the occasion:
Retirement is a charming subject for a sentimental enthusiast; there is not a
poet in the language, but will help him out with a description; Musidorus had
them all at his fingers ends, from Hesperus that led the starry host, down to a
glowworm.

The passion took so strong a hold of Sappho's mind, that she actually assailed
her father on the subject, and with great energy of persuasion moved him to
adopt her ideas: It did not exactly suit Clemens to break up a very lucrative
profession, and set out in search of some solitary cottage, whose romantic
situation might suit the spiritualized desires of his daughter, and I am afraid
he was for once in his life not quite so respectful to her wishes, as he might
have been: Sappho was so unused to contradiction, that she explained herself to
Musidorus with some asperity, and it became the subject of much debate between
them: Not that he held a contrary opinion from here is; but the difficulty which
embarrassed both parties was, where to find the happy scene she sighed for, and
how to obtain it when it was found. The first part of this difficulty was at
last surmounted, and the chosen spot was pointed out by Musidorus, which
according to his description was the very bower of felicity; it was in a
northern county at a distance from the capital, and its situation was most
delectable: The next measure was a strong one; for the question to be decided
was, if Sappho should abandon her project or her father; she called upon
Musidorus for his opinion, and he delivered it as follows: -- "If I was not
convinced, most amiable Sappho, that a second application to Clemens would be
as unsuccessful as the first, I would advise you to the experiment; but as
there is no doubt of this, it must be the height of imprudence to put that to
a trial, of which there is no hope: It comes therefore next to be considered,
if you shall give up your plan, or execute it without his privity; in other
words, if you shall or shall not do that, which is to make you happy: If it
were not consistent with the strictest purity of character, I should answer no;
but when I reflect upon the innocence, the simplicity, the moral beauty of the
choice you make, I then regard the duty you owe to yourself as superior to all
others, which are falsely called natural; whereas, if you follow this in
preference, you obey nature herself: If you were of an age too childish to be
allowed to know what suits you best, or, if being old enough to be entitled to
a choice, you wanted wit to make one, there would be no doubt in the case; nay,
I will go so far as to say, that if Clemens was a man of judgment superior to
your own, I should be staggered with his opposition; but if truth may ever be
spoken, it may on this occasion, and who is there that does not see the
weakness of the father's understanding; who but must acknowledge the
pre-eminence of the daughter's? I will speak yet plainer, most incomparable
Sappho, it is not fitting that folly should prescribe to wisdom: The question
therefore is come to an upshot, Shall Sappho live a life she despises and
detests, to humor a father, whose weakness she pities, but whose judgment she
cannot respect?"

"No," replied Sappho, "that point is decided; pass on to the next, and speak
to me upon the practicability of executing what I am resolved to attempt." "The
authority of a parent," resumed Musidorus, "is such over an unprotected child,
that reason will be no defense to you against obstinacy and coercion. In the
case of a son, profession gives that defense; new duties are imposed by a man's
vocation, which supersede what are called natural ones; but in the instance of
a daughter, where shall she fly for protection against the imperious control
of a parent, but to the arms --? I tremble to pronounce the word; your own
imagination must complete the sentence" -- "Oh! horrible!" cried Sappho,
interrupting him, "I will never marry; I will never so contaminate the spotless
luster of my incorporeal purity: No, Musidorus, no -- I Will bear my blushing
honors still about me. -- "And fit you should," cried Musidorus, "what demon
dare defile them? Perish the man, that could intrude a sensual thought within
the sphere of such repelling virtue! -- But marriage is a form; and forms are
pure; at least they may be such; there is no pollution in a name; and if a name
will shelter you, why should you fear to take it?" -- "I perceive," answered
Sappho, "that I am in a very dangerous dilemma; since the very expedient, which
is to protect me from violence of one sort, exposes me to it under another
shape too odious to mention." -- "And is there then," said Musidorus sighing,
"is there no human being in your thoughts in whom you can confide? Alas for me!
if you believe you have no friend who is not tainted with the impurities of his
sex: And what is friendship? what, but the union of souls? and are not souls
thus united already married? For my part, I have long regarded our pure and
spiritualized connection in this light, and I cannot foresee how any outward
ceremony is to alter that inherent delicacy of sentiment, which is inseparable
from my soul's attachment to the soul of Sappho: If we are determined to
despise the world, we should also despise the constructions of the world: If
retirement is our choice, and the life and habits of Clemens are not to be the
life and habits of Sappho, why should Musidorus, who is ready to sacrifice
every thing in her defense, not be thought incapable of abusing her confidence,
when he offers the protection of his name? If a few words muttered over us by a
Scotch blacksmith will put all our troubles to rest, why should we resort to
dangers and difficulties, when so easy a remedy is before us? -- But why should
I seek for arguments to allay your apprehensions, when you have in me so
natural a security for my performance of the strictest stipulations?" -- "And
what is that security?" she eagerly demanded. Musidorus now drew back a few
paces, and with the most solemn air and action, laying his hand upon his heart,
replied, "My age, madam!" -- "That Is true," cried Sappho; and now the
conversation took a new turn, in the course of which they agreed upon their
plan of proceeding, settled their rendezvous for the next day, and Musidorus
departed to prepare all things necessary for the security of their expedition.

No LXXXII.
Tange Chloen semel arrogantem.
(HORAT.) O Cupid, touch this rebel heart!

UPON the day appointed, Sappho, with her father's consent, set out in a hired
post-chaise upon a pretended visit to a relation, who lived about twenty miles
from town on the northern road: At the inn where she was to change horses, she
dismissed her London postillion with a short note to her father, in which she
told him she should write to him in two or three days time: Here she took post
for the next stage upon the great road, where she was met by Musidorus, and
from thence they pressed forward with all possible expedition toward Gretna
Green.

The mind of Sappho was visited with some compunctions by the way; but the
eloquence of her companion, and the respectful delicacy of his behavior, soon
reconciled her conscience to the step she had taken: The reflections which
passed in Musidorus's breast, were not so easily quieted: The anxiety of his
thoughts, and the fatigues of the journey, brought so violent an attack upon
him, that when he was within a stage or two of his journey's end, he found
himself unable to proceed; the gout had seized upon his stomach, and immediate
relief became necessary: The romantic visions, with which Sappho hitherto had
indulged her imagination, now began to vanish, and a gloomy prospect opened
upon her; in place of a comforter and companion by the way to sooth her cares,
and fill her mind with soft healing sentiments, she had a wretched object
before her eyes, tormented with pain and at the point of death.

The house, in which she had taken shelter, was of the meanest sort, but the
good people were humane and assiduous, and the village afforded a medical
assistant of no contemptible skill in his profession: There was another
consolation attended her situation, for in the same inn was quartered a dragoon
officer with a small recruiting party; this young cornet was of a good family,
of an engaging person and very elegant address; his humanity was exerted not
only in consoling Sappho, but in nursing and cheering Musidorus. These
charitable offices were performed with such a natural benignity, that Sappho
must have been most insensible if she could have overlooked them; her gentle
heart on the contrary overflowed with gratitude, and in the extremity of her
distress she freely confessed to him, that but for his support she must have
sunk outright. Though the extremity of Musidorus's danger was now over, yet he
was incapable of exertion; and Sappho, who was at leisure to reflect upon her
situation, began to waver in her resolution, and to put some questions to
herself, which reason could not readily answer. Her thoughts were so distracted
and perplexed, that she saw no resource but to unburthen them, and throw
herself upon the honor and discretion of Lionel, for so this young officer was
called. This she had frequently in mind to do, and many opportunities offered
themselves for it, but still her sensibility of shame prevented it. The
constant apprehension of pursuit hung over her, and sometimes she meditated to
go back to her father; in one of these moments she had begun to write a letter
to Clemens to prepare him for her return, when Lionel entered the room and
informed her that he perceived so visible an amendment in Musidorus, that he
expected to congratulate her on his recovery in a very few days -- "and then,
Madam," added he, "my sorrows will begin where yours end; be it so! if you are
happy, I must not complain: I presume this gentleman is your father, or near
relation?" -- "Father!" exclaimed Sappho: -- She cast her eyes upon the letter
she was inditing, and burst into tears. Lionel approached, and took her hand in
his; she raised her handkerchief to her eyes with the other, and he proceeded
-- "If my anxious solicitude for an unknown lady, in whose happiness my heart
is warmly interested, exposes me to any hazard of your displeasure, stop me
before I speak another word; if not, confide in me, and you shall find me ready
to devote my life to serve you. The mystery about you and the road you are upon
(were it not for the companion you are with) would tempt me to believe you was
upon a generous errand, to reward some worthy man, whom fortune and your
parents do not favor; but this poor object above stairs makes that impossible.
If however there is any favored lover, waiting in secret agony for that
expected moment, when your release from hence may crown him with the best of
human blessings, the hand, which now has hold of yours, shall be devoted to
his service: Command me where you will; I never yet have forfeited my honor,
and cannot wrong your confidence." -- "You are truly generous," replied Sappho;
"there is no such man; the hand you hold is yet untainted, and till now has
been untouched; release it therefore, and I will proceed. -- My innocence has
been my error; I have been the dupe of sentiment: I am the only child of a fond
father, and never knew the blessing of a mother; when I look back upon my
education, I perceive that art has been exhausted, and nature overlooked in it.
The unhappy object above stairs has been my sole adviser and director; for my
father is immersed in business: From him, and from the duty which I owe him, I
confess I have seceded, and my design was to devote myself to retirement. My
scheme I now perceive was visionary in the extreme; left to my own reflections,
reason shows me both the danger and the folly of it: I have therefore
determined upon returning to my father, and am writing to him a letter, which I
shall send by express, to relieve him from the agonies my silly conduct has
occasioned." -- "What you have now disclosed to me," said Lionel, "with a
sincerity that does equal honor to yourself and me, demands a like sincerity
on my part, and I must therefore confess to you, that Musidorus, believing
himself at the point of death, imparted to me not only every thing that has
passed, but a^ the future purposes of this treacherous plot, from which you
have so providentially escaped; these I shall not explain to you at present,
but you may depend upon it, that this attack upon his life has saved his
conscience. I cannot as a man of honor oppose myself to your resolution of
returning home immediately; and yet when I consider the ridicule you will have
to encounter from the world at large, the reflections that will arise in your
mind, when there is perhaps no friend at hand to assuage them, but above all
when I thus contemplate your charms, and recollect that affectation is
expelled, and nature reinstated in your heart, I cannot resist the impulse nor
the opportunity of appealing to that nature against a separation so fatal to my
peace: Yes, loveliest of women, I must appeal to nature; I must hope this heart
of yours, where such refined sensations have resided, will not be shut from
others of a more generous kind. What could the name of Musidorus do, which
Lionel's cannot? Why should you not replace an unworthy friend with one of
fairer principles? with one of honorable birth, of equal age, and owner of a
heart, that beats with ardent passion toward you? Had you been made the
sacrifice of this chimaera, this illusion, what had your father suffered? If I
am honored with your hand in marriage, what can he complain of? My conduct, my
connections and my hopes in life will bear the scrutiny: Suffer me to say you
will have a protector, whose character can face the world, and whose spirit
cannot fear it. As for worldly motives, I renounce them; give me yourself and
your affections; give me possession of this hand, these eyes, and the soul
which looks through them; let your father withhold the rest. Now, loveliest and
most beloved, have you the heart to share a soldier's fortune? Have you the
noble confidence to take his word? Will you follow, where his honor bids him
go, and whether a joyful victory or a glorious death attends him, will you
receive him living, or entomb him dying in your arms?"

Whilst Lionel was uttering these words, his action, his emotion, and that
honest glow of passion, which nature only can assume and artifice cannot
counterfeit, had so subdued the yielding heart of Sappho, that he must have
been dull indeed, if he could have wanted any stronger confirmation of his
success, than what her looks bestowed: Never was silence more eloquent; the
labor of language and the forms of law had no share in this contract: A sigh
of speechless ecstasy drew up the nuptial bond; the operations of love are
momentary: Tears of affection interchangeably witnessed the deed, and the
contracting parties sealed it with an inviolable embrace.

Every moment now had wings to waft them to that happy spot, where the unholy
hand of law has not yet plucked up the root of love: Freedom met them on the
very extremity of her precincts; Nature held out her hand to welcome them, and
the Loves and Graces, though exiled to a desert, danced in her train.

Thus was Sappho, when brought to the very brink of destruction, rescued by the
happy intervention of Providence. The next day produced an interview with
Clemens, at the house to which they returned after the ceremony in Scotland:
The meeting, as might well be expected, was poignant and reproachful; but when
Sappho, in place of a superannuated sentimentalist, presented to him a
son-in-law, in whose martial form and countenance he beheld youth, honor,
manly beauty, and every attractive grace that could justify her choice, his
transports became excessive; and their union, being now sanctified by the
blessing of a father, and warranted by love and nature, has snatched a deluded
victim from misery and error, and added one conjugal instance to the scanty
records of unfashionable felicity.

Let not my young female readers believe that the extravagance of Sappho's
conduct is altogether out of nature, or that they have nothing to apprehend
from men of Musidorus's age and character; my observation convinces me to the
contrary. Gravity, says Lord Shaftesbury, is the very essence of imposture; and
sentimental gravity, varnished over with the experienced artifice of age and
wisdom, is the worst of its species.

No LXXXIII.
THE deistical writers, who would fain persuade us that the world was in
possession of as pure a system of morality before the introduction of
Christianity as since, affect to make a great display of the virtues of many
eminent heathens, particularly of the philosophers Socrates, Plato, and some
others.

When they set up these characters as examples of perfection, which human
nature with the aids of revelation either has not attained to, or not exceeded,
they put us upon an invidious task, which no man would voluntarily engage in,
and challenge us to discuss a question, which, if thoroughly agitated, cannot
fail to strip the illustrious dead of more than half the honors which the
voice of ages has agreed to give them.

It is therefore to be wished that they had held the argument to its general
terms, and shown us where that system of ethics is to be found, which they are
prepared to bring into comparison with the moral doctrines of Christ. This I
take to be the fair ground whereon the controversy should have been decided,
and here it would infallibly have been brought to issue; but they knew their
weapons better than to trust them in so close a conflict.

The maxims of some heathen philosophers, and the moral writings of Plato,
Cicero and Seneca, contain many noble truths, worthy to be held in veneration
by posterity; and if the deist can from these produce a system of morality as
pure and perfect as that which claims its origin from divine revelation, he
will prove that God gave to man a faculty of distinguishing between right and
wrong with such correctness, that his own immediate revelation added no lights
to those, which the powers of reason had already discovered. Let us grant
therefore for a moment, that Christ's religion revealed to the world no new
truths in morality, nor removed any old errors, and what triumph accrues to the
deist by the admission? The most he gains is to bring reason to a level with
revelation, as to its moral doctrines; in so doing he dignifies man's nature,
and shows how excellent a faculty God gave his creatures in their original
formation, to guide their judgments and control their actions; but will this
diminish the importance of revealed religion? Certainly not, unless he can
prove one or both of the following positions; viz.

First, That the moral tenets of Christianity either fall short of, or run
counter to, the moral tenets of natural religion; or,

Secondly, That Christ's mission was nugatory and superfluous, because the
world was already in possession of as good a system of morality as he imparted
to mankind.

As to the first, I believe it has never been attempted by any heathen or
deistical advocate to convict the Gospel system of false morality, or to
allege that it is short and defective in any one particular duty, when
compared with that system which the world was possessed of without its aid. No
man, I believe, has controverted its truths, though many have disputed its
discoveries: No man has been hardy enough to say of any of its doctrines --
This we ought not to practice; though many have been vain enough to cry out --
All this we knew before. -- Let us leave this position therefore for the
present, and pass to the next, viz. Whether Christ's mission was nugatory and
superfluous, because the world already knew as much morality as he taught them.

This will at once be answered, if the Gospel assertion be established, that
life and immortality were brought to light. We need not adduce any other of the
mysteries of revelation; we may safely rest the question here, and say with the
apostle to the Gentile world -- Behold! I show you a mystery: We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump (for the trumpet shall sound) and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Mark to how short an issue the argument
is now brought! Either the apostle is not warranted in calling this a mystery,
or the deist is not warranted in calling Christ's mission nugatory and
superfluous.

It now rests with the deist to produce from the writings and opinions of
mankind antecedent to Christianity, such a revelation of things to come, as can
fully anticipate the Gospel revelation, or else to admit with the apostle that
a mystery was shown; and if the importance of this mystery be admitted, as it
surely must, the importance of Christ's mission can no longer be disputed; and
though revelation shall have added nothing to the heathen system of morality,
still it does not follow that it was superfluous and nugatory.

Let the deist resort to the heathen Elysium and the realms of Pluto in search
of evidences, to set in competition with the Christian revelation of a future
state; let him call in Socrates, Plato, and as many more as he can collect in
his cause; it is but lost labor to follow the various tracks of reason through
the pathless ocean of conjecture, always wandering, though with different
degrees of deviation. What does it avail, though Seneca had taught as good
morality as Christ himself preached from the Mount? How does it affect revealed
religion, though Tully's Offices were found superior to Saint Paul's Epistles?
Let the deist indulge himself in declaiming on the virtues of the heathen
heroes and philosophers; let him ransack the annals of the Christian world, and
present us with legions of crusaders drenched in human blood, furious fanatics
rushing on each other's throats for the distinction of a word, massacring whole
nations and laying nature waste for a metaphysical quibble, it touches not
religion; let him array a host of persecuting Inquisitors with all their
torturing eng^es, the picture indeed is terrible, but who will say it is the
picture of Christianity?

When we consider the ages, which have elapsed since the introduction of
Christianity, and the events attending its propagation, how wonderful is the
history we contemplate! We see a mighty light spreading over all mankind from
one spark kindled in an obscure corner of the earth: An humble persecuted
teacher preaches a religion of peace, of forgiveness of injuries, of submission
to temporal authorities, of meekness, piety, brotherly love and universal
benevolence; he is tried, condemned and executed for his doctrines; he rises
from the tomb, and, breaking down the doors of death, sets open to all mankind
the evidence of a life to come, and at the same time points out the sure path
to everlasting happiness in that future state: A few unlettered disciples, his
adherents and survivors, take up his doctrines, and going forth amongst the
provinces of the Roman empire, then in its zenith, preach a religion to the
Gentiles, directly striking at the foundation of the most splendid fabric
Superstition ever reared on earth: These Gentiles are not a rude and barbarous
race, but men of illuminated minds, acute philosophers, eloquent orators,
powerful reasoners, eminent in arts and sciences, and armed with sovereign
power: What an undertaking for the teachers of Christianity! What a conflict
for a religion, holding forth no temporal allurements! On the contrary,
promising nothing but mortification in this world, and referring all hope of a
reward for present sufferings to the unseen glories of a life to come.

The next scene which this review presents to us, shows the followers of
Christianity suffering under persecution by the heathen, whom their numbers had
alarmed, and who began to tremble for their gods: In the revolution of ages the
church becomes triumphant, and, made wanton by prosperity, degenerates from its
primitive simplicity, and running into idle controversies and metaphysical
schisms, persecutes its seceding brethren with unremitting fury; whilst the
Popes, thundering out anathemas and hurling torches from their throne, seem the
vicegerents of the furies rather than of the author of a religion of peace: The
present time affords a different view; the temper of the church grown milder,
though its zeal less fervent; men of different communions begin to draw nearer
to each other; as refinement of manners becomes more general, toleration
spreads; we are no longer slaves to the laws of religion, but converts to the
reason of it; and being allowed to examine the evidence and foundation of the
faith that is in us, we discover that Christianity is a religion of charity,
toleration, reason and peace, enjoining us to have compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering railing for railing,
but contrariwise blessing; knowing that we are thereunto called, that we should
inherit a blessing.

No LXXXIV.
TASTE may be considered either as sensitive or mental; and under each of these
denominations is sometimes spoken of as natural, sometimes as acquired: I
propose to treat of it in its intellectual construction only, and in this sense
Mr. Addison defines it to be that faculty of the soul, which discerns the
beauties of an author with pleasure, and the imperfections with dislike.

This definition may very properly apply to the faculty which we exercise in
judging and deciding upon the works of others; but how does it apply to the
faculty exercised by those who produced those works? How does it serve to
develope the taste of an author, the taste of a painter or a statuary? and yet
we may speak of a work of taste with the same propriety, as we do of a man of
taste. It should seem therefore as if this definition went only to that
denomination of taste, which we properly call an acquired taste; the
productions of which generally end in imitation, whilst those of natural taste
bear the stamp of originality: Another characteristic of natural taste will be
simplicity; for how can nature give more than she possesses, and what is nature
but simplicity? Now when the mind of any man is endued with a fine natural
taste, and all means of profiting by other men's ideas are out of the question,
that taste will operate by disposing him to select the fairest subjects out of
what he sees either for art or imagination to work upon: Still his production
will be marked with simplicity; but as it is the province of taste to separate
deformity or vulgarity from what is merely simple, so according to the nature
of his mind who possesses it, beauty or sublimity will be the result of the
operation: If his taste inclines him to what is fair and elegant in nature, he
will produce beauty; if to what is lofty, bold and tremendous, he will strike
out sublimity.

Agreeably to this, we may observe in all literary and enlightened nations,
their earliest authors and artists are the most simple: First, adventurers
represent what they see or conceive with simplicity, because their impulse is
unbiassed by emulation, having nothing in their sight either to imitate, avoid,
or excel; on the other hand their successors are sensible, that one man's
description of nature must be like another's, and in their zeal to keep clear
of imitation, and to outstrip a predecessor, they begin to compound, refine,
and even to distort. I will refer to the Venus de Medicis and the Laocoon for
an illustration of this: I do not concern myself about the dates or sculptors
of these figures; but in the former we see beautiful simplicity, the fairest
form in nature, selected by a fine taste, and imitated without affectation or
distortion, and as it should seem without even an effort of art: In the Laocoon
we have a complicated plot; we unravel a maze of ingenious contrivance, where
the artist has compounded and distorted Nature in the ambition of surpassing
her.

Virgil possessed a fine taste acccording to Mr. Addison's definition, which I
before observed applies only to an acquired taste: He had the faculty of
discerning the beauties of an author with pleasure, and the imperfections with
dislike: He had also the faculty of imitating what he discerned; so that I
cannot verify what I have advanced by any stronger instance than his. I should
think there does not exist a poet, who has gone such lengths in imitation as
Virgil; for to pass over his pastoral and bucolic poems, which are evidently
drawn from Theocritus and Hesiod, with the assistance of Aratus in every thing
that relates to the scientific part of the signs and seasons, it is supposed
that his whole narrative of the destruction of Troy, with the incident of the
wooden horse and the episode of Sinon, are an almost literal translation of
Pisander the epic poet, who in his turn perhaps might copy his account from the
Ilias Minor; (but this last is mere suggestion). As for the Aeneid, it does
little else but reverse the order of Homer's epic, making Aeneas's voyage
precede his wars in Italy, whereas the voyage of Ulysses is subsequent to the
operations of the Iliad. As Apollo is made hostile to the Greeks, and the cause
of his offense is introduced by Homer in the opening of the Iliad, so Juno in
the Aeneid stands in his place with every circumstance of imitation. It would
be an endless task to trace the various instances throughout the Aeneid, where
scarce a single incident can be found which is not copied from Homer: Neither
is there greater originality in the executive parts of the poem, than in the
constructive; with this difference only, that he has copied passages from
various authors, Roman as well as Greek, though from Homer the most. Amongst
the Greeks, the dramatic poets Aeschylus, Sophocles, and principally Euripides;
have had the greatest share of his attention; Aristophanes, Menander and other
comic authors, Callimachus and some of the lyric writers, also may be traced in
his imitations. A vast collection of passages from Ennius chiefly, from
Lucretius, Furius, Lucilius, Pacuvius, Suevius, Naevius, Varius, Catullus,
Accius and others of his own nation, has been made by Macrobius in his
Saturnalia, where Virgil has done little else but put their sentiments into
more elegant verse; so that in strictness of speaking we may say of the Aeneid,
"that it is a miscellaneous compilation of poetical passages, composing all
together an epic poem, formed upon the model of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey;
abounding in beautiful versification, and justly to be admired for the fine
acquired taste of its author, but devoid of originality either of construction
or execution." Besides its general inferiority as being a copy from Homer, it
particularly falls off from its original in the conception and preservation of
character: It does not reach the sublimity and majesty of its model, but it has
in a great degree adopted the simplicity, and entirely avoided the rusticity of
Homer.

Lucan and Claudian in later ages were perhaps as good versifiers as Virgil,
but far inferior to him in that fine acquired taste, which he excelled in: They
are ingenious, but not simple; and execute better than they contrive. A passage
from Claudian, which I shall beg the reader's leave to compare with one from
Virgil (where he personifies the evil passions and plagues of mankind, and
posts them at the entrance of hell, to which Aeneas is descending) will
exemplify what I have said; for at the same time that it will bear a dispute,
whether Claudian's description is not even superior to Virgil's in poetical
merit, yet the judicious manner of introducing it in one case, and the evident
want of judgment in the other, will help to show, that the reason why we prefer
Virgil to Claudian, is more on account of his superiority of taste than of
talents.

Claudian's description stands in the very front of his poem on Ruffinus;
Virgil's is woven into his fable, and will be found in the sixth book of his
Aeneid, as follows:

Vestibulum ante ipsum, primisque in faucibus Orci,
Luctus, et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae;
Pallentesque habitant Morbi, tristisque Senectus,
Et Metus, et malesuada Fames, et turpis Egestas,
Terribiles visu formae; Lethumque, Laborque;
Tum consanguineus Lethi Sopor, et mala mentis
Gaudia, mortiferumque adverso in limine Bellum,
Ferreique Eumenidum thalami, et Discordia demens
Vipereum crinem vittis innexa cruentis.
(VIRGIL.) Just in the gates, and in the jaws of Hell,
Revengeful Cares and sullen Sorrows dwell,
And pale Diseases, and repining Age;
Want, Fear, and Famine's unresisted rage;
Here Toils, and Death, and Death's half-brother, Sleep,
Forms terrible to view, their centry keep:
With anxious Pleasures of a guilty mind,
Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind:
The Furies iron beds, and Strife that shakes
Her hissing tresses, and unfolds her snakes.
(DRYDEN.) Protinus infernas ad limina tetra sorores
Concilium deforme vocat; glomerantur in unum
Innumerae pestes Erebi, quascunque sinistro
Nox genuit foetu: Nutrix Discordia belli;
Imperiosa Fames; leto vicina Senectus;
Impatiensque sui Morbus; Livorque secundis
Anxius, et scisso Moerens velamine Luctus,
Et Timor, et caeco praeceps Audacia vultu;
Et luxus populator opum; cui semper adhaerens
Infelix humili gressu comitatur Egestas;
Faedaque Avaritiae complexae pectora matris
Insomnes longo veniunt examine Curae.
(CLAUDIAN.) The infernal council, at Alecto's call
Convened, assemble in the Stygian hall;
Myriads of ghastly plagues, that shun the light,
Daughters of Erebus and gloomy Night:
Strife war-compelling; Famine's wasting rage;
And Death just hovering over decrepid Age;
Envy, Prosperity's repining foe,
Restless Disease, and self-dishevell'd Woe,
Rashness, and Fear, and Poverty, that steals
Close as his shadow at the Spendthrift's heels;
And Cares, that clinging to the Miser's breast,
Forbid his sordid soul to taste of rest.
The productions of the human genius will borrow their complexion from the
times in which they originate. Ben Jonson says, that the players often
mentioned it as an honor to Shakespeare, that in his writing (whatsoever he
penned) he never blotted out a line. My answer has been (adds he) Would he had
blotted out a thousand! which they thought a malevolent speech. I had not told
posterity this, but for their ignorance, who chose that circumstance to commend
their friend by, wherein he most faulted; and to justify mine own candor, for
I loved the man, and do honor his memory on this side idolatry as much as any:
He was indeed honest, and of an open and free nature; had an excellent
fantasy, brave notions and gentle expressions, wherein he flowed with that
facility, that sometime it was necessary he should be stopped; Sufflaminandus
erat, as Augustus said of Haterius: His wit was in his own power; would the
rule of it had been so too!

I think there can be no doubt but this kind of indignant negligence with which
Shakespeare wrote, was greatly owing to the slight consideration he had for his
audience. Jonson treated them with the dictatorial haughtiness of a pedant;
Shakespeare with the carelessness of a gentleman who wrote at his ease, and gave
them the first flowings of his fancy without any dread of their correction.
These were times in which the poet indulged his genius without restraint; he
stood alone and supereminent, and wanted no artificial scaffold to raise him
above the heads of his contemporaries; he was natural, lofty, careless, and
daringly incorrect. Place the same man in other times, amongst a people
polished almost into general equality, and he shall begin to hesitate and
retract his sallies; for in this respect poetical are like military excursions,
and it makes a wide difference in the movements of a skilful general, whether
he is to sally into a country defended by well-disciplined troops, or only by
an irregular mob of unarmed barbarians. Shakespeare might vault his Pegasus
without a rein; mountains might rise and seas roll in vain before him; Nature
herself could neither stop nor circumscribe his career. The modern man of verse
mounts with the precaution of a riding-master, and prances round his little
circle full-bitted and caparisoned in all the formality of a review. Whilst he
is thus pacing and piaffering with every body's eyes upon him, his friends are
calling out every now and then -- "Seat yourself firm in the saddle! Hold your
body straight! Keep your spurs from his sides for fear he sets a kicking! Have
a care he does not stumble; there lies a stone, here runs a ditch; keep your
whip still, and depend upon your bit, if you have not a mind to break your
neck!" -- On the other quarter his enemies are bawling out -- "How like a
tailor that fellow sits on horseback! Look at his feet, look at his arms! Set
the curs upon him; tie a cracker to his horse's tail, and make sport for the
spectators!" -- All this while perhaps the poor devil could have performed
passably well, if it were not for the mobbing and hallooing about him: Whereas
Shakespeare mounts without fear, and starting in the jockey-phrase at score,
cries out, "Stand clear, ye sons of earth! or, by the beams of my father
Apollo, I Will ride over you, and trample you into dust!"

No LXXXV.
I WAS in company the other day with a young gentleman, who had newly succeeded
to a considerable estate, and was a good deal struck with the conversation of
an elderly person present, who was very deliberately casting up the several
demands that the community at large had upon his property. -- "Are you aware,"
says he, "how small a portion of your revenue will properly remain to yourself,
when you have satisfied all the claims which you must pay to society and your
country for living amongst us and supporting the character of what is called a
landed gentleman? Part of your income will be stopped for the maintenance of them
who have none, under the denomination of poorrates; this may be called a fine
upon the partiality of fortune, levied by the law of society, which will not
trust its poor members to the precarious charity of the rich: Another part must
go to the debts and necessities of the government, which protects you in war
and peace, and is also a fine, which you must be content to pay for the honor
of being an Englishman, and the advantage of living in a land of liberty and
security. The learned professions will also have their share; the church for
taking care of your soul, the physician for looking after your body, and the
lawyer must have part of your property for superintending the rest. The
merchant, tradesman and artisan will have their profit upon all the multiplied
wants, comforts and indulgences of civilized life; these are not to be
enumerated, for they depend on the humors and habits of men; they have grown
up with the refinements and elegancies of the age, and they will further
increase, as these shall advance: They are the conductors, which, like the
blood vessels in the human frame, circulate your wealth, and every other man's
wealth, through every limb and even fiber of the national body: The hand of
industry creates that wealth, and to the hand of industry it finally returns,
as blood does to the heart."

If we trace the situation of man from a mere state of nature to the highest
state of civilization, we shall find these artificial wants and dependences
increase with every stage and degree of his improvements; so that if we
consider each nation apart as one great machine, the several parts and springs,
which give it motion, naturally become more and more complicated and
multifarious, as the uses to which it is applied are more and more diversified.
Again, if we compare two nations in an equal state of civilization, we may
remark, that where the greater freedom obtains, there the greater variety of
artificial wants will obtain also, and of course property will circulate
through more channels: This I take to be the case upon a comparison between
France and England, arising from the different constitutions of them and us
with respect to civil liberty.

The natural wants of men are pretty much the same in most states, but the
humors of men will take different directions in different countries, and are
governed in a great degree by the laws and constitution of the realm in which
they are found: There are numbers of people in England, who get their living by
arts and occupations, which would not be tolerated in a despotic government.
Men's manners are simplified in proportion to the restraint and circumscription
under which they are kept. The country sports of English gentlemen furnish
maintenance and employment to vast numbers of our people, whereas in France and
other arbitrary states, men of the first rank and fortune reside in the
capital, and keep no establishments of this sort. What a train of grooms,
jockies and stable-boys follow the heels of our horses and hounds in tight
boots and leather breeches! each of which carries the clothes of six men upon
his back, cased in one skin of flannel under another, like the coats of an
onion. The locomotive mania of an Englishman circulates his person, and of
course his cash, into every quarter of the kingdom: A Frenchman takes a journey
only when he cannot help it, an Englishman has no other reason but because he
likes it; he moves with every shift of the weather, and follows the changes of
the most variable climate in the world; a frosty morning puts him from his
hunting, and he is in London before night; a thaw meets him in town, and again
he scampers into the country: He has a horse to run at Epsom, another at
Salisbury, and a third at York, and he must be on the spot to back every one of
them; he has a stud at Newmarket, a mistress in London, a shooting-box in
Norfolk, and a pack of fox-hounds in the New Forest: For one wheel that real
business puts in motion, pleasure, whim, ennui turn one hundred: Sickness,
which confines all the rest of the world, sends him upon his travels; one
doctor plunges him into the sea at Brighthelmstone, a second steeps him in warm
water at Buxton; and a third sends him to Bath; for the gentlemen of the
learned faculty, whether they help us into life, or help us out of it, make us
pay toll at each gate; and if at any time their art keeps us alive, the fine we
must pay to their ingenuity makes the renewal in some cases too hard a bargain
for a poor man to profit by. In all other countries upon earth a man is
contented to be well and pay nothing for being so, but in England even health
is an expensive article, as we are for ever contriving how to be a little
better, and physicians are too conscientious to take a fee and do nothing for
it. If there is any th^g like ridicule in this, it is against the patient and
not against the physician I would wish to point it; it is in England that the
profession is truly dignified, and if it is here accompanied with greater
emoluments, it is proportionably practiced with superior learning; if life is
more valuable in a land of freedom than in a land of slavery, why should it not
be paid for according to its value? In despotic states, where men's lives are
in fact the property of the prince, all subjects should in justice be cured or
killed at his proper charge; but where a man's house is his castle, his health
is his own concern.

As to the other learned profession of the law, to its honor be it spoken,
there is that charming perplexity about it, that we can ruin one another and
ourselves with the greatest certainty and facility. It is so superior to all
other sciences, that it can turn demonstration into doubt, truth into
contradiction, make improbability put matter of fact out of countenance, and
hang up a point for twenty years, which common sense would decide in as many
minutes. It is the glorious privilege of the freemen of England to make their
own laws, and they have made so many, that they can neither count them up nor
comprehend them. The parliament of England is without comparison the most
voluminous author in the world; and there is such a happy ambiguity in its
works, that its students have as much to say on the wrong side of every
question as upon the right: In all cases of discussion it is one man's business
to puzzle, and another's to explain, and though victory be ever so certain, it
is agreed between the parties to make a long battle: There must be an
extraordinary faculty of expression in the law, when the only parts clearly
understood are those which it has not committed to writing.

I shall say very little in this place upon the sacred profession of divinity:
It is to be lamented that the church of England is not provided with a proper
competency for all who are engaged in performing its functions; but I cannot
close with their opinion, who are for stripping its dignities, and equalizing
those splendid benefices, which are at once the glory and the support of its
establishment. Levellers and reformers will always have the popular cry on
their side, and I have good reason to know with what inveteracy a man is
persecuted for an opinion which opposes it; and yet it is hard to give credit
to the sincerity and disinterestedness of him who courts popularity, and deny
it to the man who sacrifices his repose and stands the brunt of abuse in
defense of what he believes to be the truth.

And now having fallen upon the mention of Popularity, I shall take leave to
address that divinity with a few lines picked up from an obscure author, which,
though below poetry, are not quite prose, and on that account pretty nearly
suited to the level of their subject.

O Popularity, thou giddy thing!
What grace or profit do thou bring?
Thou art not honesty, thou art not fame;
I cannot call thee by a worthy name:
To say I hate thee were not true;
Contempt is properly thy due;
I cannot love thee and despise thee too.
Thou art no patriot, but the veriest cheat
That ever traffick'd in deceit;
A state empiric, bellowing loud
Freedom and phrenzy to the mobbing crowd;
And what car'st thou, if thou can raise
Illuminations and huzzas,
Though half the city sunk in one bright blaze?
A patriot! no; for thou do hold in hate
The very peace and welfare of the state;
When anarchy assaults the sovereign's throne,
Then is the day, the night thine own;
Then is thy triumph, when the foe
Levels some dark insidious blow,
Or strong rebellion lays thy country low.
Thou can affect humility to hide
Some deep device of monstrous pride;
Conscience and charity pretend
For compassing some private end;
And in a canting conventicle note
Long scripture passages can quote,
When persecution rankles in thy throat.
Thou have no sense of nature at thy heart,
No ear for science, and no eye for art,
Yet confidently do decide at once
This man a wit, and that a dunce;
And, (strange to tell!) however unjust,
We take thy dictates upon trust,
For if the world will be deceived, it must.
In truth and justice thou have no delight,
Virtue thou do not know by sight;
But, as the chemist by his skill
From dross and dregs a spirit can distill,
So from the prisons, or the stews,
Bullies, blasphemers, cheats or Jews
Shall turn to heroes, if they serve thy views.
Thou do but make a ladder of the mob,
Whereby to climb into some courtly job;
There safe reposing, warm and snug,
Thou answer'st with a patient shrug,
Miscreants, begone! who cares for you,
Ye base-born, brawling, clamorous crew?
You Have served my turn, and, vagabonds, adieu!
No LXXXVI.
WHEN it had entered into the mind of Shakespeare to form an historical play
upon certain events in the reign of Henry the fourth of England, the character
of the Prince of Wales recommended itself to his fancy, as likely to supply him
with a fund of dramatic incidents; for what could invention have more happily
suggested than this character, which history presented ready to his hands? a
riotous disorderly young libertine, in whose nature lay hidden those seeds of
heroism and ambition, which were to burst forth at once to the astonishment of
the world and to atchieve the conquest of France. This prince, whose character
was destined to exhibit a revolution of so brilliant a sort, was not only in
himself a very tempting hero for the dramatic poet, who delights in incidents
of novelty and surprise, but also offered to his imagination a train of
attendant characters, in the persons of his wild comrades and associates, which
would be of themselves a drama. Here was a field for invention wide enough even
for the genius of Shakespeare to range in. All the humors, passions and
extravagancies of human life might be brought into the composition, and when he
had grouped and personified them to his taste and liking, he had a leader ready
to place at the head of the train, and the truth of history to give life and
interest to his drama.

With these materials ready for creation the great artist sat down to his
work; the canvass was spread before him, ample and capacious as the expanse of
his own fancy; nature put her pencil into his hand, and he began to sketch. His
first concern was to give a chief or captain to this gang of rioters: this
would naturally be the first outline he drew. To fill up the drawing of this
personage he conceived a voluptuary, in whose figure and character there should
be an assemblage of comie qualities; in his person he should be bloated and
blown up to the size of a Silenus, lazy, luxurious, in sensuality a satyr, in
intemperance a bacchanalian: As he was to stand in the post of a ringleader
amongst thieves and cutpurses, he made him a notorious liar, a swaggering
coward, vainglorious, arbitrary, knavish, crafty, voracious of plunder, lavish
of his gains, without credit, honor or honesty, and in debt to every body
about him: As he was to be the chief seducer and misleader of the heir apparent
of the crown, it was incumbent on the poet to qualify him for that part in such
a manner as should give probability and even a plea to the temptation; this was
only to be done by the strongest touches and the highest colorings of a
master; by hitting off a humor of so happy, so facetious and so alluring a
cast, as should tempt even royalty to forget itself and virtue to turn reveller
in his company. His lies, his vanity and his cowardice, too gross to deceive,
were to be so ingenious as to give delight; his cunning evasions, his witty
resources, his mock solemnity, his vapouring self-consequence, were to furnish
a continual feast of laughter to his royal companion; he was not only to be
witty himself, but the cause of wit in other people; a whetstone for raillery;
a buffoon, whose very person was a jest: Compounded of these humors,
Shakespeare produced the character of Sir John Falstaff; a character, which
neither ancient nor modern comedy has ever equalled, which was so much the
favorite of its author as to be introduced in three several plays, and which
is likely to be the idol of the English stage, as long as it shall speak the
language of Shakespeare.

This character almost singly supports the whole comic plot of the first part
of Henry the fourth; the poet has indeed thrown in some auxiliary humors in
the persons of Gadshill, Peto, Bardolph, and Hostess Quickly; the two first
serve for little else except to fill up the action, but Bardolph as a butt to
Falstaff's raillery, and the hostess in her wrangling scene with him, when his
pockets had been emptied as he was asleep in the tavern, give occasion to
scenes of infinite pleasantry: Poins is contrasted from the rest of the gang,
and as he is made the companion of the prince, is very properly represented as
a man of better qualities and morals than Falstaff's more immediate hangers-on
and dependants.

The humor of Falstaff opens into full display upon his very first
introduction with the prince; the incident of the robbery on the highway, the
scene in Eastcheap in consequence of that ridiculous encounter, and the whole
of his conduct during the action with Percy, are so exquisitely pleasant, that
upon the renovation of his dramatic life in the second part of Henry the
fourth, I question if the humor does not in part evaporate by continuation; at
least I am persuaded that it flattens a little in the outset, and though his
wit may not flow less copiously, yet it comes with more labor and is farther
fetched. The poet seems to have been sensible how difficult it was to preserve
the vein as rich as at first, and has therefore strengthened his comic plot in
the second play with several new recruits, who may take a share with Falstaff,
to whom he no longer entrusts the whole burden of the humor. In the front of
these auxiliaries stands Pistol, a character so new, whimsical and extravagant,
that if it were not for a commentator now living, whose very extraordinary
researches, amongst our old authors, have supplied us with passages to
illuminate the strange rhapsodies which Shakespeare has put into his mouth, I
should for one have thought Ancient Pistol as wild and imaginary a being as
Caliban; but I now perceive, by the help of these discoveries, that the
character is made up in great part of absurd and fustian passages from many
plays, in which Shakespeare was versed and perhaps had been a performer:
Pistol's dialogue is a tissue of old tags of bombast, like the middle comedy of
the Greeks, which dealt in parody. I abate of my astonishment at the invention
and originality of the poet, but it does not lessen my respect for his
ingenuity. Shakespeare founded his bully in parody, Jonson copied his from
nature, and the palm seems due to Bobadil upon a comparison with Pistol;
Congreve copied a very happy likeness from Jonson, and by the fairest and most
laudable imitation produced his Noll Bluff, one of the pleasantest humourists
on the comic stage.

Shallow and Silence are two very strong auxiliaries to this second part of
Falstaff's humors, and though they do not absolutely belong to his family,
they are nevertheless near of kin, and derivatives from his stock: Surely two
pleasanter fellows never trod the stage; they not only contrast and play upon
each other, but Silence sober and Silence tipsey make the most comical reverse
in nature; never was drunkenness so well introduced or so happily employed in
any drama: The dialogue between Shallow and Falstaff, and the description given
by the latter of Shallow's youthful frolicks, are as true nature and as true
comedy as man's invention ever produced: The recruits are also in the literal
sense the recruits of the drama. These personages have the further merit of
throwing Falstaff's character into a new cast, and giving it the seasonable
relief of variety.

Dame Quickly also in this second part resumes her role with great comic
spirit, but with some variation of character for the purpose of introducing a
new member into the troop in the person of Doll Tearsheet, the common trull of
the times. Though this part is very strongly colored, and though the scene
with her and Falstaff is of a loose as well as ludicrous nature, yet if we
compare Shakespeare's conduct of this incident with that of the dramatic writers
of his time, and even since his time, we must confess he has managed it with
more than common care, and exhibited his comic hero in a very ridiculous light,
without any of those gross indecencies which the poets of his age indulged
themselves in without restraint.

The humor of the Prince of Wales is not so free and unconstrained as in the
first part; though he still demeans himself in the course of his revels, yet it
is with frequent marks of repugnance and self-consideration, as becomes the
conqueror of Percy, and we see his character approaching fast toward a
thorough reformation; but though we are thus prepared for the change that is to
happen, when this young hero throws off the reveller and assumes the king, yet
we are not fortified against the weakness of pity, when the disappointment and
banishment of Falstaff takes place, and the poet executes justice upon his
inimitable delinquent, with all the rigor of an unrelenting moralist. The
reader or spectator, who has accompanied Falstaff through his dramatic story,
is in debt to him for so many pleasant moments, that all his failings, which
should have raised contempt, have only provoked laughter, and he begins to
think they are not natural to his character, but assumed for his amusement.
With these impressions we see him delivered over to mortification and disgrace,
and bewail his punishment with a sensibility, that is only due to the
sufferings of the virtuous.

As it is impossible to ascertain the limits of Shakespeare's genius, I will not
presume to say he could not have supported his humor, had he chosen to have
prolonged his existence through the succeeding drama of Henry the Fifth; we may
conclude, that no ready expedient presented itself to his fancy, and he was not
apt to spend much pains in searching for such: He therefore put him to death,
by which he fairly placed him out of the reach of his contemporaries, and got
rid of the trouble and difficulty of keeping him up to his original pitch, if
he had attempted to carry him through a third drama, after he had removed the
Prince of Wales out of his company, and seated him on the throne. I cannot
doubt but there were resources in Shakespeare's genius, and a latitude of humor
in the character of Falstaff, which might have furnished scenes of admirable
comedy by exhibiting him in his disgrace, and both Shallow and Silence would
have been accessaries to his pleasantry: Even the field of Agincourt, and the
distress of the king's army before the action, had the poet thought proper to
have produced Falstaff on the scene, might have been as fruitful in comic
incidents as the battle of Shrewsbury; this we can readily believe from the
humors of Fluellen and Pistol, which he has woven into his drama; the former
of whom is made to remind us of Falstaff, in his dialogue with Captain Gower,
when he tells him that -- As Alexander is kill his friend Clytus, being in his
ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his goot
judgments, is turn away the fat Knight with the great pelly-doublet: He was
full of jests and gypes and knaveries, and mocks; I am forget his name. -- Sir
John Falstaff. -- That is he. -- This passage has ever given me a pleasing
sensation, as it marks a regret in the poet to part with a favorite character,
and is a tender farewell to his memory: It is also with particular propriety
that these words are put into the mouth of Fluellen, who stands here as his
substitute, and whose humor, as well as that of Nym, may be said to have
arisen out of the ashes of Falstaff.

No LXXXVII.
Singula laetus
Exquiritque, auditque, virum monumenta priorum.
(VIRGIL.)
OF all our dealers in second-hand wares, few bring their goods to so bad a
market, as those humble wits who retail other people's worn-out jokes. A man's
good sayings are so personally his own, and depend so much upon manner and
circumstances, that they make a poor figure in other people's mouths, and
suffer even more by printing than they do by repeating: It is also a very
difficult thing to pen a witticism; for by the time we have adjusted all the
descriptive arrangements of this man said, and the other man replied, we have
miserably blunted the edge of the repartee. These difficulties however have
been happily overcome by Mr. Joseph Miller and other facetious compilers, whose
works are in general circulation, and may be heard of in most clubs and
companies where gentlemen meet, who love to say a good thing without the
trouble of inventing it. We are also in a fair train of knowing every thing
that a late celebrated author said, as well as wrote, without an exception even
of his most secret ejaculations. We may judge how valuable these diaries will
be to posterity, when we reflect how much we should now be edified, had any of
the ancients given us as minute a collectanea of their illustrious
contemporaries.

We have, it is true, a few of Cicero's table-jokes; but how delightful would
it be to know what he said, when nobody heard him! how piously he reproached
himself when he laid in bed too late in a morning, or eat too heartily at
Hortensius's or Caesar's table. We are told indeed that Cato the Censor loved
his jest, but we should have been doubly glad to have partaken of it: What a
pity it is that nobody thought it worth their while to record some pleasanter
specimen than Macrobius has given us of his retort upon Q. Albidius, a glutton
and a spendthrift, when his house was on fire -- What he could not eat, he has
burnt, said Cato; where the point of the jest lies in the allusion to a
particular kind of sacrifice, and the good humor of it with himself. It was
better said by P. Syrus the actor, when he saw one Mucius, a malevolent fellow,
in a very melancholy mood -- Either some ill fortune has befallen Mucius, or
some good has happened to one of his acquaintance.

A man's fame shall be recorded to posterity by the trifling merit of a jest,
when the great things he has done would else have been buried in oblivion: Who
would now have known that L. Mallius was once the best painter in Rome, if it
was not for his repartee to Servilius Geminus? -- You paint better than you
model, says Geminus, pointing to Mallius's children, who were crooked and
ill-favored. -- Like enough, replied the artist; I paint in the daylight, but
I model, as you call it, in the dark.

Cicero it is well known was a great joker, and some of his good sayings have
reached us; it does not appear as if his wit had been of the malicious sort,
and yet Pompey, whose temper could not stand a jest, was so galled by him, that
he is reported to have said with great bitterness -- Oh! that Cicero would go
over to my enemies, for then he would be afraid of me. -- If Cicero forgave
this sarcasm, I should call him not only a better-tempered, but a braver man
than Pompey.

But of all the ancient wits Augustus seems to have had most point, and he was
as remarkable for taking a jest, as for giving it. A country fellow came to
Rome, who was so like the emperor, that all the city ran after him; Augustus
heard of it, and ordering the man into his presence -- Harkye, friend! says he,
when was your mother in Rome? -- Never, an please you! replied the countryman,
but my father has been here many a time and often. The anecdote of the old
soldier is still more to his credit: He solicited the emperor to defend him in
a suit; Augustus sent his own advocate into court; the soldier was
dissatisfied, and said to the emperor -- I did not fight for you by proxy at
Actium -- Augustus felt the reproof, and condescended to his request in person.
When Pacuvius Taurus greedily solicited a largess from the emperor, and to urge
him to the greater liberality added, that all the world would have it, that he
had made him a very bountiful donation -- But you know better, said Augustus,
than to believe the world -- and dismissed the sycophant without his errand. I
shall mention one more case, where, by a very courtly evasion, he parried the
solicitation of his captain of the guard, who had been cashiered, and was
petitioning the emperor to allow him his pay; telling him that he did not ask
that indulgence for the sake of the money which might accrue to him, but that
he might have it to say he had resigned his commission, and not been cashiered
-- If that be all your reason, says the emperor, tell the world that you have
received it, and I will not deny that I have paid it.

Vatinius, who was noted to a proverb as a common slanderer, and particularly
obnoxious for his scurrility against Cicero, was pelted by the populace in the
amphitheatre, whilst he was giving them the Gladiators: He complained to the
Aediles of the insult, and got an edict forbidding the people to cast any thing
into the area but apples. An arch fellow brought a furious large fir-apple to
the famous lawyer Cascellius, and demanded his opinion upon the edict. -- I am
of opinion, says Cascellius, that your fir-apple is literally and legally an
apple, with this proviso however, that you intend to throw it at Vatinius's
head.

As there is some danger in making too free with old jokes, I shall hold my
hand for the present; but if these should succeed in being acceptable to my
readers, I shall not be afraid of meeting Mr. Joseph Miller and his modern
witticisms with my ancients. In that case I shall not despair of being able to
lay before the public a veritable Roman newspaper, compounded of events in the
days of Julius Caesar: By what happy chance I traced this valuable relick, and
with what pains I possessed myself of it, may be matter of future explanation:
I have the satisfaction however to premise to the reader, that it is written
with great freedom, and as well sprinkled with private anecdotes as any of the
present day, whose agreeable familiarity is so charming to every body but the
parties concerned: It has also a good dash of the dramatic; and as some
fastidious people have been inclined to treat our intelligencers and reviewers
with a degree of neglect bordering upon contempt, I shall have pleasure in
showing that they have classical authority for all their quirks and conceits,
and that they are all written in the true quaint spirit of criticism: It is to
be lamented that the Roman theater furnishes no ladies to match the heroines of
our stage; but I can produce some encomiums upon Laberius, Roscius and the
famous Publius Syrus, which would not be unapplicable to some of our present
capital actors: I am sorry to be obliged to confess, that they were not in the
habit of speaking epilogues in those days; but I have a substitute in a
prologue written and spoken by Decimus Laberius, which I am tempted to throw
out as a lure to my newspaper; but I must first explain upon what occasion it
was composed.

This Laberius was a Roman knight of good family, and a man withal of high
spirit and pretensions, but unfortunately he had a talent for the drama: He
read his own plays better than any man then living could act them, for neither
Garrick nor Henderson were yet born. P. Clodius, the fine gentleman and rake of
the age, had the indecorum to press Laberius to come forward on the public
stage, and take the principal character in one of his own plays: Laberius was
indignant, and Clodius proceeded to menaces: -- Do your worst, says the Roman
knight, you can but send me to Dyracchium and back again -- proudly intimating
that he would suffer the like banishment with Cicero rather than consent to his
demand; for acting was not then the amusement of people of fashion, and private
theaters were not thought of. Julius Caesar was no less captivated with
Laberius's talents than Clodius had been, and being a man not apt to be
discouraged by common difficulties, took up the same solicitation, and assailed
our Roman knight, who was now sixty years of age, and felt his powers in their
decline: Conscious of this decline no less than of his own dignity, he resisted
the degrading request; he interceded, he implored of Caesar to excuse him: It
was to no purpose, Caesar had made it his point, and his point he would carry:
The word of Caesar was law, and Laberius, driven out of all his defenses, was
obliged to submit and comply. Caesar makes a grand spectacle for all Rome;
bills are given out for a play of Laberius, and the principal part is announced
to be performed by the author himself: The theater is thronged with spectators;
all Rome is present, and Decimus Laberius presents himself on the stage, and
addresses the audience in the following prologue: Prologue by DECIMUS LABERIUS.
O strong Necessity! of whose swift course
So many feel, so few escape the force,
Whither, ah! whither, in thy prone career,
Have thou decreed this dying frame to bear?
Me in my better days nor foe, nor friend,
Nor threat, nor bribe, nor vanity could bend;
Now lured by flattery in my weaker age,
I sink my knighthood and ascend the stage.
Yet muse not therefore -- How shall man gainsay
Him, whom the Deities themselves obey?
Sixty long years I Have lived without disgrace
A Roman knight; let dignity give place!
I Am Caesar's actor now, and compass more
In one short hour, than all my life before.
O Fortune! fickle source of good and ill,
If here to place me 'twas thy sovereign will,
Why, when I Would youth and faculties to please
So great a master and such guests as these,
Why not compel me then, malicious power!
To the hard task of this degrading hour?
Where now, in what profound abyss of shame,
Do thou conspire with Fate to sink my name?
Whence are my hopes? What voice can age supply
To charm the ear; what grace to please the eye?
Where is the action, energy, and art,
The look, that guides its passion to the heart?
Age creeps like ivy over my withered trunk,
Its bloom all blasted, and its vigor shrunk;
A tomb, where nothing but a name remains
To tell the world whose ashes it contains.


The original is so superiorly beautiful, that to prevent a bathos I shall
insert it after the translation.

NECESSITAS, cujus cursus transversi impetum
Voluerunt multi effugere, pauci potuerunt,
Quo me detrusit poene extremis sensibus?
Quem nulla ambitio, nulla unquam largitio,
Nullus timor, vis nulla, nulla auctoritas
Movere potuit in juventa de statu;
Ecce in senecta ut facile labefecit loco
Viri excellentis mente clemente edita
Submissa placide blandiloquens oration!
Etenim ipsi Dii negare cui nihil potuerunt,
Hominem me denegare quis posset pati?
Ergo bis tricenis annis actis sine nota
Eques Romanus lare egressus meo
Domum revertas mimus: Nimirum hoc die
Uno plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit.
Fortuna, immoderata in bono aeque atque in malo,
Si tibi erat libitum literarum laudibus
Floris cacumen nostrae famae frangere,
Cur cum vigebam membris praeviridantibus,
Satisfacere populo et tali cum poteram viro,
Non flexibilem me concurvasti ut carperes?
Nunc me quo dejicis? quid ad scenam affero?
Decorem formae, an dignitatem corporis,
Animi virtutem, an vocis jucundoe sonum?
Ut hedera serpens vires arboreas necat,
Ita me vetustas amplex^ annorum enecat:
Sepulchri similis nihil nisi nomen retines.
The play which this pathetic prologue was attached to was a comedy, in which
Laberius took the character of a slave, and in the course of the plot (as
usual) was beaten by his master: In this condition, having marked his habit
with counterfeited stripes, he runs upon the stage, and cries out amain --
Porro, Quirites! libertatem perdimus -- In good faith, Countrymen, there is an
end of freedom. The indignant spectators sent up a shout; it was in the
language of our present playhouse bills, a burst of applause; a most violent
burst of applause from a most crowded and brilliant house, overflowing in all
parts. Laberius not yet content with this atonement to the manes of his
knighthood, subjoins the following pointed allusion: Necesse est multos timeat,
quem multi timent -- The man, whom many fear, must needs fear many. All eyes
were now turned upon Caesar, and the degraded Laberius enjoyed a full revenge.

We may naturally suppose this conduct lost him the favor of Caesar, who
immediately took up Publius Syrus, a Syrian slave, who had been manumitted for
his ingenious talents, and was acting in the country theaters with much
applause: Caesar fetched him out of his obscurity, as we bring up an actress
from Bath or York, and pitted him against Laberius. It was the triumph of youth
and vigor over age and decay, and Caesar with malicious civility said to
Laberius, Favente tibi me victus es, Laberi, a Syro -- You are surpassed by
Syrus in spite of my support. As Laberius was going out of the theater he was
met by Syrus, who was inconsiderate enough to let an expression escape him,
which was very disrespectful to his veteran competitor: Laberius felt the
unbecoming insult, and, turning to Syrus, gave him this extemporary answer --
To stand the first is not the lot of all;
It Is now your turn to mount, and mine to fall:
It Is slippery ground; beware you keep your feet;
For public favor is a public cheat.
Non possunt primi esse omnes omni in tempore;
Summum ad gradum cum claritatis veneris,
Consisles aegra; et quam descendas, decides:
Cecidi ego: Cadet qui sequitur. Laus est publica.


I need not remind the learned Reader in what credit the sayings of this
Publius Syrus have been justly held by all the literati from Seneca to
Scaliger, who turned them into Greek; and it is for the honor of the
fraternity of the stage, that both he and Sophron, whose moral sentences were
found under Plato's pillow when he died, were actors by profession.

I shall now only add that my Newspaper contains a very interesting description
of two young actors, Hylas and Pylades, who became great favorites with
Augustus, when he was emperor, and made their first appearance at the time this
journal was written. If the Reader shall find any allusion to two very
promising young performers, now living, whose initials correspond with the
above, I can promise him that our contemporaries will not suffer by the
comparison. I may venture to say in the words of Doctor Young -- The Roman
would not blush at the mistake.

No LXXXVIII.
DR. Samuel Johnson, in his life of Row, pronounces of The Fair Penitent, that
it is one of the most pleasing tragedies on the stage, where it still keeps its
turns of appearing, and probably will long keep them, for that there is
scarcely any work of any poet at once so interesting by the fable, and so
delightful by the language. The story, he observes, is domestic, and therefore
easily received by the imagination, and assimilated to common life; the diction
is exquisitely harmonious, and soft or sprightly as occasion requires. Few
people, I believe, will think this character of The Fair Penitent too lavish on
the score of commendation; the high degree of public favor in which this
tragedy has long stood, has ever attracted the best audiences to it, and
engaged the talents of the best performers in its display. As there is no drama
more frequently exhibited, or more generally read, I propose to give it a fair
and impartial examination, jointly with the more unknown and less popular
tragedy from which it is derived.

The Fair Penitent is in fable and character so closely copied from The Fatal
Dowry, that it is impossible not to take that tragedy along with it; and it is
matter of some surprise to me that Row should have made no acknowledgment of
his imitation either in his dedication or prologue, or any where else that I am
apprised of.

This tragedy of The Fatal Dowry was the joint production of Massinger and
Nathaniel Field; it takes a wider compass of fable than The Fair Penitent, by
which means it presents a very affecting scene at the opening, which discovers
young Charalois attended by his friend Romont, waiting with a petition in his
hand to be presented to the judges, when they shall meet, praying the release
of his dead father's body, which had been seized by his creditors, and detained
in their hands for debts he had incurred in the public service, as Field
Marshal of the armies of Burgundy. Massinger, to whose share this part of the
tragedy devolved, has managed this pathetic introduction with consummate skill
and great expression of nature; a noble youth in the last state of worldly
distress, reduced to the humiliating yet pious office of soliciting an
unfeeling and unfriendly judge to allow him to pay the solemn rites of burial
to the remains of an illustrious father, who had fought his country's battles
with glory, and had sacrificed life and fortune in defense of an ungrateful
state, impresses the spectators mind with pity and respect, which are felt
through every passage of the play: One thing in particular strikes me at the
opening of the scene, which is the long silence that the poet has artfully
imposed upon his principal character (Charalois) who stands in mute sorrow with
his petition in his hand, whilst his friend Romont, and his advocate Charmi,
urge him to present himself to the judges and solicit them in person: The
judges now make their entrance, they stop upon the stage; they offer him the
fairest opportunity for tendering his petition and soliciting his suit:
Charalois remains fixed and speechless; Romont, who is all eagerness in his
cause, presses him again and again -- Now put on your spirits --
Now, Sir, lose not this offered means: Their looks
Fixed on you with a pitying earnestness,
Invite you to demand their furtherance
To your good purpose.

The judges point him out to each other; they lament the misfortunes of his
noble house; they observe, It is young Charalois
Son to the Marshal, from whom he inherits
His fame and virtues only.

Romont. Hah! they name you.

Dulroy. His father died in prison two days since.

Rochfort. Yes, to the shame of this ungrateful state,
That such a master in the art of war,
So noble and so highly meriting
From this forgetful country, should, for want
Of means to satisfy his creditors
The sum he took up for the general good,
Meet with an end so infamous.

Romont. Dare you ever hope for like opportunity?

It is in vain; the opportunity passes off, and Charalois opens not his mouth,
nor even silently tenders his petition.

I have, upon a former occasion, both generally and particularly observed upon
the effects of dramatic silence; the stage cannot afford a more beautiful and
touching instance than this before us: To say it is not inferior to the silence
of Hamlet upon his first appearance, would be saying too little in its favor.
I have no doubt but Massinger had this very case in his thoughts, and I honor
him no less for the imitating, than I should have done for striking out a
silence so naturally and so delicately preserved. What could Charalois have
uttered to give him that interest in the hearts of his spectators, which their
own conclusions during his affecting silence have already impressed? No sooner
are the judges gone, than the ardent Romont again breaks forth -- This
obstinate spleen
You think becomes your sorrow, and sorts well
With your black suits.

This is Hamlet himself, his inky cloak, and customary suits of solemn black.
The character of Charalois is thus fixed before he speaks; the poet's art has
given the prejudice that is to bear him in our affections through all the
succeeding events of the fable; and a striking contrast is established between
the undiscerning fiery zeal of Romont, and Charalois' fine sensibility and
highborn dignity of soul.

A more methodical and regular dramatist would have stopped here, satisfied
that the impression already made was fully sufficient for all the purposes of
his plot; but Massinger, according to the busy spirit of the stage for which he
wrote, is not alarmed by a throng of incidents, and proceeds to open the court
and discuss the pleadings on the stage: The advocate Charmi in a set harangue
moves the judges for dispensing with the rigor of the law in favor of
creditors, and for rescuing the Marshal's corpse out of their clutches; he is
brow-beaten and silenced by the presiding judge old Novall: The plea is then
taken up by the impetuous Romont, and urged with so much personal insolence,
that he is arrested on the spot, put in charge of the officers of the court,
and taken to prison. This is a very striking mode of introducing the set
oration of Charalois; a son recounting the military atchievments of a newly
deceased father, and imploring mercy from his creditors and the law toward his
unburied remains, now claims the attention of the court, who had been hitherto
unmoved by the feeble formality of a hired pleader, and the turbulent passion
of an enraged soldier. Charalois' argument takes a middle course between both;
the pious feelings of a son, tempered by the modest manners of a gentleman: The
creditors however are implacable, the judge is hostile, and the law must take
its course.

Creditor. It Is the city's doctrine:
We stand bound to maintain it.

Charalois. Be constant in it;
And since you are as merciless in your natures,
As base and mercenary in your means
By which you get your wealth, I will not urge
The court to take away one scruple from
The right of their laws, or one good thought
In you to mend your disposition with.
I know there is no music in your ears
So pleasing as the groans of men in prison,
And that the tears of widows, and the cries
Of famished orphans, are the feasts that take you:
That to be in your danger with more care
Should be avoided than infectious air,
The loathed embraces of diseased women,
A flatterer's poison, or the loss of honor.
Yet rather than my father's reverend dust
Shall want a place in that fair monument,
In which our noble ancestors lie entombed,
Before the court I offer up myself
A prisoner for it: Load me with those irons
That have worn out his life; in my best strength
I Will run to the encounter of cold hunger,
And choose my dwelling where no sun dares enter,
So he may be released.

There was yet another incident, which the poet's passion for business and
spectacle induced him to avail himself of, viz. the funeral of the Marshal;
this he displays on the stage, with a train of captains and soldiers following
the body of their general: Charalois and Romont, under custody of their
jailors, appear as chief mourners, and a party of creditors are concerned in
the groupe.

After this solemnity is dispatched, the poet proceeds to develop the amiable
generosity of old Rochfort, who being touched with the gallant spirit of
Romont, and still more penetrated with the filial piety of young Charalois,
delivers them both from imprisonment and distress, by discharging the debts of
the Marshal and dismissing the creditors: This also passes before the eyes of
the spectators. Before Charalois has given full expression to his gratitude for
this extraordinary benefaction, Rochfort follows it with a further act of
bounty, which he introduces in the style of a request -- Call in my daughter --
Still I have a suit to you,
Would you requite me --
This is my only child.

Beaumelle, Rochfort's daughter, is presented to Charalois; the scene is
hurried on with a precipitation almost without example: Charalois asks the
lady, Fair Beaumelle, can you love me?

Beaumelle. Yes, my lord.

Charalois. You need not question me if I can you:
You are the fairest virgin in Dijon,
And Rochfort is your father.

The match is agreed upon as soon as proposed, and Rochfort hastens away to
prepare the celebration.

In this cluster of incidents I must not fail to remark, that the poet
introduces young Novall upon the scene, in the very moment when the short
dialogue above quoted was passing: This Novall had before been exhibited as a
suitor to Beaumelle, and his vain frivolous character had been displayed in a
very ridiculous and contemptible light; he is now again introduced to be a
witness of his own disappointment, and his only observation upon it is --
What Is this change? -- Upon the exit of the father however he addresses himself
to the lady, and her reply gives the alarming hint, that makes discovery of the
fatal turn which the plot is now about to take; for when Novall turning aside
to Beaumelle, by one word -- Mistress! -- conveys the reproach of inconstancy,
she replies, Oh, Servant! Virtue strengthen me!
Thy presence blows round my affection's vane:
You will undo me if you speak again.
(Exit.)
Young Novall is left on the scene with certain followers and dependants, which
hang upon his fortune, one of which (Pontalier by name) a man under deep
obligations to him, yet of an honest nature, advises him to an honorable
renunciation of all further hopes or attempts to avail himself of the
affections of Beaumelle -- Though you have saved my life,
Rescued me often from my wants, I must not
Wink at your follies, that will ruin you.
You know my blunt way, and my love to truth:
Forsake the pursuit of this lady's honor,
Now you do see her made another man's.

This honorable advice is rejected with contempt: Novall, in whose mean bosom
there does not seem a trace of virtue, avows a determined perseverance; and the
poet having in this hasty manner completed these inauspicious nuptials, closes
the second act of his tragedy.

No LXXXIX.
WE have now expended two entire acts of The Fatal Dowry in advancing to that
period in the fable, at which the tragedy of The Fair Penitent opens. If the
author of this tragedy thought it necessary to contract Massinger's plot, and
found one upon it of a more regular construction, I know not how he could do
this any otherwise than by taking up the story at the point where we have now
left it, and throwing the antecedent matter into narration; and though these
two prefatory acts are full of very affecting incidents, yet the pathos, which
properly appertains to the plot and conduces to the catastrophe of the tragedy,
does not in strictness take place before the event of the marriage. No critic
will say that the pleadings before the judges, the interference of the
creditors, the distresses of Charalois, or the funeral of the Marshal, are
necessary parts of the drama; at the same time no reader will deny (and neither
could Row himself overlook) the effect of these incidents: He could not fail
to foresee that he was to sacrifice very much of the interest of his fable,
when he was to throw that upon narration, which his original had given in
spectacle; and the loss was more enhanced by falling upon the hero of the
drama; for who that compares Charalois, at the end of the second act of
Massinger, with Rowe's Altamont at the opening scene of The Fair Penitent, can
doubt which character has most interest with the spectators? We have seen the
former in all the most amiable offices which filial piety could perform;
enduring insults from his inveterate oppressors, and voluntarily surrendering
himself to a prison to ransom the dead body of his father from unrelenting
creditors. Altamont presents himself before us in his wedding suit, in the
splendor of fortune and at the summit of happiness; he greets us with a burst
of exultation -- Let this auspicious day be ever sacred,
No mourning, no misfortunes happen on it;
Let it be marked for triumphs and rejoicings!
Let happy lovers ever make it holy,
Choose it to bless their hopes and crown their wishes;
This happy day, that gives me my Calista!

The rest of the scene is employed by him and Horatio alternately in recounting
the benefits conferred upon them by the generous Sciolto; and the very same
incident of the seizure of his father's corpse by the creditors, and his
redemption of it, is recited by Horatio -- When his hard creditors,
Urged and assisted by Lothario's father,
(Foe to thy house and rival of their greatness)
By sentence of the cruel law forbade
His venerable corpse to rest in earth,
Thou gav'st thyself a ransom for his bones;
With piety uncommon did give up
Thy hopeful youth to slaves, who never knew mercy.

It is not however within the reach of this, or any other description, to place
Altamont in that interesting and amiable light, as circumstances have already
placed Charalois; the happy and exulting bridegroom may be an object of our
congratulation, but the virtuous and suffering Charalois engages our pity, love
and admiration. If Row would have his audience credit Altamont for that filial
piety, which marks the character he copied from, it was a small oversight to
put the following expression into his mouth -- Oh, great Sciolto! Oh, my more
than father!

A closer attention to character would have reminded him that it was possible
for Altamont to express his gratitude to Sciolto without setting him above a
father, to whose memory he had paid such devotion.

From this contraction of his plot, by the defalcation of so many pathetic
incidents, it became impossible for the author of the Fair Penitent to make his
Altamont the hero of his tragedy, and the leading part is taken from him by
Horatio, and even by Lothario, throughout the drama. There are several other
reasons, which concur to sink Altamont upon the comparison with Charalois, the
chief of which arises from the captivating colors in which Row has painted
his libertine: On the contrary, Massinger gives a contemptible picture of his
young Novall; he makes him not only vicious, but ridiculous; in foppery and
impertinence he is the counterpart of Shakespeare's Osrick; vainglorious,
purseproud, and overbearing amongst his dependants; a spiritless poltroon in
his interview with Romont. Lothario (as Johnson observes) with gaiety which
cannot be hated, and bravery which cannot be despised, retains too much of the
spectator's kindness. His high spirit, brilliant qualities and fine person are
so described, as to put us in danger of false impressions in his favor, and to
set the passions in opposition to the moral of the piece: I suspect that the
gallantry of Lothario makes more advocates for Calista than she ought to have.
There is another consideration, which operates against Altamont, and it is an
indelicacy in his character, which the poet should have provided against: He
marries Calista with the full persuasion of her being averse to the match; in
his first meeting with Sciolto he says -- Oh! could I hope there was one
thought of Altamont,
One kind remembrance in Calista's breast --
-- I found her cold
As a dead lover's statue on his tomb;
A rising storm of passion shook her breast,
Her eyes a piteous shower of tears let fall,
And then she sighed as if her heart were breaking.
With all the tenderest eloquence of love
I begged to be a sharer in her grief:
But she, with looks averse and eyes that froze me,
Sadly replied, her sorrows were her own,
Nor in a father's power to dispose of.

I am aware that Sciolto attempts to parry these facts by an interpretation too
gross and unbecoming for a father's character, and only fit for the lips of a
Lothario; but yet it is not in nature to suppose that Altamont could mistake
such symptoms, and it fixes a meanness upon him, which prevails against his
character throughout the play. Nothing of this sort could be discovered by
Massinger's bridegroom, for the ceremony was agreed upon and performed at the
very first interview of the parties; Beaumelle gave a full and unreserved
assent, and though her character suffers on the score of hypocrisy on that
account, yet Charalois is saved by it: Less hypocrisy appears in Calista, but
hers is the deeper guilt, because she was already dishonored by Lothario, and
Beaumelle's coquetry with Novall had not yet reached the length of criminality.
Add to this, that Altamont appears in the contemptible light of a suitor, whom
Calista had apprized of her aversion, and to whom she had done a deliberate act
of dishonor, though his person and character must have been long known to her.
The case is far otherwise between Charalois and Beaumelle, who never met
before, and every care is taken by the poet to save his hero from such a
deliberate injury, as might convey contempt; with this view the marriage is
precipitated; nothing is allowed to pass, that might open the character of
Charalois to Beaumelle: She is hurried into an assignation with Novall
immediately upon her marriage; every artifice of seduction is employed by her
confidante Bellaperte, and Aymer the parasite of Novall, to make this meeting
criminal; she falls the victim of passion, and when detection brings her to a
sense of her guilt, she makes this penitent and pathetic appeal to Charalois --
Oh my fate!
That never would consent that I should see
How worthy thou were both of love and duty
Before I lost you; and my misery made
The glass, in which I now behold your virtue --
With justice therefore you may cut me off,
And from your memory wash the remembrance
That ever I was; like to some vicious purpose,
Which in your better judgment you repent of,
And study to forget --
-- Yet you shall find,
Though I was bold enough to be a strumpet,
I dare not yet live one: Let those famed matrons,
That are canonized worthy of our sex,
Transcend me in their sanctity of life,
I yet will equal them in dying nobly,
Ambitious of no honor after life,
But that, when I am dead, you will forgive me.

Compare this with the conduct of Calista, and then decide which frail fair-one
has the better title to the appellation of a Penitent, and which drama conveys
the better moral by its catastrophe.

There is indeed a grossness in the older poet, which his more modern imitator
has refined; but he has only sweetened the poison, not removed its venom; nay,
by how much more palatable he has made it, so much more pernicious it is become
in his tempting sparkling cup, than in the coarse deterring dose of Massinger.

Row has no doubt greatly outstepped his original in the striking character of
Lothario, who leaves Novall as far behind him as Charalois does Altamont: It is
admitted then that Calista has as good a plea as any wanton could wish to urge
for her criminality with Lothario, and the poet has not spared the ear of
modesty in his exaggerated description of the guilty scene; every luxurious
image, that his inflamed imagination could crowd into the glowing rhapsody, is
there to be found, and the whole is recited in numbers so flowing and
harmonious, that they not only arrest the passions but the memory also, and
perhaps have been, and still can be, as generally repeated as any passage in
English poetry. Massinger with less elegance, but not with less regard to
decency, suffers the guilty act to pass within the course of his drama; the
greater refinement of manners in Rowe's day did not allow of this, and he
anticipated the incident; but when he revived the recollection of it by such a
studied description, he plainly showed that it was not from moral principle
that he omitted it; and if he has presented his heroine to the spectators with
more immediate delicacy during the compass of the play, he has at the same time
given her greater depravity of mind; her manners may be more refined, but her
principle is fouler than Beaumelle's. Calista, who yielded to the gallant gay
Lothario, hot with the Tuscan grape, might perhaps have disdained a lover who
addressed her in the holiday language which Novall uses to Beaumelle -- Best
day to Nature's curiosity!
Star of Dijon, the luster of all France!
Perpetual Spring dwell on thy rosy cheeks,
Whose breath is perfume to our continent;
See, Flora trimmed in her varieties! --
No Autumn, nor no Age ever approach
This heavenly piece, which Nature having wrought,
She lost her needle, and did then despair
Ever to work so lively and so fair.

The letter of Calista (which brings about the discovery by the poor expedient
of Lothario's dropping it and Horatio's finding it) has not even the merit of
being characteristically wicked, and is both in its matter and mode below
tragedy. It is Lothario's cruelty has determined her to yield a perfect
obedience to her father, and give her hand to Altamont, in spite of her
weakness for the false Lothario. -- If the lady had given her perfect obedience
its true denomination, she had called it a most dishonorable compliance; and
if we may take Lothario's word (who seems full correct enough in describing
facts and particulars) she had not much cause to complain of his being false;
for he tells Rossano -- I liked her, would have married her,
But that it pleased her father to refuse me,
To make this honorable fool her husband.

It appears by this that Lothario had not been false to her in the article of
marriage, though he might have been cruel to her on the score of passion, which
indeed is confessed on his part with as much cold indifference, as the most
barefaced avowal could express. -- But to return to the letter: She proceeds to
tell him -- that she could almost wish she had that heart, and that honor to
bestow with it, which he has robbed her of -- But lest this half wish should
startle him, she adds -- But oh! I fear, could I retrieve them, I should again
be undone by the too faithless, yet too lovely Lothario. -- This must be owned
as full a reason as she could give why she should only almost wish for her lost
honor, when she would make such an use of it, if she had it again at her
disposal. And yet the very next paragraph throws every thing into
contradiction, for she tells him -- this is the last weakness of her pen, and
tomorrow shall be the last in which she will indulge her eyes. If she could
keep to that resolution, I must think the recovery of her innocence would have
been worth a whole wish, and many a wish; unless we are to suppose she was so
devoted to guilt, that she could take delight in reflecting upon it: This is a
state of depravity, which human nature hardly ever attains, and seems peculiar
to Calista. She now grows very humble, and concludes in a style well suited to
her humility -- Lucilla shall conduct you, if you are kind enough to let me see
you; it shall be the last trouble you shall meet with from -- The lost Calista.

It was very ill done of Horatio's curiosity to read this letter, and I must
ever regret that he has so unhandsomely exposed a lady's private correspondence
to the world.

No XC.
THOUGH the part which Horatio takes in the business of the drama is exactly
that which falls to the share of Romont in the Fatal Dowry, yet their
characters are of a very different cast; for as Row had bestowed the fire and
impetuosity of Romont upon his Lothario, it was a very judicious opposition to
contrast it with the cool deliberate courage of the sententious Horatio, the
friend and brother-in-law of Altamont.

When Horatio has read Calista's letter, which Lothario had dropped (an
accident which more frequently happens to gentlemen in comedies than in
tragedies) he falls into a very long meditation, and closes it with putting
this question to himself: What if I give this paper to her father?
It follows that his justice dooms her dead,
And breaks his heart with sorrow; hard return
For all the good his hand has heaped on us!
Hold, let me take a moment's thought --

At this moment he is interrupted in his reflections by the presence of
Lavinia, whose tender solicitude fills up the remaining part of the dialogue,
and concludes the act without any decisive resolution on the part of Horatio;
an incident well contrived, and introduced with much dramatic skill and effect:
Though pressed by his wife to disclose the cause of his uneasiness, he does not
impart to her the fatal discovery he has made; this also is well in character.
Upon his next entrance he has withdrawn himself from the company, and being
alone, resumes his meditation -- What, if, while all are here intent on
revelling,
I privately went forth and sought Lothario?
This letter may be forged; perhaps the wantonness
Of his vain youth to stain a lady's fame;
Perhaps his malice to disturb my friend.
Oh! no, my heart forebodes it must be true.
Methought even now I marked the starts of guilt
That shook her soul, though damned dissimulation
Screen'd her dark thoughts, and set to public view
A specious face of innocence and beauty.

This soliloquy is succeeded by the much-admired and striking scene between him
and Lothario; rigid criticism might wish to abridge some of the sententious
declamatory speeches of Horatio, and shorten the dialogue to quicken the
effect; but the moral sentiment and harmonious versification are much too
charming to be treated as intruders, and the author has also struck upon a
natural expedient for prolonging the dialogue, without any violence to
probability, by the interposition of Rossano, who acts as a mediator between
the hostile parties. This interposition is further necessary to prevent a
decisive rencounter, for which the fable is not ripe; neither would it be
proper for Horatio to anticipate that revenge, which is reserved for Altamont:
The altercation therefore closes with a challenge from Lothario -- West of the
town a mile, amongst the rocks,
Two hours ere noon tomorrow I expect thee;
Thy single hand to mine.

The place of meeting is not well ascertained, and the time is too long
deferred for strict probability; there are however certain things in all
dramas, which must not be too rigidly insisted upon, and provided no
extraordinary violence is done to reason and common sense, the candid critic
ought to let them pass: This I take to be a case in point; and though Horatio's
cool courage and ready presence of mind are not just the qualities to reconcile
us to such an oversight, yet I see no reason to be severe upon the incident,
which is followed by his immediate recollection -- Two hours ere noon
tomorrow! Hah! Ere that
He sees Calista. -- Oh! unthinking fool!
What if I urged her with the crime and danger?
If any spark from Heaven remain unquench'd
Within her breast, my breath perhaps may wake it.
Could I but prosper there, I would not doubt
My combat with that loud vainglorious boaster.

Whether this be a measure altogether in character with a man of Horatio's good
sense and discretion, I must own is matter of doubt with me. I think he appears
fully satisfied of her actual criminality; and in that case it would be more
natural for him to lay his measures for intercepting Lothario, and preventing
the assignation, than to try his rhetoric in the present crisis upon the
agitated mind of Calista. As it has justly occurred to him, that he has been
overreached by Lothario in the postponement of the duel, the measure I suggest
would naturally tend to hasten that rencounter. Now, though the business of the
drama may require an explanation between Horatio and Calista, whereupon to
ground an occasion for his interesting quarrel with Altamont, yet I do not see
any necessity to make that a premeditated explanation, nor to sacrifice
character by a measure that is inconsistent with the better judgment of
Horatio. The poet, however, has decreed it otherwise, and a deliberate
interview with Calista and Horatio accordingly takes place. This, although
introduced with a solemn invocation on his part, is very clumsily conducted --
Teach me, some Power! that happy art of speech
To dress my purpose up in gracious words,
Such as may softly steal upon her soul,
And never waken the tempestuous passions.

Who can expect, after this preparation, to hear Horatio thus break his secret
to Calista? Lothario and Calista! -- Thus they join
Two names, which Heaven decreed should never meet.
Hence have the talkers of this populous city
A shameful tale to tell for public sport,
Of an unhappy beauty, a false fair-one,
Who plighted to a noble youth her faith,
When she had given her honor to a wretch.

This I hold to be totally out of nature; first, because it is a palpable
departure from his resolution to use gracious words; next, because it has a
certain tendency to produce rage and not repentance; and thirdly, because it is
founded in exaggeration and falsehood; for how is he warranted to say that the
story is the public talk and sport of the city? If it were so, what can his
interference avail? why seek this interview? Why come to tell her how she might
be happy?
To sooth the secret anguish of her soul?
To comfort that fair mourner, that forlorn one,
And teach her steps to know the paths of peace?

No judge of nature will think he takes the means to lead her into the paths of
peace, by hurrying her to the very brink of desperation. I need not enlarge
upon this observation, and shall therefore only remark, that the scene breaks
up, as might be expected, with the following proof of her penitence, and his
success in persuasion -- Henceforth, thou officious fool,
Meddle no more, nor dare, even on thy life,
To breathe an accent that may touch my virtue:
I am myself the guardian of my honor,
And will not bear so insolent a monitor.



Let us now enquire how Romont (the Horatio of Massinger) conducts this
incident, a character from whom less discretion is to be expected than from his
philosophical successor. Romont himself discovers Beaumelle and Novall engaged
in the most wanton familiarities, and, with a warmth suitable to his zeal,
breaks up the amorous conference by driving Novall off the scene with ineffable
contempt; he then applies himself to the lady, and with a very natural and
manly spirit says, -- I respect you
Not for yourself, but in remembrance of
Who is your father, and whose wife you now are.

She replies to him with contempt and ridicule; he resumes the same
characteristic strain he set out with, and proceeds -- My intents,
Madam, deserve not this; nor do I stay
To be the whetstone of your wit: Preserve it
To spend on such as know how to admire
Such colored stuff. In me there is now speaks to you
As true a friend and servant to your honor,
And one that will with as much hazard guard it,
As ever man d^ goodness. But then, lady,
You must endeavor, not alone to be,
But to appear worthy such love and service.



We have just now heard Horatio reproach Calista with the reports that were
circulated against her reputation; let us compare it with what Romont says upon
the same subject -- But yet be careful!
Detraction's a bold monster, and fears not
To wound the fame of princes, if it find
But any blemish in their lives to work on.
But I Will be plainer with you: Had the people
Been learnt to speak but what even now I saw,
Their malice out of that would raise an engine
To overthrow your honor. In my sight,
With yonder painted fool I frighted from you,
You used familiarity beyond
A modest entertainment: You embraced him
With too much ardour for a stranger, and
Met him with kisses neither chaste nor comely:
But learn you to forget him, as I will
Your bounties to him; you will find it safer
Rather to be uncourtly than immodest.

What avails it to attempt drawing a comparison between this conduct and that
of Horatio's, where no comparison is to be made? I leave it to the reader, and
decline a task at once so unnecessary and ungrateful.

When Romont finds no impression is to be made upon Beaumelle, he meets her
father, and immediately falls into the same reflection that Horatio had struck
upon -- Her father! -- Hah!
How if I break this to him? Sure it cannot
Meet with an ill construction. His wisdom,
Made powerful by the authority of a father,
Will warrant and give privilege to his counsels.
It shall be so.

If this step needs excuse, the reader will consider that it is a step of
prevention. The experiment however fails, and he is rebuffed with some asperity
by Rochfort; this draws on a scene between him and Charalois, which, as it is
too long to transcribe, so it is throughout too excellent to extract any part
from it. I can only express my surprise, that the author of The Fair Penitent,
with this scene before him, could conduct his interview between Altamont and
Horatio upon a plan so widely different, and so much inferior: I must suppose
he thought it a strong incident to make Altamont give a blow to his friend,
else he might have seen an interview carried on with infinitely more spirit,
both of language and character, between Charalois and Romont, in circumstances
exactly similar, where no such violence was committed, or even meditated. Was
it because Pierre had given a blow to Jaffier, that Altamont was to repeat the
like indignity to Horatio, for a woman, of whose aversion he had proofs not to
be mistaken? Charalois is a character at least as high and irritable as
Altamont, and Romont is out of all comparison more rough and plain-spoken than
Horatio: Charalois might be deceived into an opinion of Beaumelle's affection
for him, Altamont could not deceive himself into such a notion, and the lady
had testified her dislike of him in the strongest terms, accompanied with
symptoms which he himself had described as indicating some rooted and concealed
affliction: Could any solution be more natural than what Horatio gives? Novall
was a rival so contemptible, that Charalois could not, with any degree of
probability, consider him as an object of his jealousy; it would have been a
degradation of his character, had he yielded to such a suspicion: Lothario, on
the contrary, was of all men living the most to be apprehended by a husband,
let his confidence or vanity be ever so great. Row, in his attempt to
surprise, has sacrificed nature and the truth of character for stage-effect;
Massinger, by preserving both nature and character, has conducted his friends
through an angry altercation with infinitely more spirit, more pathos and more
dramatic effect, and yet dismissed them with the following animated and
affecting speech from Charalois to his friend: You Are not my friend;
Or being so, you are mad. I must not buy
Thy friendship at this rate. Had I just cause,
Thou know I durst pursue such injury
Through fire, air, water, earth, nay, were they all
Shuffled again to chaos; but there is none.
Thy skill, Romont, consists in camps, not courts.
Farewell, uncivil man! let us meet no more:
Here our long web of friendship I untwist.
Shall I go whine, walk pale, and lock my wife
For nothing from her birth's free liberty,
That opened mine to me? Yes; if I do,
The name of cuckold then dog me with scorn:
I am a Frenchman, no Italian born.
(Exit.)
It is plain that Altamont at least was an exception to this remark upon
Italian husbands, I shall pursue this comparison no further, nor offer any
other remark upon the incident of the blow given by Altamont, except with
regard to Horatio's conduct upon receiving it; he draws his sword, and
immediately suspends resentment upon the following motive: Yet hold! By Heaven,
his father's in his face!
Spite of my wrongs, my heart runs over with tenderness,
And I could rather die myself than hurt him.

We must suppose it was the martial attitude that Altamont had put himself
into, which brought the resemblance of his father so strongly to the
observation of Horatio, otherwise it was a very unnatural moment to recollect
it in, when he had just received the deepest insult one man can give to
another: It is however worth a remark, that this father of Altamont should act
on both sides, and yet miscarry in his mediation; for it is but a few passages
before that Altamont says to Horatio, Thou were my father's friend; he loved
thee well;
A venerable mark of him
Hangs round thee, and protects thee from my vengeance.
I cannot, dare not lift my sword against thee.

What this mark was is left to conjecture; but it is plain it was as seasonable
for Horatio's rescue at this moment, as it was for Altamont a few moments
after, who had certainly overlooked it when he struck the very friend against
whom he could not, dared not lift his sword.

When Lavinia's entrance has parted Altamont and Horatio, her husband complains
to her of the ingratitude with which he has been treated, and says -- He, who
was all to me, child, brother, friend,
With barbarous bloody malice sought my life.

These are very extraordinary terms for a man like Horatio to use, and seem to
convey a charge very unfit for him to make, and of a very different nature from
the hasty insult he had received; in fact it appears as if the blow had totally
reversed his character, for the resolution he takes in consequence of this
personal affront is just such an one as would be only taken by the man who
dared not to resent it -- From Genoa, from falsehood and inconstancy,
To some more honest distant clime we'll go:
Nor will I be beholden to my country
For aught but thee, the partner of my flight.

That Horatio's heroism did not consist in the ready forgiveness of injuries is
evident from the obstinate sullenness with which he rejects the penitent
apologies of Altamont in the further progress of the play; I am at a loss
therefore to know what color the poet meant to give his character by disposing
him to quit his country with this insult unatoned for, and the additional
stigma upon him of running away from his appointment with Lothario for the next
morning amongst the rocks. Had he meant to bring him off upon the repugnance he
felt of resenting any injury against the son of a father, whose image was so
visible in his face, that his heart ran over with fondness in spite of his
wrongs, and he could rather die than hurt him; surely that image would have
interceded no less powerfully for him, when, penetrated with remorse, he
intercedes for pity and forgiveness, and even faints at his feet with agony at
his unrelenting coduracy: It would be unfair to suppose he was more like his
father when he had dealt him an insulting blow, than when he was atoning for an
injury by the most ample satisfaction and submission.

This is the light in which the conduct of Horatio strikes me; if I am wrong, I
owe an atonement to the manes of an elegant poet, which, upon conviction of my
error, I will study to pay in the fullest manner I am able.

It now remains only to say a few words upon the catastrophe, in which the
author varies from his original, by making Calista destroy herself with a
dagger, put into her hand for that purpose by her father: If I am to moralize
upon this proceeding of Sciolto, I know full well the incident cannot bear up
against it; a Roman father would stand the discussion better than a Christian
one; and I also know that the most natural expedient is unluckily a most
undramatic one; yet the poet did not totally overlook it, for he makes
Sciolto's first thought turn upon a convent, if I rightly understand the
following passage -- Hence from my sight! thy father cannot bear thee:
Fly with thy infamy to some dark cell,
Where, on the confines of eternal night,
Mourning, misfortunes, cares and anguish dwell;
Where ugly Sham^ hides her opprobrious head,
And Death and Hell detesied rule maintain;
There howl out the remainder of thy life,
And wish thy name may be no more remembered.

Whilst I am transcribing these lines a doubt strikes me that I have
misinterpreted them, and yet Calista's answer seems to point to the meaning I
had suggested; perhaps however they are mere ravings in fine numbers without
any determinate idea: Whatever they may be, it is clear they do not go to the
length of death: He tells Altamont, as soon as she is departed -- I wo' not
kill her;
Yet by the ruin she has brought upon us,
The common infamy that brands us both,
She sha' not 'scape.

He seems in this moment to have formed the resolution, which he afterward
puts into execution; he prompts her to self-murder, and arms her for the act:
This may save the spectators a sight too shocking to behold, but does it convey
less horror to the heart, than if he had put her to death with his own hand? A
father killing his child for incontinence with the man whom he had not
permitted to marry her, when he solicited his consent, is an act too monstrous
to reflect upon: Is that father less a monster, who, deliberately and after
full reflection, puts a dagger into her hand and bids her commit self-murder? I
should humbly conceive the latter act a degree in guilt beyond the former;
especially when I hear that father coolly demanding of his victim, if she has
reflected upon what may happen after death -- Have thou considered what may
happen after it?
How thy account may stand, and what to answer?

A parent surely would turn that question upon his own heart before he
precipitated his unprepared child to so awful and uncertain an account: Rage
and instant revenge may find some plea; sudden passion may transport even a
father to lift his hand against his own offspring; but this act of Sciolto has
no shelter but in heathen authority -- It Is justly thought, and worthy of that
spirit,
That dwelt in ancient Latian breasts, when Rome
Was mistress of the world.

Did ever poetry beguile a man into such an allusion? And to what does that
piece of information tend, that Rome was mistress of the world? If this is
human nature, it would almost tempt one to reply in Sciolto's own words -- I
could curse nature.

But it is no more like nature, than the following sentiments of Calista are
like the sentiments of a Penitent, or a Christian -- That I must die it is my
only comfort;
Death is the privilege of human nature,
And life without it were not worth our taking --

And again, Yet Heaven, who knows our weak imperfect natures,
How blind with passions, and how prone to evil,
Makes not too strict enqiry for offenses,
But is atoned by penitence and prayer.
Cheap recompense! here 'twou'd not be received;
Nothing but blood can make the expiation.

Such is the catastrophe of Rowe's Fair Penitant, such is the representation he
gives us of human nature, and such the moral of his tragedy.

I shall conclude with an extract or two from the catastrophe of The Fatal
Dowry; and first, for the penitence of Beaumelle, I shall select only the
following speech, addressed to her husband: I dare not move you
To hear me speak. I know my fault is far
Beyond qualification or excuse;
That it is not fit for me to hope, or you
To think of mercy; only I presume
To entreat you would be pleased to look upon
My sorrow for it, and believe these tears
Are the true children of my grief, and not
A woman's cunning.

I need not point out the contrast between this and the quotations from
Calista. It will require a longer extract to bring the conduct of Rochfort into
comparison with that of Sciolto: The reader will observe that Novall's dead
body is now on the scene, Charalois, Beaumelle, and Rochfort her father, are
present. The charge of adultery is urged by Charalois, and appeal is made to
the justice of Rochfort in the case. Rochfort. What answer makes the prisoner?

Beaumelle. I confess
The fact I Am charged with, and yield myself
Most miserably guilty.

Rochfort. Heaven take mercy
Upon your soul then! It must leave your body --
-- Since that the politic law provides that servants,
To whose care we commit our goods, shall die
If they abuse our trust; what can you look for,
To whose charge this most hopeful Lord gave up
All he received from his brave ancestors,
All he could leave to his posterity?
His honor -- Wicked woman! in whose safety
All his life's joys and comforts were locked up,
Which thy lust, a thief, has now stolen from him!
And therefore --

Charalois. Stay, just Judge -- May not what is lost
By her one fault (for I am charitable,
And charge her not with many) be forgotten
In her fair life hereafter?

Rochfort. Never, Sir!
The wrong that is done to the chaste married bed,
Repentant tears can never expiate:
And be assured to pardon such a sin,
Is an offense as great as to commit it.

In consequence of this the husband strikes her dead before her father's eyes:
The act indeed is horrid; even tragedy shrinks from it, and Nature with a
father's voice instantly cries out -- Is she dead then? -- and you have killed
her? -- Charalois avows it, and pleads his sentence for the deed; the
revolting, agonized parent breaks forth into one of the most pathetic, natural
and expressive lamentations, that the English drama can produce -- -- But I
pronounced it
As a Judge only, and a friend to justice,
And, zealous in defense of your wronged honor,
Broke all the ties of nature, and cast off
The love and soft affection of a father:
I in your cause put on a scarlet robe
Of red died cruelty; but in return
You have advanced for me no flag of mercy:
I looked on you as a wronged husband, but
You closed your eyes against me as a father.
Oh, Beaumelle! Oh, my daughter! --

Charalois. This is madness.

Rochfort. Keep from me! -- Could not one good thought rise up
To tell you that she was my age's comfort,
Begot by a weak man, and born a woman,
And could not therefore but partake of frailty?
Or wherefore did not thankfulness step forth
To urge my many merits, which I may
Object to you, since you prove ungrateful?
Flinty-hearted Charalois! --

Charalois. Nature does prevail above your virtue.

What conclusions can I draw from these comparative examples, which every
reader would not anticipate? Is there a man, who has any feeling for real
nature, dramatic character, moral sentiment, tragic pathos or nervous diction,
who can hesitate, even for a moment, where to bestow the palm?

No XCI.
An toti morimur?
(SENECA IN TROAD.)
I Believe there are few people, who have not at some time or other felt a
propensity to humor themselves in that kind of melancholy, which arises in the
mind upon revisiting the scene of former happiness, and contemplating the
change that time has wrought in its appearance by the mournful comparison of
present with past impressions.

In this train of thought I was the other day carried almost imperceptibly to
the country seat of a deceased friend, whose loss I must ever lament. I had not
been there since his death, and there was a dreariness in the scene as I
approached, that might have almost tempted me to believe even things inanimate
partook of my sensations. The traces of my friend, whose solicitude for order
and seemliness reached to every thing about him, were no longer to be seen: The
cottages and little gardens of his poor neighbors, which used to be so trim
and neat, whilst his eye was over them, seemed to be falling into neglect; the
lawn before his house was now become a solitude; no laborers at their work; no
domestics at their sports and exercises: I looked around for my old
acquaintance, that used to be grazing up and down upon their pensions of
pasturage; they had probably been food for hounds long ago; Nature had lost her
smile of hospitality and benevolence; methought I never saw any thing more
disconsolate.

As I entered the house, an aged woman, whom I had long remembered as one of
the family, met me in the passage, and, looking me in the face, cried out, "Is
it you, Sir?" -- and burst into tears: She followed me into the common
sitting-room, and as she was opening the shutters, observed to me -- "That it
did not look as it used to do, when my lord was living." It was true; I had
already made the remark in silence: -- "How the face of a friend," said I
within myself, "enlivens all things about him! What hours of placid delight
have I passed within these walls! Have I ever heard a word here fall from his
lips, that I have wished him to recall? Has the reputation of the absent ever
bled by a stab of his giving? Has the sensibility of any person present
suffered for an expression of his? Once, and only once, in this very spot, I
drew from him the circumstantial detail of an unfortunate period in his life:
It was a recital so manly and ingenuous, so void of coloring, so disdainful of
complaint and so untainted by asperity, that it carried conviction to my mind,
and I can scarce conceive a degree of prejudice that could have held out
against it; but I could perceive that the greatest event in a man's history may
turn by springs so subtle and concealed, that they can never be laid open for
public exculpation, and that in the process of all human trials there may be
things too small for the fingers of the law to feel; motives, which produce the
good or ill fortunes of men and govern their actions, but which cannot guide
the judgments, or even come under the contemplation of those who are appointed
to decide upon them."

I soon quitted this apartment, and entered one which I contemplated with more
satisfaction, and even with a degree of veneration; for it was the chamber, in
which I had seen my friend yield up the last breath of life. Few men had
endured greater persecution in the world; none could leave it in greater peace
and charity: If forgiveness of injuries constitutes a merit, our enemies surely
are those to whom we are most beholden. How awful is the last scene of a man's
life, who has filled a dubious and important part on the stage of the world! --
"Of a truth," thought I, "thou art happily removed out of an unfriendly world;
if thou had deceived my good opinion, it had been an injury to my nature: But
though the living man can wear a mask and carry on deceit, the dying Christian
cannot counterfeit: Sudden death may smite the hypocrite, the sensualist, the
impostor, and they may die in their shame; but slow and gradual dissolution, a
lingering death of agony and decay, will strip the human heart before it seizes
it; it will lay it naked, before it stops it. There is no trifling with some
solemnities; no prevaricating with God, when we are on the very threshold of
his presence: Many worldly friendships dissolve away with his breath to whom
they were pledged; but thy last moments, my friend, were so employed as to seal
my affection to thy memory closer than it was ever attached to thy person; and
I have it now to say, there was a man, whom I have loved and served, and who
has not deceived or betrayed me."

And what must I now think of popularity, when I reflect upon those who had it,
and upon this man, who had it not? Fallacious test! -- Contemptible pursuit!
How often, since the exile of Aristides, has integrity been thy victim and
villainy thine idol? Worship it then, thou filthy idolater, and take the proper
wages of thy servility; be the dupe of cunning, and the stalking-horse of
hypocrisy.

What a contrast to the death I have now been reviewing, occurs to my mind,
when I reflect upon the dreadful consummation of the once popular Antitheus! I
remember him in the height of his fame, the hero of his party; no man so
caressed, followed and applauded: He was a little loose, his friends would own,
in his moral character, but then he was the honestest fellow in the world; it
was not to be denied, that he was rather free in his notions, but then he was
the best creature living. I have seen men of the gravest characters wink at his
sallies, because he was so pleasant and so well bred, it was impossible to be
angry with him. Every thing went well with him, and Antitheus seemed to be at
the summit of human prosperity, when he was suddenly seized with the most
alarming symptoms: He was at his country house, and (which had rarely happened
to him) he at that time chanced to be alone; wife or family he had none, and
out of the multitude of his friends no one happened to be near him at the
moment of this attack.

A neighboring physician was called out of bed in the night to come to him
with all haste in this extremity: He found him sitting up in his bed supported
by pillows, his countenance full of horror, his breath struggling as in the
article of death, his pulse intermitting, and at times beating with such
rapidity as could hardly be counted. Antitheus dismissed the attendants he had
about him, and eagerly demanded of the physician, if he thought him in danger:
The physician answered that he must fairly tell him he was in imminent danger
-- How so! how so! do you think me dying? -- He was sorry to say the symptoms
indicated death. -- Impossible! you must not let me die: I dare not die: O
doctor! save me, if you can. -- Your situation, Sir, is such, said the
physician, that it is not in mine, or any other man's art, to save you; and I
think I should not do my duty, if I gave you any false hopes in these moments,
which, if I am not mistaken, will not more than suffice for any worldly or
other concerns, which you may have upon your mind to settle. -- My mind is full
of horror, cried the dying man, and I am incapable of preparing it for death.
-- He now fell into an agony, accompanied with a shower of tears; a cordial was
administered, and he revived in a degree; when turning to the physician, who
had his fingers on his pulse, he eagerly demanded of him, if he did not see
that blood upon the feet-curtains of his bed. There was none to be seen the
physician assured him; it was nothing but a vapor of his fancy. -- I see it
plainly, said Antitheus, in the shape of a human hand: I have been visited with
a tremendous apparition. As I was lying sleepless in my bed this night, I took
up a letter of a deceased friend, to dissipate certain thoughts that made me
uneasy. I believed him to be a great philosopher, and was converted to his
opinious: Persuaded by his arguments and my own experience that the disorderly
affairs of this evil world could not be administered by any wise, just or
provident Being, I had brought myself to think no such Being could exist, and
that a life, produced by chance, must terminate in annihilation: This is the
reasoning of that letter, and such were the thoughts I was revolving in my
mind, when the apparition of my dead friend presented itself before me; and,
unfolding the curtains of my bed, stood at my feet, looking earnestly upon me
for a considerable space of time. My heart sunk within me; for his face was
ghastly, full of horror, with an expression of such anguish as I can never
describe: His eyes were fixed upon me, and at length with a mournful motion of
his head -- "Alas, alas!" he cried, "we are in a fatal error" -- and taking
hold of the curtains with his hand, shook them violently and disappeared. --
This, I protest to you, I both saw and heard, and look! where the print of his
hand is left in blood upon the curtains.

Antitheus survived the relation of this vision very few hours, and died
delirious in great agonies.

What a forsaken and disconsolate creature is a man without religion!

Reader, whosoever thou art, deceive not thyself; let not passion, or
prosperity, or wit, or wantonness, seduce thy reason to an attempt against the
truth. If thou have the faculties of a man, thou will never bring thyself to a
fixed persuasion that there is no God: Struggle how thou will against the
notion, there will be a moment when the glaring conviction will burst upon thy
mind. Now mark what follows -- If there is a God, the government of the world
is in that God; and this once admitted, the necessity of a future state follows
of consequence. Ask thyself then, what can be the purposes of that future
state; what, but those of justice and retribution, to reward the good, and to
punish the evil? Our present life then is a life of probation, a state of trial
and of discipline, preparatory to that future state. Now see what is fallen
upon thee, and look well to thyself for the consequences: Thou have let the
idea of a God into thy mind, because indeed thou could not keep it out, and
religion rushes through the breach. It is natural religion hitherto, and no
more: But no matter; there is enough even in natural religion to make thee
tremble. Whither will thou now resort for comfort, whither fly for refuge from
the wrath to come? -- Behold the asylum is open, Christianity is thy salvation
and redemption: That, which natural religion has shadowed out to thee in
terrors, Christianity will reveal in glory: It will clear up thy doubts,
disperse thy fears, and turn thy hopes into certainty. Thy reasonings about a
future state, which are but reasonings, it will not only verify by divine
authorities, but by positive proof, by visible example, attested by witnesses,
confirmed by the evidence of the senses, and uncontradicted by the history of
ages. Now thou will know to thy comfort, that there is a Mediator gone before
thee, who will help out thy imperfect atonement, when thou art brought to
judgment in a future state. Thou will indeed be told for certain, that this
life is a state of probation, and that thou shall be brought to account for
thine actions; but thou will be taught an easy lesson of salvation; thou will
be cheared with the mercies of thy God, and comforted with the assurance of
pardon, if thou will heartily turn to repentance: Thou will find that all this
system of religion is conformable to those natural notions, which reason
suggested to thee before, with this advantage, that it makes them clearer,
purifies, refines, enlarges them; shuts out every dismal prospect, opens all
that is delightful, and points a road to Heaven through paths of peace and
pleasantness.

No XCII.
I DO not know a man in England better received in the circles of the great
than Jack Gayless: Though he has no one quality for which he ought to be
respected, and some points in his character for which he should be held in
detestation, yet his manners are externally so agreeable, and his temper
generally so social, that he makes a holiday in every family where he visits.
He lives with the nobility upon the easiest footing, and in the great houses
where he is in habits of intimacy, he knows all the domestics by name, and has
something to say to every one of them upon his arrival: He has a joke with the
butler at the side-board during dinner, and sets the footman a tittering behind
his chair, and is so comical and so familiar -- He has the best receipt book in
England, and recommends himself to the cook by a new sauce, for he is in the
secrets of the King's kitchen at Versailles: He has the finest breed of
spaniels in Europe, and is never without a puppy at the command of a friend: He
knows the theory of hunting from top to bottom, is always in with the hounds,
can develop every hit in a check, and was never known to cheer a wrong dog in a
cover, when he gives his tongue: If you want an odd horse to match your set,
Jack is your man; and for a neat traveling carriage, there is not an item that
he will not superintend, if you are desirous to employ him; he will be at your
door with it, when the builder brings it home, to see that nothing is wanting,
he is so ready and so obliging: No man canvasses a county or borough like Jack
Gayless; he is so pleasant with the freeholders, and has so many songs and such
facetious toasts, and such a way with him amongst their wives and daughters,
that flesh and blood cannot hold out against him: In short, he is the best
leader of a mob, and of course the honestest fellow in England.

A merchant's daughter of great fortune married him for love; he ran away with
her from a boarding-school, but her father after a time was reconciled to his
son-in-law, and Jack, during the life of the good man, passed his time in a
small country house on Clapham Common, superintending the concerns of about six
acres of ground; being very expert however in the gardens and grape-house, and
a very sociable fellow over a bottle with the citizen and his friends on a
Saturday and Sunday, he became a mighty favorite: All this while he lived upon
the best terms with his wife; kept her a neat little palfrey, and regularly
took his airing on the common by her side in the most uxorious manner: She was
in fact a most excellent creature, of the sweetest temper and mildest manners,
so that there seemed no interruption to their happiness, but what arose from
her health, which was of a delicate nature. After a few years the citizen died,
and Jack, whose conviviality had given him a helping hand out of the world,
found himself in possession of a very handsome sum of money upon casting up his
affairs at his decease.

Jack Gayless having no further purpose to serve, saw no occasion to consult
appearances any longer, and began to form connexions, in which he did not think
it necessary for his wife to have a share. He now set out upon the pursuit of
what the world calls pleasure, and soon found himself in the company of those
whom the world calls the Great. He had the address to recommend himself to his
new acquaintance, and used great dispatch in getting rid of his old ones: His
wife was probably his greatest encumbrance on this occasion; but Jack possessed
one art in perfection, which stood him in great stead; he had the civillest way
of insulting that could be imagined; and as the feelings of his wife were those
of the fondest susceptibility, operating upon a weak and delicate constitution,
he succeeded to admiration in tormenting her by neglect, at the same time that
he never gave her a harsh expression, and in particular, when any body else was
present, behaved himself toward her in so obliging a manner, that all his
acquaintance set him down as the best tempered fellow living, and her as a
lady, by his report, rather captious and querulential. When he had thus got the
world on his side, he detached himself more and more from her society, and
became less studious to disguise the insults he put upon her: She declined fast
in her health, and certain symptoms began to appear, which convinced Jack that
a perseverance in his system would in a short time lay her in the grave, and
leave him without any further molestation. Her habit was consumptive, for where
is the human frame that can long resist the agony of the heart? In this
extremity she requested the assistance of a certain physician, very eminent in
these cases: This little gentleman has a way of hitting off the complaints of
his patients, which is not always so convenient to those expectant parties, who
have made up their minds and reconciled themselves to the call of nature. As
Jack had one object, and the Doctor another, they did not entirely agree in
their process, and she was sent down by her husband into a distant county for
the benefit of the air, in a low situation and a damp house. Jack and the
physician had now a scene of altercation, in which it was evident that the
least man of the two had the greatest spirit and the largest heart, and Jack
certainly put up with some expressions, which could only be passed over by
perfect innocence or absolute cowardice: The little Doctor, who had no
objection to send Jack out of the world, and a very longing desire to keep his
lady in it, spoke like a man who had long been in the practice of holding death
at defiance; but what Jack lost in argument he made up in address, and after
professing his acquiescence in the measures of his antagonist, he silently
determined to pursue his own, and the Doctor's departure was very soon followed
by that of his patient. The dying wife made a feeble stand for a while, but
what can a broken heart do against a hardened one?

After Jack had taken such zealous pains to overruled the Doctor's advice, it
is not to be supposed but he would have accompanied his wife to the place of
her destination, if it had been only for the satisfaction of contemplating the
effects of his own greater sagacity in her case; and he protested to her, in
the kindest manner, that nothing should have robbed him of the pleasure of
attending her on the journey, but the most indispensable and unexpected
business: He had just then received letters from two friends, which would be
attended with the greatest breach of honor, if neglected; and she knew his
nicety of principle in those affairs: He would not read them to her, as she was
in too weak a condition (he observed) to attend to business, but she might rest
assured, he would, if possible, overtake her on the way, or be with her in a
few hours after her arrival, for he should be impatient to be a witness of her
recovery, which he persuaded himself would soon take place, when she had made
experiment of the place he had chosen for her. When he had finished his
apology, his wife raised her eyes from the ground, where she had fixed them
whilst he was speaking, and with a look of such mild languor, and such dying
softness, as would almost have melted marble into pity, mournfully replied --
farewell! -- and resigning herself to the support of her maid and a nurse, was
lifted into her carriage, and left her husband to pursue his business without
reproach.

Jack Gayless now lost no further time in fulfilling the promise he had made to
his wife, and immediately began to apply himself to the letters, which had so
indispensably prevented him from paying her those kind offices, which her
situation was in so much need of. These letters I shall now insert, as some of
my readers may probably think he wants a justification on this occasion. The
first was from a great lady of unblemished reputation, who has a character for
public charity and domestic virtues, which even malice has not dared to
impeach. Her ladyship was now at her country seat, where she presided at a
table of the most splendid hospitality, and regulated a princely establishment
with consummate judgment and decorum: In this great family jack had long been a
welcome visiter, and as he had received a thousand kindnesses at her hands,
gratitude would dispose him to consider her requests as commands the most
pressing. The important contents were as follows, viz.

Dear Jack,
I am sorry your wife's so sick; but methinks you would do well to change the
scene, and come amongst us, now home's so dull. You Will be grieved to hear I
have clapped Tom Jones in the back sinews: Ned has put a charge to him, but he
is so cruelly let down, I am afraid he must be scor'd with a fine iron, and
that will be an eyesore, to say no worse on it. My lord you know hates writing,
so he bids me tell you to bring Moll Ross with you, as he thinks there is a
young man here will take her off your hands; and as you have had the best of
her, and she is rather under your weight, think you will be glad to get well out
of her. Would you believe it, I was eight hours in the saddle yesterday: We dug
a fox in Lady Tabby's park: The old Dowager goes on setting traps; all the
country round cries out upon it: Thank the fates, she had a py'd peacock and a
whole brood of Guinea fowls carried off last night: My lord says it is a
judgment upon her. Don't forget to bring your Highland tarrier, as I would fain
have a cross with my bitch Cruel.

Dear Jack, yours, *.


As Jack Gayless was not one of those milk-sops, who let family excuses stand
in the way of the more amiable office of obliging his friends, and saw in its
just light the ridicule he would naturally expose himself to, if he sheltered
himself under so silly a pretense as a wife's sickness, he would infallibly
have obeyed her ladyship's commands, and set out with the Highland tarrier
instead of Mrs. Gayless, if he had not been divided by another very pressing
attention, which every man of the world will acknowledge the importance of.
There was a certain young lady of easy virtue, who had made a tender impression
on his heart as he was innocently taking the air in Hyde Park: He had prevailed
so far with her as to gain her consent to an appointment for that day; not
foreseeing, as I should suppose, or perhaps not just at that moment
recollecting his wife's journey, and the call there would be upon him on that
account. This young lady, who was wanting in no other virtue but chastity, had
learnt some particulars of Mr. Gayless, which she had not been informed of when
she yielded to the assignation, and in consequence had written him the
following perplexing billet: Sir,
I am sorry it is not possible for me to receive the honor of your visit, and
the more so, as I am afraid my reason for declining it, though insuperable with
me, will not appear a sufficient one in your opinion. I have just now been
informed that you are a married man; this would have been enough, if I had not
heard it with the addition, that your Lady is one of the most excellent and
most injured women living -- if indeed she be yet living, for I learn from the
same authority that she is in the last stage of a rapid decline.

In what ^ght must I regard myself, if I was to supply you with a motive for
neglecting that attention, which her situation demands of you? Don't let it
surprise you, that a woman who has forfeited her claim to modesty, should yet
retain some pretensions to humanity: If you have renounced both the one and the
other, I have a double motive for declining your acquaintance.

I am, etc. * *.




The style of this letter seemed so extraordinary to Jack, and so unlike what
he had been used to receive from correspondents of this lady's description,
that it is not to be wondered at, if it threw him into a profound meditation:
Not that the rebuke made any other impression on him, than as it seemed to
involve a mystery, which he could not expound; for it never entered into his
head to suppose that the writer was in earnest. In this dilemma he imparted it
to a friend, and with his usual gaiety desired his help to unriddle it: His
friend perused it, and with a serious countenance told him he was acquainted
with the lady, and gave her perfect credit for the sincerity of the sentiments
it contained: She was a romantic girl, he told him, and not worth a further
thought; but as he perceived he was chagrined with the affair, he advised him
to take post for the country, and attend the summons of his noble
correspondent, for that he himself had always found the dissipation of a
journey the best remedy in all cases of vexation, like the present. This
friendly advice was immediately followed by an order for the journey, and Jack
Gayless put himself into his post-chaise, with his tarrier by his side,
ordering his groom to follow with Moll Ross by easy stages.

Whilst Jack was rapidly posting toward the house of jollity and dissipation,
his suffering and forsaken wife by slow stages pursued her last melancholy
journey: Supported in her coach by her two women, and attended by an old man
servant of her father's, she at last reached the allotted house, where her
miseries were to find a period. One indiscretion only, a stolen and precipitate
marriage, had marked her life with a blemish, and the husband, who in early
youth had betrayed her artless affection into that fatal mistake, was now the
chosen instrument of chastisement. She bore her complicated afflictions with
the most patient resignation; neither sickness nor sorrow forced a complaint
from her; and Death, by the gentleness of his advances, seemed to lay aside his
terrors, and approach her with respect and pity.

Jack was still upon his visit, when he received the news of her death: This
event obliged him to break off from a most agreeable party, and take a journey
to London; but as the season had happened to set in for a severe frost, and the
foxhounds were confined to their kennel, he had the consolation to reflect that
his amusements were not so much interrupted as they might have been. He gave
orders for a handsome funeral, and deported himself with such outward propriety
on the occasion, that all the world gave him credit for his behavior, and he
continues to be the same popular character amongst his acquaintance, and
universally caressed: In short, Jack Gayless (to use the phrase of fashion) is
the honestest fellow in England, and -- a disgrace to human nature.

No XCIII.
BEING now arrived at the conclusion of my Third Volume, and having hitherto
given my readers very little interruption in my own person, I hope I may be
permitted to make one short valedictory address to these departing adventurers,
in whose success I am naturally so much interested.

I have employed much time and care in rearing up these Essays to what I
conceived maturity, and qualifying them, as far as I was able, to shift for
themselves, in a world where they are to inherit no popularity from their
author, nor to look for any favor but what they can earn for themselves. To
any, who shall question them who they are, and whence they come, they may truly
answer -- We are all one man's sons -- we are indeed Observers, but no Spies.
If this shall not suffice, and they must needs give a farther account of
themselves, they will have to say, that he who sent them into the world, sent
them as an offering of his good will to mankind; that he trusts they have been
so trained as not to hurt the feelings or offend the principles of any man, who
shall admit them into his company; and that for their errors (which he cannot
doubt are many) he hopes they will be found errors of the understanding, not of
the heart: They are the first fruits of his leisure and retirement; and as the
mind of a man in that situation will naturally bring the past scenes of active
life under its examination and review, it will surely be considered as a
pardonable zeal for being yet serviceable to mankind, if he gives his
experience and observations to the world, when he has no further expectations
from it on the score of fame or fortune. These are the real motives for the
publication of these Papers, and this the Author's true state of mind: To serve
the cause of morality and religion is his first ambition; to point out some
useful lessons for amending the education and manners of young people of either
sex, and to mark the evil habits and unsocial humors of men, with a view to
their reformation, are the general objects of his undertaking. He has formed
his mind to be contented with the consciousness of these honest endeavors, and
with a very moderate share of success: He has ample reason notwithstanding to
be more than satisfied, with the reception these Papers have already had in
their probationary excursion; and it is not from any disgust, taken up in a
vain conceit of his own merits, that he has more than once observed upon the
frauds and follies of popularity, or that he now repeats his opinion, that it
is the worst guide a public man can follow, who wishes not to go out of the
track of honesty; for at the same time that he has seen men force their way in
the world by effrontery, and heard others applauded for their talents, whose
only recommendation has been their ingenuity in wickedness, he can recollect
very few indeed, who have succeeded, either in same or fortune, under the
disadvantages of modesty and merit.

To such readers, as shall have taken up these Essays with a candid disposition
to be pleased, he will not scruple to express a hope that they have not been
altogether disappointed; for though he has been unassisted in composing them,
he has endeavored to open a variety of resources, sensible that he had many
different palates to provide for. The subject of politics, however, will never
be one of these resources; a subject which he has neither the will nor the
capacity to meddle with. There is yet another topic, which he has been no less
studious to avoid, which is personality; and though he professes to give
occasional delineations of living manners, and not to make men in his closet
(as some Essayists have done) he does not mean to point at individuals; for as
this is a practice which he has ever rigidly abstained from when he mixed in
the world, he should hold himself without the excuse, even of temptation, if he
was now to take it up, when he has withdrawn himself from the world.

In the Essays (which he has presumed to call Literary, because he cannot
strike upon any apposite title of an humbler sort) he has studied to render
himself intelligible to readers of all descriptions, and the deep-read scholar
will not fastidiously pronounce them shallow, only because he can fathom them
with ease; for that would be to wrong both himself and their author, who, if
there is any vanity in a pedantic margin of references, certainly resisted that
vanity, and as certainly had it at his choice to have loaded his page with as
great a parade of authorities, as any of his brother writers upon classical
subjects have ostentatiously displayed. But if any learned critic, now or
hereafter, shall find occasion to charge these Essays on the score of false
authority or actual error, their author will most thankfully meet the
investigation; and the fair Reviewer shall find that he has either candor to
adopt correction, or materials enough in reserve to maintain every warrantable
assertion.

The Moralist and the Divine, it is hoped, will here find nothing to except
against; it is not likely such an offense should be committed by one, who has
rested all his hope in that Revelation, on which his faith is founded; whom
nothing could ever divert from his aim of turning even the gayest subjects to
moral purposes, and who reprobates the jest, which provokes a laugh at the
expense of a blush.

The Essays of a critical sort are no less addressed to the moral objects of
composition, than to those which they have more professedly in view: They are
not undertaken for the invidious purpose of developing errors, and stripping
the laurels of departed poets, but simply for the uses of the living. The
specimens already given, and those which are intended to follow in the further
prosecution of the work, are proposed as disquisitions of instruction rather
than of subtlety; and if they shall be found more particularly to apply to
dramatic compositions, it is because their author looks up to the stage, as the
great arbiter of more important delights, than those only which concern the
taste and talents of the nation; it is because he sees with serious regret the
buffoonery and low abuse of humor to which it is sinking, and apprehends for
the consequences such an influx of folly may lead to. It will be readily
granted there are but two modes of combating this abasement of the drama with
any probability of success: One of these modes is, by an exposition of some one
or other of the productions in question, which are supposed to contribute to
its degradation; the other is, by inviting the attention of the public to an
examination of better models, in which the standard works of our early
dramatists abound. If the latter mode therefore should be adopted in these
Essays, and the former altogether omitted, none of their readers will regret
the preference that has been given upon such an alternative.

If the ladies of wit and talents do not take offense at some of these Essays,
it will be a test of the truth of their pretensions, when they discern that the
raillery, pointed only at affectation and false character, has no concern with
them. There is nothing in which this nation has more right to pride itself,
than the genius of its women; they have only to add a little more attention to
their domestic virtues, and their same will fly over the face of the globe. If
I had ever known a good match broken off on the part of the man, because a
young lady had too much modesty and discretion, or was too strictly educated in
the duties of a good wife, I hope I understand myself too well to obtrude my
old-fashioned maxims upon them. They might be as witty as they pleased, if I
thought it was for their good; but if a racer, that has too great a share of
heels, must lie by because it cannot be matched, so must every young spinster,
if her wits are too nimble. If I could once discover that men choose their
wives, as they do their friends, for their manly atchievments and convivial
talents, for their being jolly fellows over a bottle, or topping a five-barred
gate in a fox-chace, I should then be able to account for the many Amazonian
figures I encounter in slouched hats, great-coats and half-boots, and I would
not presume to set my face against the fashion; or if my experience of the
fair-sex could produce a single instance in the sect of Sentimentalists, which
could make me doubt of the pernicious influence of a Musidorus and a Lady
Thimble, I would not so earnestly have pressed the examples of a Sappho, a
Calliope or a Melissa.

The first Numbers of the present collection, to the amount of forty, have
already been published; but being worked off at a country press, I find myself
under the painful necessity of discontinuing the edition. I have availed myself
of this opportunity, not only by correcting the imperfections of the first
publication, but by rendering this as unexceptionable (in the external at
least) as I possibly could. I should have been wanting to the public and
myself, if the flattering encouragement I have already received had not
prompted me to proceed with the work; and if my alacrity in the further
prosecution of it shall meet any check, it must ari^ only from those causes,
which no human diligence can control.

Vos tamen O nostri ne festinate libelli!
Si post fata ven^ gloria, n^ propero^
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

