MEMOIRS OF THE Court of France AND City of Paris: CONTAINING The Intrigues of
that Court, and the Characters of the Ministers of State, and other Officers;
Together With the Occurrences of the TOWN.

In Two PARTS.

Translated from the French.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at Grays-Inn-Gate, and George Strahan at the
Golden Ball in Cornhil. MDCCII.

MEMOIRS Of the COURT of FRANCE, And of the CITY of PARIS.
PART I.
IT was soon after the Treaty, with the Duke of Savoy, that I came to the
French Court. The King found it convenient, to conclude a Peace with that
Prince; thereby, to ease himself of so expensive and troublesome a War, as that
had proved; which he had been obliged to maintain on that side. This great
Monarch, who having once put an end to the Civil Wars, which were raised in his
Kingdom, while he was under age, had been so successful in his Undertakings,
that he was looked on as a Prince whom Providence designed to raise above all
others: found himself on a sudden, in danger of being cast down, from his
greatest height of Grandeur; all Europe being united against him; and King
William, who is now in Possession of the Throne of England, having been invited
thither, by some of that Kingdom; to deliver them from the Apprehensions they
were under, that their Religion, Laws and Privileges, were in danger, from the
Measures taken by King James and his Ministers: engaged so many Princes in his
Interests by his prudent Conduct, that in a short time, he formed a very
considerable League; and put himself at the Head of so many Forces, that he was
in a Condition to put a stop, to his most Christian Majesty's formidable Power;
under which, every thing had bowed before. So that by a Vi^issitude, frequent
enough in Governments, one descended of William of Nassaw, preserved the House
of Austria from its utter Ruin: The beginnings of which were owing to his
illustrious Predecessor. Yet nothing in all this War, created more trouble to
the King, than the Duke of Savoy's declaring against him. He had often
endeavored to take him off from the Confederates, but could not prevail. The
Mareshal de Catinat, who commanded his Majesty's Army in Italy; and who is as
well qualified, for Negociations of State, as for the Business of War, was more
successful than others had been. He sent the Count de Tesse, Lieutenant General
of the King's Armies, to Turin; with Instructions, suitable to those he had
himself received from Court: and that he might be the better heard, his Majesty
added so many Troops to his Army, under the Mareshal's Command, that he made it
much Superior to the Duke of Savoy's. He had two Reasons for doing this; one
was that thereby he might make the Duke sensible of the Mischiefs he was
capable of doing him; and the other was, that he might not be afraid of the
foreign Troops, which he had called to his Assistance; who might have offered
to prescribe to him, if they had been equal to the united Forces of France and
Savoy. The advantageous Proposals, that were offered to the Duke, made him
hearken to an Accommodation. By one of the Articles of this Treaty, the
Princess of Savoy, was to be given in Marriage to the Duke of Burgundy, so soon
as she was full twelve years of Age: Until which time, she was to be educated
in France; for as yet she wanted fifteen or sixteen months of it. And the King
engaged, to give two Dukes and Peers of France, to remain Hostages in Savoy,
till the Marriage should be accomplished. The King made choice of the Dukes de
Froix and de Choiseul to go there, as the two Hostages; and gave each of them
12000 Livers to defray the expense of their Journey. The Duchess du Lude, was
appointed Lady of Honor, to this Princess. The Duchess d' Arpajou, expected
to have had the Honor of this Charge, because she had it under the Dauphiness:
And she was so vexed at the Disappointment, that in a short time she fell into
an Apoplexy; which obliged her to go to the Waters of Bourbon, though the
Season in which they are usually taken, was already past: but it is now
believed, they are good for that Disease at any time of the year; and therefore
no regard is had to any particular Season. The King appointed also six Dames du
palais, one of which was the Countess de Roucy, who is this Dutchess's
Daughter; upon which account, it was thought, that the King's having neglected
her self, would not affect her any more: But, as we always prefer our own
Interests to that of others, she was much more sensible, of the Affront, which
she thought was put upon her self, than of the Honor, which was done to her
Daughter. It Is but of late, that the Duchess du Lude, could reasonably hope,
to have been so fortunate, for she was not much in Favor at Court, nor of the
number of those Ladies, who are allowed to go to Marli; and the first time she
went there, it cost her 2000 Crowns to the Princess d' Harcourt, who makes
money of every thing, and who procured her that Favor. She had some Difficulty
to furnish the Money, yet she has reason to be well-pleased, that she employed
it that way; for she has thereby had Opportunities, to act her part so well,
that she is got much into the King's Favor, and into the Favor of those, in
whom he has the greatest Confidence. After she was named to her Charge, she
took Journey, very soon for Pout-Beauvoisin, which separates France from the
Dominions of Savoy; at which Place she was to receive the Princess of Savoy.
The Countess de Roucy went thither also, with the other five Dames du palais,
whom the King had named. The Marquess de Dangeau (who had better Fortune than
the Duchess d' Arpajou, for he was named Gentleman of Honor to the young
Princess, which was the very Charge, he had with the late Dauphiness) went also
to meet her, with the other Officers of her Household, whom the King had named.
The Count de Tesse, who was made her first Master of Horse, as a Reward of the
good Services he had done at the Treaty, would have much rather chosen to have
been Gentleman of Honor. The King had some time before granted the Marquess de
Dangeau, the great Privilege, of the Order of St. Lazarus; which the Count de
Tesse thought, was a sufficient Reward, and that nothing more was designed for
him, but he soon found his mistake: Yet he has no reason to complain of his own
Fortune; for he is one of those, whom the Court has used with the greatest
Kindness; yea, I may add, that he is even overburthen'd with its Favors: for
in a short space of time, he was made Governor of Ypres, Knight of the Holy
Ghost, Colonel General of the Dragoons, Lieutenant General of the King's
Armies, and first Gentleman of the Horse to the Duchess of Burgundy. This
might seem strange, but that we often see when a Courtier has once got much
into Favor, the King is so lavish in bestowing Honors and Preferments upon
him, that one would think, he was to keep none in reserve for others.

Some days after this, the Princess of Savoy, took her Journey from Turin for
Pont-Beauvoisin, where her Lady of Honor, waited for her with the King's
Coaches. They whom the Duke of Savoy sent along with her, to be her Convoy,
took leave of her at that Place. And when she had come as far as Lions, the
Duchess du Lude, made her stay a while there, as well to refresh her after the
Fatigue of her Journey, as to satisfy the Curiosity of the People, who were
passionately desirous to see her: after which she set forward in her Journey
for Fountain-bleau, where the Court was at that time. The King went as far as
Montargis to meet her, for he knew what day she was to be there; the Dauphin
went along with his Majesty, as did also the Duke and Duchess of Orleans; and
having lodged there that night, they came to Nemours next day to dinner, where
the Duke of Burgundy waited for them: They were then within four Leagues of
Fountain-bleau, which they easily reached before night. The Princess was then
but a very Child, yet the King was so taken with her, that he stayed full four
hours in Company with her at Montargis. The Duke and Duchess of Savoy had
taught her so well her Lesson, that she seemed to have Wit and Sense much above
her Age. The Court began now to consider, what Name or Title should be given
her, whether they should call her Duchess of Burgundy, or Princess of Savoy;
the King inclined to the first, though she was not to be married for some
considerable time: His reason was, that that Title would give her the
Precedence of all the Princesses of the Blood, without giving them any reason
to complain. But the Duke of Savoy requested the King, that she might retain
her own Title, till she was married to the Duke of Burgundy. He thought perhaps
thereby to find a Precedent for him and his Family, henceforth to claim
Precedence at the French Court; for he knew well enough, that whatever Title
they gave her, she should always take the door of all the Ladies about the
Court: And, it seems, he knew, that when one of his Ancestors was in France, in
the time of Henry IV. and disputed for Place with Henry de Bourbon, Prince of
Conde, at the door of the King's Antichamber, the King took the Prince by the
Hand, and made him enter first; and to mortify the Duke of Savoy yet farther,
he told him, that he knew not what he meant, in offering to vie with a Prince
who might one day be his Master.

However, the present Duke of Savoy having requested the King, that his
Daughter's Title might be continued till the Marriage; the King held a Council
with his Ministers, that he might know what was fittest to be done on that
Occasion: They fell upon a middle-way, which was to call her neither Duthess of
Burgundy, nor Princess of Savoy, but only the Princess, without adding any
more; and thus she was always called till the day of her Marriage: In the mean
time, it was ordered, that she should have the Precedence of all the Princesses
of the Blood, as being the presumptive Wife of the Duke of Burgundy. The King
caused her to be entertained with Diversions suitable to her Age. And Monsieur
L' abbee de Choisi, finding it was become fashionable, to be employed in
something relating to the young Princess; thought, that he should make his
Court wonderfully well, by writing a Narrative of every thing, that had
befallen her since she parted from Tarin. When this Book came first abroad,
some People got into an Humor, of commending it highly in all Companies, as
the finest Piece that had appeared of a long time: But if they had been asked,
what they found in it that made them boast so much of it, they had been puzzled
to tell what it was. The more ingenuous and frank sort of People spoke quite
otherwise of it, and instead of calling it so fine a Piece, they owned plainly,
that it was good for nothing. Monsieur L' abbee, who sets up for an ingenious
Writer, was extremely vexed at this; but all those who are looked upon as the
best Judges, agreeing in the same Opinion; his Book was by common consent,
condemned for waste Paper, to be sent to the Grocers Shops.

Before I proceed farther, I beg leave, to make a short Digression concerning
this Author; he lost once fifty Lowis d' ors, at Game with that handsome Lady
Madam Fresnoi; and having no ready Money, she trusted him for some time, but at
last sent to ask it of him; he sent her instead of her Money, a Copy of some
Books he had written; telling her at the same time, that if she longed for the
Money, because without it, she had not wherewith to divert her self, at Game,
as she had told him, in her Note to him; she might divert her self with those
Books, till such time as he could satisfy her with Money. The Lady looked upon
this as a new way of paying Debts; but it tempted her to write Books as well as
others, that by her own Compositions, she might satisfy her Creditors, when
they asked Money of her.

But to return to my Subject. The Duke of Savoy was not at all well pleased,
that his Daughter had only the Title of Princess, without having that of Savoy
added to it: But if he could not have his Ambition satisfied in this matter, he
tried to have it in another. He caused a Latin Inscription to be set up,
importing that after he had enlarged the Bounds of his Dominions, and recovered
the Keys of Italy, he had shut up the Temple of Janus. It cannot be said, that
there was any manifest Falsehood in this Inscription; yet it was somewhat odd,
that he should boast of such mighty Wonders, and in so strange a manner too:
For it was never heard before, that the losing of Battles, and a whole Province
too, was the way for a Prince to enlarge his Dominions, or to reduce his Enemy
to Reason. The Inscription was put above a triumphal Arch, which was erected at
Tarin, to set off a Fire-work that was raised there, to testify the Joy of
that Place for the Peace: And it was all he could boast of from the beginning
of the War; since he had lost not only his Duchy, but the Battles of Staffard
and Marsaille into the bargain. Yet the great Number of Enemies, which France
had at that time, made his Majesty reckon, that he should be a considerable
Gainer, though he should deliver up Savoy to him, and even the Town and Citadel
of Pignerol, which were taken by Cardinal Richeleu in Person, if by that Means
he could oblige him to a Peace. By this Treaty, the Duke was ^ut into as good
Circumstances, as if he himself had gained those Battles, and conquered a great
Province.

The Duke having had the Pleasure to see two Dukes and Peers of France at his
Court, resolved to revenge himself, and all the Princes of his Blood, of the
Affront which Henry IV. put upon their Ancestor; and as that great King, had
carrv'd it so high in his own House, as to make a Prince of his own Blood, take
place of a Duke of Savoy: So the present Duke would needs carry it so high at
his Court, as to make the Prince de Carignan (who is of his Family, and elder
Brother to the Count de Soissons) take place of the two French Dukes, when they
came to pay him a Visit at his House. Had the King's great Master of Horse been
there, to see a Prince triumph over these two Dukes, he had thought himself
sufficiently revenged of them; for they were so far from yielding him the place
in his own House, that they disputed it with him wheresoever they met him.
Perhaps he will not soon forget a Debate he had on this Score, with the Duke de
Montausier; who having told him, that he never thought, nor was it ever heard,
that a younger Brother, of the Family of St. Maur, would vie for Precedence
with a Prince of a Sovereign House: The Duke de Montausier answered him
saucily, that he would let him know, that both as a younger Brother of the
Family of St. Maur, and as Duke and Peer of France, he would dispute the
Precedence with him where ever they should meet. But though perhaps this Duke
may have been much in the right upon the one Score, yet certainly he was not so
upon the other; for a younger Brother, of the Family of St. Maur, or of any
other House, can never be supposed equal to the Son of a Sovereign Prince. And,
perhaps, he had not spoke after that manner, but that the Duke of Lorrain was,
at that time, dispossed of his Dominions; so that he looked upon the Princes of
that House, but as younger Brothers of a good Family. And it was, no doubt, for
this very reason, that much about the same time, the Count de Crequi Berniulle,
entered into a Debate with the late Count d' Harcourt, younger Brother to the
Duke d' Elbeuf, for he treated him just as if he had been his Equal; and was so
very haughty, that when the Mareshals of France (before whom both of them were
obliged to appear, to give account of their Quarrel) made some Distinction
between them, and ordered him to go to the Prince's House, and there to beg
Pardon for what had passed, his Behavior to him was the same as before. It Is
true, he went to Harcourt, where the Prince dwelt at that time; but he caused
drive his Coach to the very door of the Parlour, where the Mareshals of France
had appointed the Count d' Harcourt to receive him: He found him there, with
some Gentlemen of their Neighborhood, for they themselves were near
Neighbors. The Prince had caused Chairs to be set for them, and had also
reserved one for the Count de Crequi, while he himself designed to sit in an
Elbow-chair: But so soon as the Count de Crequi (who was always of a great
Presence of Mind) perceived, that by this means, he intended to let him
understand the Difference between a Prince of a sovereign House, and a
Gentleman of a good Family; he skilfully warded off the blow; for after he had
made those Compliments to the Prince, which the Mareshals of France ordered him
to do, he went to the Chair that was reserved for him; but instead of sitting
down in it, he put one knee upon the Seat of it, and took hold of the back of
it with his Hands: The Count d' Harcourt, who had Orders prescribed him by the
Mareshals of France, how to behave himself on that Occasion, as well as he; and
who was obliged not to sit while he was standing, told him, that it would be
more for his Convenience to sit down in the Chair, and that at least, the
Gentlemen who were there present, would take their Seats if he had once taken
his: The Count d' Crequi answered him, that there was no need of Ceremonies
among Neighbors as they were, and that he might sit down if he pleased; but as
for himself, he was well enough as he was: With these words, he ended his
Visit; and without giving the Prince time to make use of his Elbow-chair, took
leave of him. The Prince was obliged to wait on him to the door of the Parlour;
and the Distinction which he designed to have made between them, turned more to
his Shame than to his Honor. And he himself said plainly to one of the
Gentlemen that was at his House, and in whom he put Confidence, that in his
lifetime, there was never any thing so mortified him, as the Count de Crequi's
Behavior to him that day. The Mortification, no doubt, was great enough; but
he met with one incomparably greater, (if he was sensible of it) when the
Prince of Condee cudgelled him at Luxenburg. This Treatment lets us see, that
every Man is Master in his own House; and that there is a great Difference
between a Prince of the Blood, and any other Prince in France, though of a
Sovereign House. However, the Prince of Conde's great Haughtiness was brought
low soon after; I mean, when he went out of France, and betook himself to the
Protection of the Spaniards; and took part with them, to the manifest Violation
of that Allegiance which he owed his own Sovereign. I admire that we have not a
full Account of all this, in the History that is written of his Life. It is
well enough known, that so soon as he was at Namur, he found Reason to repent,
that ever he had left his native Country. The Author of that History, methinks,
should have told us all the Journeys he made from that Town to Brussels, and
from Brussels to Namur; endeavoring to adjust the Difference about Precedence
with the Archduke Leopold, who pretended to take place of him: He should have
told us also, all that happened in a Debate of the like nature, between his
most serene Highness, and the Duke of Lorrain. If it had been Cardinal
Mazarin's good Pleasure to have made use of this Juncture, to persuade the
Prince of Condee to return, he could have easily prevailed; for he was almost
mad, at the Treatment he met with: But that Minister, who thought it a piece of
the best Policy he could contrive, to oblige him to quit France, was far from
wishing his return thither. These, and a thousand other curious Things, which
are wholly left out, deserved a place, in the History of that Prince's Life;
and it would have been much more becoming an Historian, to have published them,
than to have entertained us, with so many Trifles and false Stories.

It Is true, the Author did not well know the History of that Prince's Life; and
he is so ingenuous, as to tell us so much, in the beginning of his Book; but
since he acknowledged, that he was unable for such a Performance, why did he
undertake it? There is nothing, in my Opinion, more inexcusable in an Author,
than to confess his own Ignorance; for since he acknowledges his own Failings,
why does he venture to write Books? A pretty Idea indeed, he gives us of his
Works! Were it not a thousand times better, he should say nothing of them? And
may he not reasonably expect the common Fate of all such Authors; that is, to
make himself contemptible, as they always do? When an Author is so silly, as to
condemn himself, he must not expect afterward, that others will deal more
gently by him, than he has done by himself.

But to return to my Subject. The Prince de Carignan having (as I have just now
said) revenged his own Family and that of Lorrain, of the Affronts that had
been put upon them; there were many Dukes and Peers of France, who found their
own Honor concerned in the Treatment, which the Dukes of Froix and Choyseul
had met with; and therefore they consulted together at private meetings, if
they should complain to his Majesty of these two Dukes, for having disgraced
their Character, in bearing with a thing so unworthy of their Rank: But the
wisest of them, did not think fit to do it; for they thought it more than
probable, that before they went from Versailles, they had Instructions given
them in Writing, how to behave themselves at Turin; and therefore they could
not hope for Redress, though they should make their Complaint. In the mean
time, the more Reasons the Duke of Savoy had to be well satisfied, the more did
he caress the two Dukes; his very being an Italian, makes him dissemble
naturally. The only thing he had to wish for, to make him completely satisfied,
was, that Monsieur Louvois had been still alive; that he might have seen, with
what Art and Skill he could revenge himself of Injuries that were done him; for
as it was he, who had first provoked him to engage in a War against the King,
by the Slights he had given him upon many Occasions: He would, no doubt, have
been exceedingly pleased, could he but have asked him, what was now become of
all that Haughtiness and Contempt, with which he treated all the Sovereign
Princes, whose Power was inferior to his Majesty's.

This Prince having dealt after this manner by the two Hostages, and having
nothing else that could vex them; thought it convenient to send them back to
France, without waiting till his Daughter's Marriage should be accomplished.
The pretense he used was, that he had so much Confidence in his Majesty, that
he did not desire any other Security but his Word: He said also to the two
Dukes, that it was only for form sake, that ever he had asked Hostages of the
King; and that he was now glad of the Opportunity he had, to let all Europe
see, that he did not in the least doubt, but that his Majesty would faithfully
perform every thing he had promised; that therefore they might return into
France as soon as they pleased: yet they would not adventure to do this till
they should receive his Majesty's Orders.

The King has also learned to dissemble, not only from the Lessons that
Cardinal Mazarin taught him, but also by long Experience in Government, and in
the Exercise of a Sovereign Power; which has taught him, that the Art of
dissembling is one of the most necessary Qualifications for a King: He first
assured the Duke of Savoy of his Thankfulness for his Generosity, and then he
ordered the two Dukes to return to France. At the same time, his Majesty sent
an Ambassador into that Country; it was the Count de Briord, who belonged to
the Prince of Condee, without whose Knowledge he had made an Interest for that
Employment; for which his Highness was highly offended at him, but dared not
show his Resentments, for fear of a Reprimand from the King.

The Feast of Christmas was now at hand, and the Duchess du Lude caused a
little Jesus to be made, for a Present to the young Princess, after the custom
of Italy. She found it upon her Toilet at her Levee; and the Case into which it
was put, being of most exquisite and curious Work, with panes of Crystal, she
was altogether charmed with it. But upon Newyears Day the King made her a much
more magnificent Present; for he gave her an Apron with Jewels to the value of
an Hundred thousand Franks in it. The Dauphin gave her another, which had cost
him Forty thousand Franks: and these two New Years Gifts were accompanied with
a third Present from the King, of all the Jewels that had ever belonged to his
own Queen, and to the late Dauphiness. The Count de Thoulouse, after the King's
Example, gave so magnificent New Years Gifts, that they seemed too great by
much, for a private Person. No doubt, but what he did, was by the King's
Allowance; and that even his Majesty advised him to it. But whatever was in
that, it was to the Marquis d' Antin (who is his Brother by the Mother's side)
that he made those rich Presents; and the whole Business was managed thus: The
Marquess d' Antin being gone to dine with his Brother in Law the Marquis de
Barbesieux, he found under his Mapkin a Billet which was folded; he knew not
what was the Import of it; and the Marquis de Barbesieux (who probably had put
it there by his Majesty's Order) having forbidden him to blus^, (...) ^is Lady
should not know of it; he told him also, that all the Company would allow him
to read it, and that they would refer it to his own Discretion, whether he
would tell them what was in it or not; for they would not at all vex him. The
Marquis d' Antin arose from the Table, and went to the Window to read it. He
found, that instead of coming from a Lady, as he at first had imagined, it was
come from the Count de Thoulouse, who took the Liberty to call him a big
hoggish Fellow, for he looked like one that had got enough of Food in his time:
But he had no Reason to complain of this Freedom, since as the Contents of the
Billet made him see clearly, that it proceeded from true Friendship: For the
Count told him, that two years ago, he had resolved to give him a Pension of
Ten thousand Livres a year; and that as it was but just he should have the
Benefit of it from that time; so now he gave him notice, that he had not only
settled it on him for the time coming, but had also ordered his Treasurer
immediately to pay him 20000 Livers for the two past years. The Marquis d'
Antin, being come back to the Table, told the Company, that they were not much
mistaken, if they thought that this was a Billet doux, that at least he himself
took it for one; and he was sure he was in the right of it; and for that he
would appeal to the Judgment of those present. He then told them the Contents
of it; and so soon as they had heard them, they all owned, that it was
incomparably better than any Billet that could come even from the handsomest
Lady. They had all the Reason in the World to think so, since 10000 Livers a
year, and 20000 of ready Money is well worth any Mistress; especially now
adays, when the World is so changed, that whereas formerly the Men sought after
the Ladies, these do now seek after the Men; and almost all of them are become
effronted to the highest Degree; and carry on their Debauchery so far, that
many of them fuddle as if they were to gain no small Honor and Reputation by
it: and since the Cordial Liquors came in Fashion, they make use of that
Pretense, to drink of every thing that pleases their Palate, not excepting
even Drandy it self, which they drink as if it were sweet Water; by which we
may guess how well they relish other Liquors: and seeing their Taste is so
viciated, that they love even that which Porters themselves detested not many
years ago; it is not very probable, that they will be at much Pains to resist
those Temptations, that procure those Pleasures, which are much more natural
than the other; and which (in the Opinion of some People) are not altogether so
unworthy of the Female Sex. And the Truth is, the Ladies are generally sensible
enough of this, and are become so impudent in those lewd Practices, that one,
whom I know very well, and who is none of the least considerable about the
Court, knowing some time ago that her Gallant was to be married, besought him
to call at her House as he returned from Church. It was the Niece of this
Messalina whom he married; and the Niece's Modesty is as great as the Aunts
Impudence: However, her Gallant not being able to refuse her Desire, was no
sooner in her Chamber, but she asked another Favor of him, which was, that he
would pass that day a bed with her; that at night her Niece might have nothing
but what she had left. The Bridegroom stood in great need of Money, and knowing
that she rewarded liberally, granted her Request; while the Friends, who were
invited to the Marriage, were searching throughout all the parts of the
Neighborhood to know what was become of him. Yet this is not the only Court
Lady of this Stamp. But every one of them were lashed and exposed sufficiently,
in some Carols and Lampoons that were composed and published soon after the
Princess came to France. There we had the true and genuine History of every one
of them, without the least Disguise. It Is true, it is not well done to discover
to the World the Faults of other People; yet the exposing of them thus, was
useful to persuade many of them to reflect upon their own Conduct, and to be
more circumspect in time coming. But the worst thing of those Carols was, that
they were so full of gross Immoralities, that many who had but a small share of
Religion detested them. The King (who was never of an Humor to bear with
things of that nature, and less now than ever, that he is become devout in good
earnest) made a deal of noise about them; and said openly before all the Court,
that he had one good Counsel to give the Author of them, which was, that he
would make his Escape in time, thereby to prevent the Punishments which he must
inevitably undergo, if ever he come to be discovered: If the Author had
followed this Counsel, it had been the same thing as to have accused himself;
and therefore, whoever he was, he put as good a Face on it, as they could do
who were sensible of their own Innocence. There is not the least doubt but that
he belongs to the Court, and that he is one of those who are best acquainted
with it; for no body else could know so well, the History of every one's Life
as that Author did; though after all he was mistaken in some things: However,
after many had been suspected, and among the rest, a Lady of very great
Quality, because her Genius bends a little that way; it came at last to be
generally believed, that the Chevalier de Bouillon was the man, but because
there was no certain Proof of it, and that all that was said, was founded only
on suspicion, he got no harm by it. The King was not satisfied that he had
signified his displeasure against this Author, who had thus signalized himself
for an impious Wretch, and perhaps for a Liar too; (for it is not probable,
that all the nasty things that are in those Carolls, can be literally true)
but his Majesty made it known also, that he would not take it well, if any body
should sing them. But as there are some things above the Power of Kings, how
great soever their Authority may be: So this Order took not much effect: every
body sung them as before, except that they were cautious not to do it, in the
hearing of those, who they thought would give an Account of it to his Majesty.
For we must understand, that there are abundance of spies about the Court; and
though some of them are known, as the Marquis de Terms, and some others, yet
there are of them who act their parts so cunningly, that there is nothing they
are less suspected of, than of being what they truly are.

It was not only in these Carolls and Songs, that the Conduct of the Ladies was
publicly censured: a certain Person, who is well known in the World, for an
Employment of a quite other kind, than what he is naturally fitted for,
resolved to censure them also, in the same manner that he has for a long time,
censured all mankind. As he sets up for a Jester and maker of Ballads, he made
some upon the Accou^rements, which the Ladies now make use of, that they may be
ready for an Engagement; he brought them forth in slippers, and quilted
Wastcoats; ready to enter the Lifts: and though he named no body, yet, as they
who censure others, must not expect many thanks, especially when vicious
customs are laid so deep, that it s next to impossible to root them out, so his
performances were so unacceptable, that as a Reward of his pains, he was soon
born down and oppressed with a World of Censures and Reproaches. And that much
after the same manner, that he had reproached others; that is, by Ballads and
Lampoons: but with this difference, that whereas, in th^se which he had
composed, he had been so civil, as not to name any body; ^et they dealt so
rudely by him, as to name him expressly; and, which was harder upon him, that
they might chastize him yet farther, they sent Copies of their Lampoons to his
three Best Friends, the Cardinal de Bouillon, the Duke de Chawnes, and the
Marchioness de Louvois; whose houses he frequented daily, and who could not
easily be without him. They were not well pleased, that others should be so
unjust, as to calumniate him, who had never calumniated any person, because, as
they said he had not named any, in the Songs which he had made: Yet they cannot
say, but that since the time, that from being Master of Requests, he had
dwindl'd into a Poet of the Pontneuf; he has fallen foul upon several Persons
of Quality, without being so circumspect; and therefore he must not expect,
that all the World will be so favorable to him, as was the Cardinal and his
other Friends. And as there was no great injustice in finding fault with what
he had done, as to the Ladies; so, many others as well as he were of opinion,
that they had even done best, to have laid by their sl^ppers and Wastcoats. The
thrust he gave in, being thus smartly pareed, and returned upon himself, the
poor Fellow was forced to shut himself up in his little Closet, without daring
to peep abroad for some days. But as every man returns soon to his natural
Temper, and as the Ladies too did not fail to provoke him anew, not to spare
them, as hitherto he had done; we have since had a thousand Ballads of his
making, where he represents them prettily enough.

If Lewdness was so ordinary at this time among the Women, it was not much less
so, among the Men; but especially they were taken, with a very Frenzy and
Madness, for which they could make no Apology; for besides the Vice of
excessive drinking, which many of them were addicted to, rather through bad
custom, than by natural inclination; they had got into an humor of preferring
the Women Players of the Playhouse, and the Opera, to their own Wives, though
never so handsome; and their Husbands were much to blame for it, if they were
not modest and circumspect. And thus for the leavings of a great many other
People, they forsook their own Wives, whom they might have enjoyed all alone;
yea, and provoked them too, to become common. For nothing more provokes a Wife
to be unfaithful to her Husband, than when he slights her, and prefers other
Women to her.

The Lords of the greatest Quality, were not more exempted from this vice, than
were others; though they be more obliged than other People, to give good
Example, for the higher and greater a Man's Station and Character is, the more
is his behavior exposed to the view of the public.

There was one of them among the rest, who fell in Love with a Woman of the
Opera, which very much vexed his Friends and Relations; but there was one thing
encouraged him in his amors, and served to harden him in his shameful and lewd
Practices, and that was, that many of the most topping Ladies about the Court,
went a purpose to the Opera, that they might see his Mistress, and speak highly
to her advantage; for those who enter once into a vicious way of living, can
applaud Vice, with as little remorse, as others applaud Virtue. Those who were
concerned in this Nobleman, had perceived sometime before, that it was
necessary to observe his conduct narrowly: and therefore they put a wise and
sober Man to attend him, who might give them an account of his Behavior. But
as youth has an aversion to People of this sort, and usually considers them, as
Pedagogues, whom they cannot bear with; so this young Lord endeavored, so soon
as he could, to free himself of the bonds, which his friends had put upon him.
All the young Gentlemen who made their court to him, confirmed him as much as
they could, in His Resolution; and they called his Observer by the name of
Caius Garrulus, which sounded not unlike his own name, and they added an
Epithet to it, which was somewhat suitable to his Employment. This young
Gallant's Father, was extremely concerned, when he knew that his Son was so
fond of this Actress: He spoke to him of it, as a thing which would ruin his
Reputation. And at length he spoke to him, not only as from himself, but as
from the King, to whom he knew that he paid very much Deference. And that his
Counsels might make the greater impression upon his Son's mind, he told him,
that they who were fond of that sort of People, met often with sad misfortunes;
and that his Rank and Quality did not at all secure him against the treachery
of a Coquette, and that if he must have a Mistress, he should at least look for
one, with whom he could live with greater safety than he could do with her.
Notwithstanding all the Deference he had for the King, and the Duty he owed to
his Father, he made no other Answer, but that he would do all that was in his
power, to satisfy both of them, but that he found so strong an inclination for
that Woman, that he knew not if it was in his power to disengage himself
altogether from her, on a sudden. He continued (notwithstanding all this) to
visit her, and having told her every word his Father had spoke to him, they
agreed that he should not pay her a visit for some days. Caius Garrulus
advertised the young Gallants Friends of the visit he had paid, maugre all his
Fathers Remonstrances to the contrary; upon which account, his Father spoke
once more to him, and told him, that he must be very incorrigible, in that he
had so soon forgot what he had said to him formerly; and that being of so high
a birth, as he was he ought at least to have delayed that visit, for some days,
thereby to give some proof of his obedience. He took him to task so seriously,
as that the young Beau might have been persuaded, to reflect as seriously upon
his own behavior: He could not deny, but that he had paid her a visit, but the
answer he gave, was, that with all due regard, to the Deference he owed him, he
thought that he had no just ground to reprove him; That Civility, and good
Manners, had obliged him to go and tell her, that he was peremptorily
discharged to have any more Correspondence with her, and that having once had a
kindness for her, he could do no less; for she might have been justly enraged
against him, had he cast her off, without telling her why. That in the mean
time, notwithstanding the great desire he had, to give him full satisfaction in
that matter, yet he could not but own, that at the last visit, he had found her
more charming than ever; that it troubled him much when he reflected upon his
own weakness, but that all he could do in obedience to his Commands, was, to
pray to God, for Strength and Resolution to obey them. His Father understood
well enough, the meaning of all this, and conceiving no great hopes of him, he
left him, being much out of humor, at his answer. It was two or three days
before the Son paid another visit to his Mistress, yet he sent Letters to her
every hour, and gave her notice, that next day, his Father was to give a
splendid Ball, and that she must not fail to be there; but that she should come
disguised in such and such a manner, that he might know her by her Garb. This
Ball was the finest that had been seen of a long time, and all the Court was
present at it, but this young Lord could not as yet see his Mistress there,
which put him out of humor, at a Lady, who would fain have had the same
Interest in his affection, that the Actress had, and flattered her self, with
hopes, that if she was successful, his Father and his other Friends, would not
find so much fault with it: She began to rally him for being out of Humor,
that she might thereby find a way, to bring about her own purposes, but he was
not at leisure to give her an answer, for he saw his Mistress come into the
Ball that very moment. She was disguised in Man's dress, and he went
immediately, and spoke to a young Princess, who was often engaged in the Dance,
that with the first opportunity she would please to take out the young Spark,
who was in such and such a dress, pointing to his Mistress. She promised to do
it, and was as good as her word. Caius Garrulus, who had always an eye upon
him, having observed, that he looked much to that side, where the new Masker
was, and that immediately after he had spoken to that Princess, he began to
suspect what it was he had said to her, yet he would let no body know his
Jealousy, till he should be fully assured that he was in the right. And
observing this new Masker very narrowly, the more he viewed him, the more was
he persuaded that it was his Master's Mistress. By this time there was one came
and took out the young Princess to dance, and immediately after, she took out
this new Masker, which let Caius Garrulus clearly see that he was not mistaken,
for he knew so well by her dancing, that it was she, whom he suspected, that
though he had not had any other presumptions, that alone was sufficient to
confirm him in his suspicions. This Masker, who was truly the young Lord's
Mistress, after she had danced with the young Princess, was so affronted as to
take out her Gallants Lady to dance with her. Caius Garrulus could bear no
longer with her Impudence, but went and told his Masters Father, who it was
that had taken out his daughter in Law to dance: He had a good mind at first to
have caused to throw her over the Window, and so had the young Lords Mother.
But when they had reriected, that that would make too much noise, both of them
resolved to try calmer methods, for breaking off this correspondence: they
caused to inform him, that she was false to him, and that others conversed
familiarly with her; and unless he would give up converse with her, it was not
safe for his own Lady to bed with him. But though they endeavored under hand,
to raise all the jealousies imaginable, in his mind, yet he would believe
nothing. After these endeavors, his Father was afraid, lest what he would
have had his Son to believe, should prove true in good earnest; and therefore
he appointed a Woman, to attend his Sons Mistress; and to observe her so
narrowly, that it should not be in her power to prove false to his Son.

This young Lord was not the only Person, who was fond of the Women of Opera
and Playhouse, contrary to the duty he owed both to himself, and to his Lady;
there were many others who after his Example, did the same thing; and but too
many who had done it before him.

But among all those, whose inconsiderateness is the most astonishing, the^e is
not one more inexcusable, than a certain Duke, who was old enough, to have
given greater Proofs of his prudence; besides that he had married a young
Princess, of incomparable Beauty, and who deserved beyond all comparison, to
have been more esteemed, than all the Mistresses, he could find among that sort
of Women. But no consideration would prevail with him, against lewdness, and he
was not only unfaithful to her, but left her for good and all, and went to keep
House with his new Mistress: Before this happened, his Father, who was one of
the greatest and richest Lords about the Court; had carried his Son's Lady, to
his own Seat, in the Country, while her Husband was in the Army. Her Mother
who loved her most tenderly, was loath to part with her, and had much rather
she had stayed with her, but could not obtain it; Yet her Daughter wrote to her
soon after, and besought her to employ all her interest with the King; that he
would please to give orders that she should return, for she was not at all
safe, with her Father in Law who had spoken to her of Amors, notwithstanding
her relation to him; and that he had spoken so very earnestly, that no time
must be lost; if she had any concern for her honor, and the peace of her mind.
It is not certain if all this was literally true, or if it was only concerted,
between the Mother and the Daughter, to get her brought out of that Country,
where her Father in Law dwelt, and of which she was wearied, that she might
live with her Mother, who longed so much for her company. Whatever was in this,
the Lady having spoke of it to his Majesty, obtained an order to the Dukes
Father, to send his Daughter in Law back to Paris. He was enraged against both
of them, for the affront which they had put upon him; and therefore though he
ought to have been the first, who should have reproved his Son for conversing
with his new Mistress, which now began to appear; yet he was at no great pains,
to dissuade him from it; he alleged they had served him a very Scurvy trick,
and he was glad to revenge himself by this connivance. But if he thought this a
good way to be revenged of them, he had very soon reason to be satisfied with
it, for his Son became so passionately in love with this new (...), or rather
he became such a very Fool, as when he knew that she was big with Child, he
left his Wife, and went and lived with her: and his Father having given him no
great yearly revenue, when he married him (though he himself had 400000 Livers
a Year, besides great Sums of Money in his Coffers, and not one Farthing of
Debt,) he found himself so (...), because of the two Families he had to provide
for, and the charges he had been at in the Camp; that he resolved to do, what
People will scarcely believe of one of his quality, that was, to live without
Coach, and without that great number of Pages and Lackeys, that Men of his
quality usually have about them, and thus he reduced all his expenses for the
Winter time, to a very small matter; having only one Lackey for himself, and
another for his Mistress; and these he put in gray Clothes, that when he took a
Hackney to go abroad, neither he nor they might be known; The Women Servants
wereas few in number, as the Lackeys, she had only a Chambermaid and a Nurse,
and this last served with both hands, that is, she was Servant of the House,
and Nurse at the same time. His Friends could bear no longer with his
inconsiderateness, and this disgraceful way of living; they spoke to him of it,
as a thing that would stain his honor to such a degree, that it would be
impossible for him, ever to retrieve it, and that he might not be altogether
confounded with shame, as he ought to be for such Practices, they told him that
this Woman had certainly bewitched him; that at least they had reason to think
so; since it was so unnatural a thing in him, to part with the most lovely
Princess in the World, and to keep house with a beggarly Strumpet, whose very
Trade and Profession, was enough to make any body disgust her, though she was a
Thousand times more charming in her Person than she seemed to be. All the
Answer he made them was, that they spoke so of her, only because they did not
know her: But if they had conversed a little with her, they would soon be of
another mind; in this they could not agree with him, and having taken leave of
him, without being able to persuade him to alter his measures, they were
grieved that he continued so obstinately to disgrace himself.

When they found this, they caused to speak underhand to the Woman her self,
and threatened, that they would have recourse to Royal Authority, to have her
shut up in a Convent, or in some Prison, if she would not even persuade the
Duke to part with her. One in her condition could not be well pleased with such
a proposal, and it quite confounded her. She knew that those threatenings were
not groundless, for she had known a Woman kept in Prison Seven or Eight Years,
because she had been Mistress to the Count D'Harcourt, whom we have already
spoken of. And therefore being resolved to prevent so great a mischief, she
promised to do all that was in her power, to satisfy them; and she was as good
as her word, for that very day after she had on set purpose, made a show of
melancholy to the Duke; she told him that she could not any longer converse
with him, as hitherto she had done; because her conscience reproached her
continually with her guilt, and represented to her every moment, that she only
was the cause that he abandoned his Lady the Duchess; and that every body
blamed her for it, as no doubt she deserved to be, insomuch that was there
nothing but that one consideration, she was obliged to tell him, that he must
resolve to break up with her, since their converse was equally shameful, and
sinful to them both. The Duke was surprised at a discourse which he so little
expected; but having still the more esteem of her upon this very account;
because the two things she made use of as a pretense for this divorce, are
agreeable to a Lover, that is his own interest and the virtue of the Person he
loves; he did all he could to make her change her thoughts, but the fears of a
Prison made her deaf to all his reasons and to all his caresses; she persisted
in her resolution to give over all converse with him, and knowing nothing could
more prevail with him to cause him to reflect upon his past conduct, than his
own Lady's charming Beauty, which was indeed incomparably above hers, she told
him that if she was as beautiful as his Lady, and if his Lady had nothing more
charming about her than she had, she would not think it strange that he should
forsake her, and live with her; but being obliged to confess, that all the
advantage was upon his Ladies side, she could not suffer any longer, that he
should be called a Man of so ill a taste; as to choose the worse, and to
forsake the better. He would fain have persuaded her, that only her modesty
made her speak so of herself, that if his thoughts were asked in that matter,
he would soon tell just the contrary, that he was as capable as any other to
judge of their Beauties, having conversed so much with her. But his Mistress
finding how he answered her, and that it was impossible to make him gainsay any
thing of all this, she betook herself to her first Argument; that her
Conscience would not allow her to converse any longer with him.

The Duke considered all these discourses, as the effect of some secret
discontent, that had put her into an ill humor; and that he might bring her
back to her ordinary Gaiety, he offered her some Presents, but she refused them
generously, and as the most disinteressed Person in the World. In the mean time
she gave notice to those who had threatened her, that she was using her utmost
endeavors to satisfy them, but if they were desirous that she should succeed,
it was needful they should do something upon their parts. They bestirred
themselves immediately, knowing that it is best to strike the Iron while it is
hot; and they came a purpose to wait on the Duke. He would have resisted all
the Batteries, they could have raised against him, had they been alone; but his
Mistress treating him with so much Indifference, and like a Woman who was
absolutely resolved, to abandon her former Vices; he told them that there
needed no more Importunities, for he was resolved to give them full
satisfaction: But if they would know the true reason, why he resolved so; it
was because his Mistress had determined him in it; she who alone had a more
absolute Empire over him, than it was possible for all of them to have, when
they were united together; that he cheerfully and frankly owned so much to
them, hoping, that for their parts, they would also acknowledge that she was a
much worthier Person than he could express: an evident Proof of which was, that
she was fully resolved, to bid adieu to all sorts of Intrigues and Amors; a
thing very unusual for Women, after they have once been accustomed to those
Pleasures. But for her, he told them, that he had so good an opinion of her, he
could be surety for her, she should never return to them, that at least he
would comfort himself, with those thoughts of her. His Friends did not trouble
themselves, to dispute this matter with him, nor were they such fools as to
inform him, how much they had frighted her with their threatenings, they thought
it enough, that they had brought him to their own Terms, and it was all one to
them, by what means soever it was done; the only thing they desired was, how to
bring the matter to an happy Issue, now that it was so well begun. They went to
his Ladies Parents, and desired, they might concur with them in reconciling
them together. But the Dutchess's Mother, (who after she had once taken back
her Daughter to her house, could never resolve to part with her) told them
resolutely that she would never consent to it. The Dukes Father gave them much
the same Answer, for he continued to be extremely angry, at what the young
Princess had said of him. But, as Men ordinarily yield sooner to Reason than
Women do, he was at last prevailed with, but upon condition, that when his
Daughter in Law should be reconciled to her Husband, she should not see her
Mother any more. This was to throw Oil into the Flame, and served only to
provoke the Ladies Indignation, so that she withstood their Reconcilement more
than ever. The Prince her Husband, was much wiser and more reasonable than she
was: He told her that by the Laws both of God and Man; they were obliged to
contribute their endeavors for reconciling Husband and Wife; even though they
had but small hopes to succeed in it: But that in this case she was much more
obliged to it, than others were; because it was the Concern of her Son in law,
and her Daughter. But for all this, she continued obstinate, and she had such
an Ascendant over him, that he used to do nothing but what she was pleased
with, it was at last found necessary to speak to the King of it.

His Majesty was of the Fathers opinion, and thought that in procuring such an
Agreement, they ought not to stand upon Punctilios; and therefore ordered the
Duchess to follow her Husbands Advice.

The Condition proposed by her Son in law's Father, that she should not see her
Daughter, was qualified, and she was allowed to see her sometimes, but not
above twice a Week, lest the Dukes Father should take it amiss. It went much
against the Ladies Stomach, that they should set bounds to the Kindness she had
for her Daughter; and therefore she proposed, that if she was not to see her
Daughter but twice a Week; then her Son in law's Father, should not be allowed
to see her at all, and much less that they should live in the same House. They
found out also a Medium for this, which was that he might see her, as often as
his Son would allow him; and they told the Lady, that her Son in law, was more
concerned than she was, that his Father should not see her Daughter; if all was
true, that was said of him. After all these things were concerted, nothing
remained, but to know, what the Duke would do with his Mistress and his Child;
and that he would pitch upon a day for being fully reconciled to his Duchess.
As to the first, he promised to allow them a Pension, which perhaps he has not
been over careful to perform; yet I will not vouch this for a Truth; but
because he was then as passionately in love with her as ever, I may presume, he
was prodigal enough of his Promises, but perhaps, he has been as sparing in
performing them; for Lovers easily forget their Promises, when they are not any
more to see the Person, to whom they are made. As to the other matter, he made
no difficulty in it; the day was appointed, and there was a new Marriage
solemnized. Before he went to Bed with his Wife, their Parents paid their
Compliments to them, as if they had been, but a new married Couple: And their
other Friends, after their example, did the same; in fine, they were both
together, carried to the Opera, and to other public places, that those who had
heard of their Divorce, might see that the greatest Follies do not last always.

One would think, that such an example as this, might have had, a good
Influence, upon those, who werefallen into the same frensy, that is upon those,
who made but small account of their Wives, for the sake of these naughty
Creatures; but we have not hitherto seen, any good that it has done to a
certain Duke, who though he has not as yet parted with his Wife, as the other
did; yet, he lives not in much better Terms with her; one of these unhappy
Women of the Playhouse, having by some means engaged his Affections. has so
bewitchd him, that of a long time, he has had no Converse with his Wife; and
vet she is very young, and which is more, she is a Lady of great Virtue, which is
so valuable an Accomplishment, yea, and so singular in this Age, as to deserve
that a Husband should esteem it much more than he does.

It Is true, she is not so great a beauty, as is an Aunt of her Husbands, who
yet has not been much more fortunate, though she be a Lady of great Virtue, as
well as her Neice. This Lady was married to a Person of Honor, and a Man of as
good Sen^e as was about the Court, which is another reason why he should have
used her well; for the more a Man has of Honor and true Sense, the more will
he endeavor to acquit himself of his Duty. But he was so desperately in Love
with a young Lady, who is also of great virtue, and is at this time Superior
of the Maids of St. Marie de Chaliot, that he could not open his eyes, to see
how happy he might have been in his own Wife. And he did even much worse, than
did the two Dukes I last spoke of, for he did not so much as bed with her, the
first Night of the Marriage: And if we will believe the accounts we have at
Court, he suffered her to continue always a Maid, though they lived a long time
together, and though there was never any public breach between them. His
Father, who was also a Man of good Sense, and so far from approving his want of
affection to this Lady, that he was extremely vexed at it, when he perceived
it, and told him his thought of it, very freely; and finding the Arguments he
made use of, made him nothing the wiser Man, he be thought himself of others,
and tried if perhaps they would be of greater force: He told him, that laying
aside the authority of a Father, he would now only advise him as his true
Friend, and that all he had to say to him, was, that all the Court looked upon
his Wife, as a very agreeable Lady, and that among them who esteemed her much,
she might perhaps find one whom she would think worthy of her Affection, that
the best means how to prevent that, was for him to perform the duty of a
Husband to her, otherwise perhaps another might supply his place. This advice
was sound and wholesome, but as this young Gentleman had shut his Eyes, and
would not take notice of his Lady's true worth, so he stopped his Ears at his
Father's Reasons, and held on his course, without ever troubling himself, with
the thoughts of his future destiny. Yet the Horoscope, which his Father had
cast for him, proved false, for there was never a Lady at Court, made her self
be less talked of than she did However, her Husband died, and she kept for a
second Husband, that, which is so much valued in a Bride. She was reputed a
Widow, but was truly a Maid when she was married the second time And as if she
had been born under the strangest Planet that ever was. It Is generally believed
that this second Husband, has not as yet made her change her condition. He was
one of the handsomest men in France, yet altogether unfit for the Marriage Bed;
and therefore his first Wife did not care much to dwell with him, though there
was never any public rupture between them, and though she might have made a
very good figure at Court too: But she chose rather to leave him there alone,
and to revenge her self of her hard fate, upon the Hearts, and other wild
Beasts, with whom she made War so long as she lived. It Is true, that when she
was a dying, she made a Will in his Favors, which would seem to import quite
other things, than what I have been just now alleging; for it is seld^m that a
Wife will be so obliging to a Husband, unless she have first received of his
Favors: But all Women are not of the same humor, and it must be said to the
advantage of this Lady, that as to this matter, she was less concerned, and
much more modest, than many others are. Hunting was that which she took
greatest Pleasure in, and because her Husband treated her always very kindly,
save, in that, which most of other Women think the chief and essential part of
a Husband's kindness. It seems she made no great account of it; And she had
rather, that her Husband should enjoy her estate, than some of her Relations,
whom she did not much esteem. She gave the trust of her Will, to the Duke De
Lesdeguires, but he being surprised with a sudden Death, when he was least
thinking of it, and when he had lived but to half the Age, that by the course
of Nature he might have done; it created much trouble afterward to her
Husband. Yet this was a seasonable relief to him, and he had much need of it,
to repair the breaches he had made in his own estate, in the time he had been
at Court.

As the Court is the place of the World, where the greatest number of
extraordinary things fall out: so about the same time, that the terms of the
Reconciliation (which I spoke of) were agreed to; There was one thing happened
that did not sound well, for one of the principal Actors in it, and it has made
People have but an ill Opinion of a Man, whom we now bring upon the Stage.

We must know then, that among other methods which the King had taken, to raise
Money, for maintaining the War, he had published an Edict, for the sale of some
Governments, within the heart of the Kingdom; and there was more need of Money,
for the purchase of them, than either of Service or Merit. There is a little
Town named Rue, lying toward Abbeville in Piccardy, and the late Duke d'
Elbeuf, was formerly Governor of it. And his Son the present Duke d' Elbeuf,
finding that it would be very convenient for him, that he had the Government of
the same place, resolved to purchase it. There was one Monsieur d' Augancourt,
a Gentleman of that Country, who was neither rich nor much taken notice of,
some 25 Years ago, but has now a good estate, and lives in plenty, because he
belonged to the late Marquis de Louvois, and carried his Portofolio, when that
Minister went to do busine^s with the King. This Gentleman, I say, designed
also to purchase it; and so soon as he knew that the Duke d' Elbeuf had the
same design, he took an odd method, to carry it against him; a method, which
any other Man than he, would have been afraid of, but he was for bold
Adventures, that he might bring about his Designs, and because he had not been
altogether unsuccessful in another business, wherein he was once like to have
been quite ruined, he hoped he might succeed well enough in this; especially
seeing what Friends or Interests soever, the Duke d Elbeuf could make, he was
still much less to be feared, than was his former Antagonist the Marquis de
Barbesieux. Yea it was not only with him he had contended, but with the whole
Family of his Old Master the Marquis de Louvois, whose Memory he endeavored to
blacken. I shall first give an Account of this Affair, and then I shall return
to his business with the Duke d'Elbeufe.

The Marquis de Louvois being dead, this d' Augincourt, who had the honor to
be known to the King, because he had so very often, carried this Minister 's
Portofolio, to the Door of his Majesty's Closet; having asked and obtained a
secret audience, told him, that he thought it his Duty to advertise him of one
thing, which his Majesty knew nothing of before; which was, that his Majesty
had always believed that all the projects which the late Marquis de Louvois had
presented to him, were of his own contrivance, but it was far from being so,
and that that Minister had always had recourse to him, when he had any thing to
do of Consequence: That it was he who had projected such and such things, and
that the Marquis de Louvois was never able of himself, to do any thing to
purpose; that his undertakings at Maintenon, were a sufficient proof of this,
that at that place he had committed a great many faults, which he had never
fallen into, had he but followed his advice, that he was ready to discover
these faults and oversights to his Majesty, who, because of his great skill in
Fortification, would soon be convinced, that what he said was true. The King
who is truly skilful in these things, and perhaps much more so, than many
People believe of him, finding that he offered to prove to a demonstration all
the oversights, which he charged his late Minister with, gave him, upon that
Account a fuller hearing than otherways he would have done. D' Augincourt
having said whatever he thought fit for his own advantage, and the King knowing
that in some things he was in the right, though in some also he was mistaken;
was so far from telling him, that he did not approve of his ingratitude to his
Master, to whom he had been obliged of his Estate, that though these were his
Sentiments, yet on the contrary he told him, that he would continue the Pension
to him, which he had given him upon the Marquis D' Louvois's recommendation: D'
Augincourt, though he was in some measure pleased with the Kings bounty,
because the cont^nuing of the Pension, was a Proof that his Majesty approved of
what he had said, yet he was not altogether satisfied, for he had flattered
himself, with the hopes of a much greater reward; and that his Majesty would
make use of him, in his secret affairs, of which he pretended to have the Key;
and expecting that the King would bestow the late Marquis D'Louvois place upon
him, he continued as often as he could find occasion, to speak all the ill of
him he could think of. It Is impo^^^ble for one to behave himself after this
manner at Court, but that a Minister shall have notice of it, and the Marquis
D'Barbiseux was soon advertised of it, and he was struck to the very Heart with
it; especially when he knew that the King had granted him his Pension; by which
he understood that his Majesty believed many of the things which he had
alleged against his Fathers Memory. These thoughts galled him so much, that he
resolved to be revenged on him, and meeting with him that very day, as he was
going to the Kings Appartments, he was not Master enough of his Passions, for
at first sight he gave him very harsh Language as he well deserved, but D'
Augincourt who flattered himself, that since the King had heard him so
favorably, he would certainly grant him the honor of his Protection, answered
him with as much insolence, as if he had never been his Fathers domestic. This
insolent behavior raised the Marquis D'Barbiseux's passion to such a height,
that he himself forgot the respect he owed to the place he was in; he took him
by the Cravate and would have certainly strangled him, had not his Friends put
him in mind, that the King would be highly offended at what he was doing. He
yielded to their reasons and went immediately to the King, and told him, that
he came to beg his pardon, for something he had done in a sudden fit of
passion; that his Majesty knew how unaccountable D' Augincourts ingratitude
was, toward his Father, though it was to him he owed all he had; that he had met
with him accidentally at the door of the Antichamber; and not being able to
command his passion, he had offered some violence to him, of which he humbly
acknowledged himself guilty, that though his passion lasted but a moment, because
he had reflected upon it, yet he did not pretend to be excusable upon that
account, and therefore he would submit to all the punishments, that his Majesty
should order for him, only he besought him to consider how natural it was for a
Son, to be sensibly t^^ched with every thing that concerned his Fathers Honor.
The King having heard him calmly, answered him, that it was good for him that
he had so soon reflected upon his fault, and had put a stop to the course of
his passion; but that he had done better if he had reflected sooner upon it, so
as not to have committed it, that yet he would pardon him upon the account of
what a Son owed to his Father; but upon condition always, that he should never
again fall into the like enormity. The Marquis De Barbiseux acted like a wise
man, thus to prevent the other in addressing himself to the King; for scarcely
had he done it, when D' Augincourt presented himself before his Majesty, and
demanded justice for the ill treatment he had met with from his Minister. The
King told him he should have it, but that he would first examine how the matter
went; but seeing he had once promised to pardon the Marquis D' Barbiseux, all
the satisfaction D' Augincourt could ever obtain, was that his Majesty told
him, he had given him such a reprimand as was proper, and that he would be
wiser in time coming, he told him also, that when one had been a menial Servant
to a Man, as he had been to the Marquis D'Louvois, he ought to behave himself
respectfully toward his Children.

D'Augincourt might have learned from this, to have been wiser afterward, than
to contend with one that was above him, yet never thinking that the same
accident might befall him, if he fell again into the same Error; he no sooner
formed the design of carrying the Government of Rue against the Duke D'Elbeuf,
but he gave in a memoir against him to the King, which contained that this
Prince, had been several times guilty of extortioning the People, within the
bounds of his Government of Piccardy and Artois, and that his Majesty might
give credit to this, he offered to prove it, so soon as he was commanded to do
it: the King who knew that this Prince had some good qualities, for which he is
deservedly esteemed, was troubled to see him stained with so black an
accusation, as that of extortion is. Not but that he knew well enough, that
accusations are not always true; he had seen abundance of instances in his own
time, where the Accusations fell back upon the Heads of the Accusers; as it
happened to Courbier and some others. But because this memoir was so conceived,
as to have all the appearances of truth, the King knew not well what to say of
it, and would not so much as speak of it; but the Duke D'Elbeuf, finding that
the Farmers of the Kings revenues, asked much more for the Government of Rue,
than it was worth, because D'Augincourt had offered them Money, he had recourse
to the King that he might not fall into their Hands.

His Majesty, who remembered what the other had said to his disadvantage,
instead of answering him, so obligingly as he used to do, told him only, that
he would consider of it. The Duke who knew his Majesty's humor, which is to be
kind and obliging, even to Persons of far less quality than he concluded
presently from this answer, that some person had done him an ill office; He did
all he could, for some days, to discover who it might be, and knowing that
D'Augincourt, had an Eye upon the Government of Rue, he was almost persuaded
that he was the Man. His Ingratitude to his late Master, was enough to make him
entertain these thoughts of him, yet that he might be more assured of it, he
spoke again to the King, and begged to know, if he had as yet considered of his
Request, as he had promised to do: His Majesty told him, that he had thought of
it, but it could not be granted him, for some Reasons which he was unwilling to
tell him. The Duke D'Elbeuf, was yet more surprised at this Answer, than he was
at the first, and was more persuaded than ever, that the King was not well
pleased with him, and therefore he supplicated His Majesty, with the greatest
Earnestness, that he would be graciously pleased to tell him what it was, that
he had to lay to his Charge. His Majesty answered him, that he had resolved to
conceal it from him, that thereby he might save him the trouble, which the
knowledge of it would certainly give him. But since he was so very earnest to
know it, he would tell him plainly, that he had received a Memoir against him,
wherein he was accused, of extortioning the People who lived under his
Jurisdiction. It Is true the Duke D'Elbeuf, who is not very rich, and who loves
to live great, and therefore had need to make the best advantage of every
thing; had used his utmost Skill and Industry, in looking narrowly after his
Affairs, so that nothing that did of right belong to him, could escape him; but
how much soever he looked after his own Interest, yet he had never been an
Extortioner; and he could not endure that he should be unjustly accused of it:
And therefore, he requested His Majesty, that Inquiry should be made into it.
He told him that he who was but a Young man, had rashly done some things in his
time, which his Majesty could not approve of, that he most humbly begged pardon
for them, as he had also done, when he was first charged with them; but that he
was content to lose his Head, if ever he was in the least guilty of what was
now laid to his Charge. The King who was prepossessed with an Opinion, that
D'Augincourt would never have dared, to have given him the Memoir, if he had
not been well assured, that what it contained was true; especially since he
lived in the Neighborhood, where he pretended that the Duke had been guilty of
the Extortions; answered him, that he would not at all advise him, to search
this matter to the bottom, least perhaps it might prove more to his hurt than
he expected, and that at least it was probable it would prove so. This answer
afflicted him yet more, than any of the former Answers had done; and therefore
he continued to solicit His Majesty, that he would be pleased to allow him to
justify himself. The King turned away from him, to speak to another Person of
Quality, to whom he had something to say: And the Duke d'Elbeuf going out with
an heart full of Sorrow, resolved to employ all his own and his friends
Interests, that he might be allowed to clear himself of this Calumny. As he
went out of the Antichamber, he found D'Augincourt with one of his Friends at
the door of the Guard-hall, he took him aside, to speak to him in private.
D'Augincourt left his friend alone, and the Duke asked him, if perhaps he was
not the Man, who had given the King a certain Memoir, of which his Majesty had
been just now speaking to him? D'Augincourt who had so much Impudence as to
speak ill of his dead Master, by whose favor it was, that he had acquired all
that he was worth; was impudent enough to own in the Dukes face, that he was
the very Man; and which was more, he told him that he had promised to the King,
to make good every thing that was in that Memoir, and that e're it was long, he
would be as good as his word. The Duke was so wise, as not to do as the Marquis
de Barbisieux had done, when he fell into his hands. But instead of that, he
contented himself to tell him, that he was satisfied to know, how far his
Impudence had carried him, that he might come to be treated as he deserved, at
another time, and in another place; that he would take notice of him, and at
last he threatened him, that he would cause him to be cudgelled to death for a
Rascal as he was. D'Augincourt went and complained to the King, and demanded
Justice of him. The King told him, he was ready to do him Justice, but he must
first prove what he had alleged against the Duke d'Elbeuf; who expressly denied
all that he had charged him with: And if he had calumniated him without ground,
then the Duke had much more reason to demand Justice than he had. The Duke
returned to wait upon the King, and requested him to appoint Judges, to enquire
into that matter; for if that were not done, his Reputation should be brought
into question, and that it was not just, that in prejudice of his Innocence any
credit should be given, to such a lying Wretch as D'Augincourt: He told him at
the same time, the designs that D'Augincourt had upon the Government of Rue,
and that he had taken this method of calumniating him, fearing least otherwise,
he should not be able to carry it against him. The King who is extremely
prudent and judicious, began to perceive how the matter stood, as soon as he
heard this; and he guessed, that Jealousy and interest, had made D'Augincourt
do what he had done; and therefore he allowed that the Duke should clear
himself; and promised to name Judges for that Affair: and which was more, he
told him, that if he found D'Augincourt had accused him falsely, he should cause
to inflict any Punishment upon him, that the Duke thought fit. But the Judges
were not named, for some time after; insomuch that now, when I am writing these
Memoirs; this Affair is not as yet ended.

The young Beaus of the Court; were become so profligate, that many lewd Women,
came to be in vogue among them; and among the rest, the Women of the Playhouse
and the Opera: But there were some others besides them, who came to be as much
esteemed as they were; and especially one Mademoiselle Chambonneau, the
Daughter of a Gentleman of Poiton, who finding her self every way fitted for
Amors, thought it was pity, to bury so good Qualities, in an obscure Country
place; and therefore, she came to Paris, where she might set them forth; in the
view of the finest City, and of the finest Court in the World. Prince Philip,
was one of her first Admirers; but he dying soon after, there were others
succeeded him, who were fully equal to him, both for Personal Worth and
Quality, so that she was no looser by the Change. But before I say any more of
her, I beg leave to give an account of a silly Impertinence of the Marshal de
Milleraies Lady, who is the most whimsical Woman in the World, as to what
concerns Quality.

This Prince had not lived a very Christian Life, at least, so far as appeared
to the View of the World: And there was a devout Lady, who soon after his
Death, said in a public Company, where the Marshal's Lady was; that his
Salvation was much to be doubted of, considering how irreligiously he had
lived; that many People had been Witnesses of his Debaucheries, but none had
ever heard of his Repentance. The Marshal's Lady answered, that she confessed
that all that was true; but that God was merciful, especially to a Person of
Prince Philip's Quality; and that since God was good to all Mankind, he would
be much more so, to such a Man as he was; and when it came to the damning of a
Person of so great Quality, God would think twice upon it before he did it: The
Lady to whom she made this Answer, would not let her pass with it, though she
knew her weak side, and that she was but a magotty Woman about these things,
and therefore she could not hope for much satisfaction, from any thing she
could say about them.

But to return to my Subject, Madam Chambonneau, being the Widow of a Person of
such a Character, and being married to a second Husband, who is yet more of it,
all the young People of Quality resorted to her House. Her new Husband was not
at all jealous of her, and allowed her to see every body. And she got a good
number of young Favorites about her, out of which she was sure to make a
choice of such Debauchees as were most agreeable to her humor; especially the
Count de Donsi, eldest son to the Duke de Nevers, a Man of as odd a Temper as
his Father is; and to give his Character in one Word, I need only say, that he
has all the Vices of the Manchinies, yea, and surpasses them in two things,
that are extremely shameful in any man; but especially in a Person of his
Quality. He can scarce speak a word without adding the Name of God to it, and
Blasphemes as often as he speaks. And as for Drinking, it would seem that in
what place soever he is, Bacchus had set up his Throne, and kept Court there:
Yet these are the two great Qualities he boasts most of, whereas he ought
rather to consider them, as very dangerous Distempers; for in my opinion, he
who is become a Slave, to two such disgraceful Vices, may justly look upon
himself, as the most wretched and miserable of all Mortals. Notwithstanding all
this, he is so very comely and handsome in his Person, that were he as sound in
the Head, as he is well shaped in the Body, we might easily excuse not only
this Mad. Chambonneau, but many others; who after her Example, should show some
Affection for him*

This Counts Father, (who is sordidly penurious in some things, though in others
he seems rather to be prodigal) did not allow him so much as one farthing of
Money, which was the reason, that he had neither Servants nor Equipage. Perhaps
he would have had him to go to the Market as he did himself; for we must know,
that when the humor takes him, he makes no scruple to go thither: And it is
pretty odd to see a Knight of the Holy Ghost with his blew Ribband, in a
Public Market, asking a Fruit woman, how she sells her Fruit and her Carrots.
There was a man came once, and told Monsieur Baville Intendant of Languedoc,
that he was seen doing so in the public Market at Montpellier, but he could
not tell his Name, for he that had seen him, did not know him; he sent
immediately to all parts of the Town, to know who this Knight of the Holy Ghost
might be, that was come thither; and so soon as he knew that it was the Duke de
Nevers, he went to pay him a Visit; and that he might engage him to reflect
upon his own Conduct, as unworthy of his Character; he told him, that he should
not have known that he was in that Town, but that it had been told him, that he
was seen in the Market, that when he first heard of it, he could not believe
it, till it was confirmed to him by so many People, that at last he was forced
to give credit to it, lest he should seem to be too incredulous. The Duke
answered him, that he had gone from his Lodgings, with a design to pay him a
Visit, but that having thought it too early, and that he would not be up so
soon; he had done after the Custom of Italy, which allows Masters to go
themselves, and buy whatever they have a mind to eat; that he knew it was not
so in France, but that for his part, he never stood upon such small matters, so
that he might have the satisfaction to have nothing upon his Table, but what
did relish with him.

But this Man is of a singular humor in other things besides this, especially
in his way of Housekeeping. For when he is not to have any Strangers at his
Table, he gives fifty Sols a day for himself, and as much for his Lady, to the
Steward of his House, who must therewith provide victuals for them both; and as
to his Servants, he gives Ten Sols for every one of them, so that he is in no
great hazard of being cheated; since the Steward can neither augment nor
diminish the daily Allowance. By this means its only when he entertains
Strangers, that any thing beyond ordinary is to be seen in his House, and it is
then, that he uses to go himself to the Market, which might be thought a sure
Mark of a penurious Humor: Were it not that there is one thing remarkable in
his House, that is not to be found elsewhere, and that is, that if another Man
have one Cook, and an Under-cook; This Duke has six, or at least four of them;
for he has an humor, that he will not suffer that one Cook should meddle but
with one thing: So that he, who has the charge of the Roast Meat, never meddles
with the Ragoo's, and he who has the charge of the Ragoo's, meddles not with
the more dainty Dishes; and so of the rest.

A Man of so singular an humor as this is, could never allow his Son to live
such a Life as he did; he had already quit his House, so as not to lodge in it,
and he thought it high time to give a check to his extravagant way of living;
he sent to him, and warned him not to see Mad. Chambonneau any more, or else he
knew what remedies to find for his Distemper. He was afraid either that he
should run himself into debt, by spending too much with her, or that he should
be such a Fool, as to marry her privately, as was reported of him. He had
reason to look upon him, as a Man that was capable of anything that was foolish
and extravagant, though there had been no other ground for it, but only this,
that he had taken upon himself the Title of a Duke, though it did not all
belong to him, and which is yet worse, had no ground to hope that ever it
should belong to him, for his Father's Patent is not for his Posterity, but
only for his own Life time. So that when he comes to die, his Family has done
with that Title; as it happened not long ago to Monsieur Vieuville. By this, we
may easily judge of the Father's humor, for he married his Lady, when her
Aunt, Madam de Montespan, was in greatest favor with the King, and at her
greatest height; yet he neglected to have that Honor ensur'd to his Posterity
and Family, though it would have cost him nothing to obtain it, if he had but
asked it.

However, the Count de Donsi, who had heard, that while his Father was a young
Man, he had lived much after the same manner, that he did himself now while he
was also young; and that he could not justly challenge him, for copying after
his example, answered the Gentleman whom his Father had sent to him, that he
could not think of leaving Paris, as he would have him do. The Duke procured a
letter de Cachet from the King, for comitting him to the Bastile.

Mad. Chambonneau went the first and second day after he was taken up, and
wandered up and down about the Castle, to try, if perhaps she might see him
upon the Terrass, or in the Windows; but she dared not adventure to go in, and
inquire for him, for they had threatened to put herself in Prison, if she should
be found in a disguise, offering to pay him a visit: But she was so much a
Coquette, that in two or Three days, she became indifferent, whether she should
ever see him again or no; she troubled herself no more about him, but
considered him as a dead Man, because he was no more in a condition to do her
service. Only she thought fit to keep some rules of decency with him, and
therefore she wrote some Letters to him, and expressed herself as tenderly, as
if she had loved him as much as ever, and even employed Mademoiselle de
Soissons (who is conduct is not much approved of, by those who are concerned in
her Person and Interest) that she might assure him of it. Mademoiselle de
Soissons went twice or thrice to the Bastile to deliver her Commission, and it
may be she was glad of the opportunities, that she might see him her self. But
the Duke de Nevers, (who was jealous of her, and to whom the Governor of the
Castle, would not refuse any favor, because he owed his Fortune to Cardinal
Mazarin the Dukes Uncle,) prevailed so far that she was stopped at the Gate, and
not suffered to enter, as if it had been by order from his Majesty. This was a
notable affront for this Princess; who though she was warned of what was to
befall her, yet could not believe that the Governor dared do such a thing,
because she was grand Niece of the same Cardinal, to whom he had been Captain
of the Guards.

But as he had learned from him, to make no great account of any sort of
People, but of those who were rich and powerful; and she being neither the one
nor the other, because of the many Disasters, that had befallen her family, he
got soon over those considerations, that so he might gratify the Duke. She
might have complained of this to the King, if she durst have spoken to him, but
his Majesty was far from having any esteem for her, and he had already caused
notice to be given her, that if she did not alter her conduct, he would be
obliged to send her orders, that would not at all please her; and therefore she
had rather put up the affront, and be silent, than by complaining, to put his
Majesty in mind, that she did not live as a Lady of her quality ought to do.
Yet the King did not forget her so soon, he remembered her more than ever; now
that the Duke of Burgundy had married the Princess of Savoy. The honor that
Mademoiselle de Soissons, had, to be of the same Family that the Princess is
of, made him often reflect, how unworthy it was of her Character and Quality to
live as she did; and seeing she would not be reclaimed, by what was said to
her, either from the King, or from her Friends, he sent her a Letter de Cachet,
to depart out of the Kingdom.

Her Sister Mademoiselle Carignan got also a secret rebuke, though her conduct
was not altogether so disorderly as hers was; yet she came to be talked of, as
conversing too frequently with a certain Duke, who was married: The King
therefore sent to her, and offered her an Apartment at Versailles; upon
condition that she would take a Governess of his naming. She had one already,
who was as old a Woman as any I know; and Mademoiselle Carrignan took occasion
from this, to excuse her self, for not accepting the honor which his Majesty
had designed for her, and she told those who spoke to her from his Majesty;
that it would occasion the death of her old Governess, if she should now put
her a way, when she had been so long time with her; that it would look like a
Tacit Accusation, that she had not been so careful as she ought to have been
of her Education; that in all appearance she could not live long; and that so
soon as she was dead, there could be nothing which she would so much rejoice
at, as to make good use of the Favors, which his Majesty was pleased to offer
her. Mademoiselle de Carignan, having by this means got her self off, she was
very well pleased, that she had thereby shunned the constraint, under which she
should have been, had she lived at Versailles. She chose rather to keep her own
little Court at the Hotel de Soissons, than to be one of those, who make up the
splendor at the Princesses Court: The good old Woman Madam de St. Martin who
is her Governess, was extremely well pleased, a^ the answer she had made; in
the mean time, the Duke was advertised of this, and it was desired of him that
he would take care, not to pay her so many visits, as he used to do; lest the
King should send her such another order, as he had sent to her Sister.

Mademoiselle Chambonneau was in a great consternation, when she heard of
Mademoiselle de Soisson's fate; she was afraid, that since the King had dealt
so hardly by a Person of her Birth, he might come to deal more severely by her,
how small provocation soever, she should give him; she therefore entreated many
of the young Beaus that frequented her house, that they should come but seldom
thither. But he who had succeeded to Prince Philip having encouraged her, by an
Oath that he made to her, that he would preserve her, from all hazards; she
soon recalled those whom so lately she had advised to seek for diversions
elsewhere. But there were two of them, whom she endeavored all she could, to
discourage from coming to her House; because she thought neither of 'em fit for
her purpose; the one was the Baillif D'Auvergne, eldest Son of the Count
D'Auvergne; who had already so much offended his Father, that he had nothing to
expect from him. For he had forced him to engage himself in the order of Malta,
and to give up his right of primogeniture in Favors of that Brother, who was
next to him in age. The other was the Chevalier de Kailus, a younger brother of
the Marquis de Kailus, who has married Mademoiselle de Vilette, a Cousin of
Madam de Mantenons. This Man had not the same faults that the Baillif de
Auvergne had; yet he had as small a share in Mademoiselle Chambonneau's Favors
as the other had, though I know not upon what account it was so. And she
endeavored to set them at variance, that by the one, she might come to get rid
of the other; or rather, that she might get rid of them both at the same time.
The best means she could think on for this, was, under pretense of Friendship,
to make every one of them believe, that the other spoke much to his
disadvantage; they easily believed what she said, for each of them was
persuaded, that she loved him dearly; and therefore, thought it impossible,
that she could tell him any thing, that was false. They began then to look a
squint upon one another, but their Resentments were too strong to stop there.
They agreed to do one another Justice, with Sword in hand; and to try, which of
them Madm. de Chambonneau should belong to. They agreed to meet, in the Court
of the Abbey of St. Germain, and that the one of them should make, as if he
were going into the Church, while the other was coming out of it, that so, it
might seem, that they had met only by chance; for they knew, how severe the
King was to those, that dared to transgress his Edicts; and especially that,
which he had made against Duels: they knew, that he could never be prevailed
with, to grant a Pardon to any Man who had been so unfortunate, as to fall into
that Crime.

They met, as they had appointed, and drew their Swords, but were parted before
much blood was shed. Yet the one of them wounded the other, and each of them
retired to a Friends house; and resolved not to come abroad, till they should
know first, if it was safe for them to appear; but they had notice very soon,
that they should do well to lurk; and that the King was no sooner informed of
their fighting, but that he had sent an Order to the Procuror General of the
Parliament, to enquire after that Matter. The Count d' Auvergn went at the same
time to Versailles, and said to the King, that though he came to beg a favor
of him, yet it was not at all for his Son, who had now of a long time behaved
himself so unworthily, that he did not concern himself in any thing upon his
Account.

But seeing, as the case stood, if he was sentenced to die, the like Sentence
must necessarily pass against the Chevalier de Kailus, who deserved much better
than his Son did, that his Condition and Circumstances should be regarded; he
did therefore, upon his Account, rather than upon his own, supplicate His
Majesty to give Orders, that the whole Affair might be well examined; for if
there was any credit to be given to those who waited on his Son, he had fought
only upon an accidental Rencounter, and without any premeditated design to
transgress His Majesty's Laws. It would have been a very extraordinary thing
for a Father, (who what Faults soever his Son has committed, easily forgets
them, when his Life is at Stake,) thus to have expressed himself, in good
earnest; but it was fit, the Count should use some Art upon such an Occasion.
He knew, that sometimes Prudence will oblige a Man to blame those, who he
designs should be found innocent; especially, when he is speaking to those whom
they are accountable to, for what they have done; and who are offended with
them. For as one seldom gains any thing, by opposing a passionate Man, while
his Anger is at its height; but upon the other hand brings him soonest to
Reason, by seeming to go along with him in his Sentiments; so it is with regard
to a Prince, who alleges, that such a man has transgressed his Laws; and
therefore deserves to be punished. However, the King having given him as
favorable a Reception, as he could have desired; answered him, that both for
his Sons sake, and for the sake of the Chevalier de Kailus, he wished that it
might be found so, as he had heard; but that he would be very soon informed of
it, for he had already given such strict Orders about it, that it was
altogether needless to give any more.

In the mean time, the King came to be informed, that it was upon Madam
Chambonneau's Account, that they had come to fight; and that she had
industriously set them together by the Ears, by her false Reports: Upon which
he sent a Letter de cachet, ordering her to be banish d to Rowan. There were
some young Counselors of that Parliament, who got into a humor of courting
her, but she found a great difference between them, and that great crowd of
Persons of Quality, who used to frequent her House at Paris. And being soon
wearied of that Town, she would have languished to death, but that she hoped,
that her Friends would employ all their Interests to have her recalled. But as
among the vast number of Women, who live as she did, there are but few, who are
so fortunate as was Ninon Lendos; that is, there are but few of them, who have
the art to engage People to love them, notwithstanding all the Lewdness they
can be guilty of; so those who had seen her at Paris, forgot her much sooner
than she thought of. And at last having lost all her hopes, she was so
overwhelmed with grief, that she died soon after.

The Duke de Nevers, who while she was at Rowan, knew his Son's Character
better, than to be afraid that he would be at the pains to go thither, (for
the Count de Donzi is a Man who can very soon forget both Friends and
Mistresses) the Duke de Nevers I say, who had nothing to fear on that score,
got an Order to set him at liberty: But it was upon condition, that he should
go to Moulins, and wait there, till the Duke de Vendome his Cousin, with whom
he had made the last Campaign, and with whom he resolved that he should make
the next, should be in a readiness to set forward for the Camp. In the mean
while, Mademoiselle de Soissons left Paris, in obedience to the King*s
Commands, and went to her Mother a^ Brussels.

This Lady, who while her Husband was alive had been an Honor to France; as
far, as a costly and magnificent way of living can be accounted so; had fallen
on a sudden, (if I may so say, from Greatness and Splendour, into Poverty and
Misery: having been accused of poisoning her Husband; for which she was forced
to make her Escape into Flanders, without having so much as 24 Hours allowed
her, to put her Affairs in order If we may give credit to what she says herself
she was altogether innocent of this Crime: And it was her mortal Enemy, the
Marquis de Louvois, who had forged that Accusation against her, because she
would never be in Friendship with him. But whatever may be in this, it is
certain, that at Court, she has always been reputed guilty of that Crime.
Whether it be, that she has still powerful Enemies there, or that the King is
convinced, that she is not unjustly accused, I cannot tell; but there is not
one, that offers to espouse her Interests. Before that Mademoiselle de Soissons
went to that Country, it was reported, that she would go to Avignon, and that
Madam de Soissons her Mother, would go and live there also: because she could
not live any longer at Brussels, where every thing was so dear. A certain Woman
named Vendome, who is well known at Court, not by her Quality, but because she
brings thither Sallads for the King and Nobility, which are better than any
that comes from another hand; hearing, that this Princess was brought so very
low, and remembering her former Splendor that she had often seen; was so
touched with Compassion for her, that she sent her as much Money, as one of her
small Stock was able to spare, and it is said, that she received it; yea, and
that she was very well pleased with it. But this is what I cannot aver for a
truth, though I have heard it told to some Persons of the greatest Quality, who
may have known something of it themselves. But I can scarcely believe, that
this Princess, was ever reduced to so great Straits, as to accept of so small a
Sum as that was; and at least, I wish it may not have been so, after having my
self been Witness of the great Pomp she formerly lived in. Yet it was commonly
reported at Court, that had not the Lady of a Foreign Prince's Minister,
supplied her with Money, she had not known how to satisfy her Baker and
Butcher, who dun'd her continually for the Money she owed them.

Whatever was in this, her Family has been in a declining State these Twenty
Five Years past, and is very much lower, than it was before that time; and this
Princess's Son, who should have raised it up again, having been so
low-spirited, as to Marry a Girl, who is unworthy of his Birth, has been
obliged to go out of the Kingdom, because he found that he could not live in it
with honor. And if it be true, that this Princes Mother, was guilty of what
was laid to her charge, we may presume, that all that has befallen her, is the
effect of Divine justice, which does not suffer that Crimes of this nature
should continue unpunished.

Mademoiselle de Soissons, was not the only Person whose Conduct the King
endeavored to reform; he took much the same measures with Madam de la Force,
who is one of the two Daughters which the late Marquis de Castelmoron had left
behind him; the other was married to the Marquis de Bricquemau, a Name well
know among the French Protestants, as well as that of de la Force. But that
Religion being now prohibited, the Marquis de Bricquemau, thought fit to obey
the King, who Commanded all his Subjects to be Roman Catholics.

Mademoiselle de la Force, had already had many Intrigues, which had made much
noise; and among others, those with the Marquis de Nesle, and with the
President de Brion's Son. This last had disgraced her yet more than the other;
because this President's Son, was but of a very mean extract in comparison of
her. For without having recourse to the idle fancies of the Family of la Force,
which pretends to be descended of the Kings of England, about which the
Genealogists are not agreed; or to what is pretended, that the name of Nompart
which they bear, with that of Caumont, was given them, because one of their
Ancestors killed a Dragon, which destroyed all that Country, where their chief
Possessions and Interests in Land do now lie: I say, that without laying any
stress on these things, it is certain that the Family of la Force, is a very
Illustrious and a very Ancient Family. It has produced two Mareschals of
France, the one just after the other; of the first of which, the Father
Mainbourg has given us a History, which he has composed after his own fancy, in
his Book of Calvinism; but he is so often mistaken in every thing, that he has
Written, that a Man must be at pains to compose as many Volumes as he has done,
if he would take in hand to discover all his Mistakes. But since we have
occasion here, to speak of this Marshall, who was called James, I shall give a
true and genuine account of what befell him, at the Massacre of St. Bartholomew,
quite different from what is given by that Jesuit.

Charles IX. having formed a design, to catch all the Protestants of France in
one Net, and at the same time; made as many of them as he could, especially of
the leading Men among them, come to Court, that he might cause them to be
murdered (so to speak) in his own sight; while by his Orders, the same was to
be done, upon the same day and at the same hour, in all the parts of the
Kingdom: It is not my business, to tell here how it was possible, that such a
Design could be executed, without being discovered before hand to those against
whom it was formed; besides, that though I should make all the plausible
Conjectures imaginable, I could not expect to succeed better, than they have
done, who have beat their Brains to tell us their Conjectures about it; and at
last I should be forced to confess, as they do, that it was a thing that God
had resolved from all Eternity, and that he put a vail before the Eyes of all
those who were appointed to suffer, that they might not know the imminent
dangers that threatened them. However this be, James's Father being come to
Paris, where he was called by the King, and having brought along with him his
two Sons, viz. James and his elder Brother; he and they were among the first
who were assassinated. James was but Fourteen Years old, but was of a much
readier wit, than is usual for Boys of that age, and he seigned himself dead,
upon his receiving the first blow; that was the reason why he was left there,
and had no more wounds given him; and lying stretched out at full length
between his Father and his Brother, who were killed dead, he had also so much
presence of mindas to take off a Diamond of great value, which his Father had
upon his Finger, and to put it in his Mouth, with an other which he had
himself; for he did not doubt, but the People would soon come and strip them,
and take every thing that was about them; and he was afraid, that if he should
keep nothing for getting his Wound cured, and for maintaining himself in some
private place, till the storm were over, he might come to be starved to death.
It happened just so as he had guessed would: all the People about the Louvre,
where his Father was lodged, hearing what had been done, came immediately to
make all the advantages they could of the Clothes of these murdered
Protestants. The Master of a Tennis Court, that was in that part of the Town,
who knew Monsieur de la Force's Sons, because they had played sometimes at the
Tennis, which he kept, happened by good luck to come to their House, when he
was going a pillaging as well as others: He was so touched with compassion,
when he saw them in that condition, that he cried out and spoke of it aloud,
though he was all alone.

James, who knew him, thought that he might trust himself with him, and tell
him, that he was not as yet dead. The Master of the Tennis, being overjoyed to
see him yet alive, bid him get up and go along with him; and promised to keep
him in his House, and that he should not at all discover him, but that he
should be in as great safety with him as ever he had been in his own Father's
house; but because he had no Cloak to give him, and that he could not go out,
naked as he was, for another had already stripped him of his Clothes; James
therefore, desired him to go and seek for one to him, and to bring a Lanthorn
with him, that he might have the greater Benefit of his kind Offers. The Master
of the Tennis, brought him all that he had desired, and a Hat also; and making
him go before him, as if he had been his Boy; he brought him to his house,
where his Wife asked him, who he was; he told her, that she was not concerned
to know that, and that she had nothing to do, but to use him kindly. She judged
by this, that he was some Huguenot of Note; which she was yet more persuaded
of, when upon his Finger, she saw the Diamonds which he had saved, and she
coveted very much to have them; but not knowing any other way, how to come by
them, she began to say to her Husband, that she was very desirous he should put
him out of doors; that she could not suffer him any longer to expose himself,
for his sake, to those Inconveniences that would inevitably befall him, if it
should ever come to be known, that he had harbored such a Guest. Her Husband,
who had been forced to tell her who he was, that the hopes she might have, of
being well rewarded one day, might give her satisfaction; endeavored to
satisfy her with the same hopes. But she had rather have what was present,
than what was but to come, and she continued to press him that he would rid
himself of this Stranger; telling him, that it seemed he knew not well what he
was doing, when he put himself into so great hazard, without any prospect of
advantage. The Tennis-court keeper, finding, that he could not satisfy her
with Reason, advertised James of it, that he might choose rather to go
elsewhere, than to expose himself to new Dangers. La Force answered him, that
he would soon find a Remedy for that: He knew that this Woman coveted his
Diamonds, because she had many times spoken to him of them; he therefore gave
her one of them, which procured him peace and quiet for some days. But because,
that which he had kept to himself, was the finest of the two, and that he had
given her only the least, her wicked humor returned very soon, insomuch that
she disturbed her Husband with her Importunities, as much as before. He who was
a man of much honesty, could not approve of her Behavior, and reproved her
sharply for it. But finding that she persevered in her Covetousness, and that
she valued her Interest, more than any other thing, he spoke to Monsieur de la
Force, that he might have a care, not to make a Present to her of the other
Diamond, and he told him, that it would be much better for him, that he should
go to one of his Friends houses, and that if he knew any of them with whom he
could trust himself; he would go himself, and ask him if he could be in safety
at his house: Monsieur de la Force answered him, that he knew none, but
Monsieur de Biron, and he entreated him to go to his house as from him; and
that he knew him to be so generous, that he hoped, he would make no difficulty,
^o shelter him. The Master of the Tennis-court went thither, and having asked a
private Audience of him, he was surprised, and overjoyed at the same time, when
he told him, that the young La Force was still alive. Monsieur de Biron
desired, that he might come so soon as conveniently he could: he came to his
house immediately; and that he might not be discovered, Monsieur de Biron,
after he had discoursed a little with him, put him in his Livery as one of his
Pages, and sent him to Biron. He was cured of the Wound, he received at the
Massacre, and having taken Post, he stayed in Guyenne, till the Persecution of
the Protestants was over. He went afterward to the War, where he signalized
himself so gloriously, that he came to be in greater esteem than any of his
Predecessors had ever been. And he came to be so much in favor with Henry the
Third, and Henry the Fourth, that he was made Master of the Kings Wardrobe, and
Captain of his Lifeguards. He afterward married Monsieur de Biron's Daughter,
in gratitude to him, for having sheltered him, when he was in hazard of his
Life; and at last he was advanced to the Dignity of Duke, and Peer, and Marshal
of France. He died when he was Eighty years of Age, Loaded with Riches and
Honor. His Son enjoyed all the same Honors, and having but one Daughter, she
was married to Monsieur de Turenne. The Duchy of la Force fell to the
Posterity of James's second Son, who enjoy it at this time.

Mademoiselle de la Force, of whom we are now discoursing, was descended also
of the same James, who was her Grandfather; but her way of living being
altogether unworthy of the Grandchild of so great a Man, who had lived always
like a Man of true Honor and Virtue; the King caused a Complement to be made
her, much like to that, which had been made to Mademoiselle de Soissons; he
ordered that it should be told her, that there were but two things, of which
she might choose one, that was, either to go out of the Kingdom, or to go in to
a Convent: such an Order as this, was like a Thunderbolt to this young Lady.
But as there is no disputing with the King, she chose the Convent; upon
condition always, that His Majesty should give her, wherewith to pay her Board.
For though she had many Intrigues in her time, yet she was so much a Beggar,
that she had not wherewith to maintain herself: Perhaps, had she been richer,
she would not have gone and buried herself alive, within the Walls of a
Cloister; but as Necessity forces many People to do many things, which
otherwise they would not incline to; it was impossible for her to take any
other course, than what she did. There was one Madam Thaumur, who underwent the
same Fate, though she was married, and her Husband Captain of the Galleys of
Versailles; yet he was so good natured, as never to complain of her Conduct.
But the King, who had declared openly before all the Court, that he would not
suffer any Person, to give ill Example to another, knowing that himself was
charitable enough, to comfort an old Suisse for the loss of his Wife, caused
her to be shut up among the penitent Maids.

This frighted a great many Women, whose Conduct was nothing better than hers;
while all good People approved of his Majesty's Resolution, for the Reformation
of Manners.

He commanded the Archbishop of Paris, that in his Station, he should
vigorously pursue the same design as well as he did. That Prelate gave Orders
to the Clergy of that great City, that every one of them should enquire
diligently, within the bounds of his Parish, after those who lived
licentiously, whether under the pretense of their Greatness, or under pretense
of Clandestine Marriage. His Majesty's Care extended also, farther than this
Capital City; for he sent the same Orders to all the Bishops of the Kingdom.
The Bishop of Angers had a Man in his Diocese, who was rather rich than of
Quality, and who was in one of these two Cases. It was the Count de Serran, who
had been Chancellor of Monteur: he lived familiarly with one Madam Racapee; but
it was not known how they came to live together, whether they lived in
Whoredom, or if there had been a Clandestine Marriage between them; for these
sorts of Marriages are much in fashion at this time, insomuch, that we seldom
hear of any other. The Bishop went and paid him a visit, as he used frequently
to do; but after he had dined with him, and with this Lady, who ordered all the
Affairs of his house; he told him, that he would not delay any longer to
acquaint him, with the Reasons that had obliged him to pay him that visit. That
His Majesty had commanded him to enquire of him, what was the Relation he was
in to that Lady, who had the trust of every thing in his house. For if she
served him only for his pleasure, and was not married to him, he must resolve
never to see her any more. The Count de Serran knowing that his Wealth, which
made him absolute in that Country, could do him no service, in shifting a
question that was put to him in the Kings Name; was forced to own, that they
were married together. The Bishop answered him, that his owning of the Marriage
was something, and that he could discourse willingly with him upon the reasons,
which he offered him at the same time, for having so long concealed it; but
that all that was not enough, for such an Answer, as he must give the King.
That if it were only he, who as Bishop of the place, came to enquire after it;
he would believe it, upon his word; but since his business was with the King,
it was absolutely necessary to show other Proofs for it. The Count hearing him
speak after such a manner, went and searched for the Marriage-contract, which
he had made with this Lady, and showed him at the same time, a Certificate of
their Marriage. He asked for no more, and having given an Account of it to the
King, it has produced so good an effect, that this Count owns it openly in his
Family; so that Madam de Racapee, is now considered as his Lady.

About this time, the City of Paris came to have one of its principal
Magistrates changed, though this Office be neither ancient nor honorable; I
mean the Office of Lieutenant de Police, which was at its first Institution, in
the year 1667. bestowed upon Monsieur de la Reinie, who is still alive. For
there was never any such Magistrate before that time, and all the parts of that
Office were performed by the Lieutenant Civil. But His Majesty considering,
that in so great a City as this Metropolis, it was too great a Charge for one
Man, to attend particular Affairs, and the more public Concerns of the City at
the same time; he created this new Office in his Favor. It Is true, Political
Reasons obliged him to institute it, as much as Zeal for Justice did. For the
King had found by experience, while he was under age, that this City alone, was
capable by its example, to cause an Insurrection throughout the who^e Kingdom.
And therefore, he thought fit, to have a Man there, of his own Appointment, in
whom he might put confidence, who might narrowly observe every thing that was
done in the City. He settled Twelve Thousand Franks a year upon this
Magistrate; and Monsieur de la Reinie, after he had discharged this Office, for
at least 25 years, becoming old, and perhaps that he might complement the chief
Minister of State, desired him some years ago, that he would give him his
Nephew Monsieur de Bignon for his Coadjutor.

As this Office, gives a Man much Authority and Interest at Court, upon which
he immediately depends; therefore, Monsieur Bignon, who is now Intendant of
Picardy, accepted of it, by the Advice of his Parents and Friends; but being of
a Family, that has been always obliging and full of humanity, he became soon
wearied of it; for he saw, that he could not discharge that Office, unless, he
became severe and rigorous, and therefore, he made an Interest, to be Intendant
of a Province, and obtained that of Amie^s. In the mean while, Monsieur de
Reinie growing now very old, for he is about Eighty years of Age, supplicated
anew, that he might be eased of this Burden, and that he might be allowed to
sell his Office. The King granted his request, upon condition, that he should
resign in favor of Monsieur d' Argenson. This Gentleman is of much better
Quality than Monsieur de la Reinie, and falls nothing short of him, as to good
sense; besides, that he has all necessary Qualities to make himself to be
feared, and his very Presence strikes dread, if it does not create respect. His
Father had been the Kings Ambassador to the Republic of Venice, and his
Ancestors were equally famous for the Gown and for the Sword; but it is seldom
that a Man grows rich by Embassies, and his Father who is still alive, spent a
good part of his own Estate in that Employment; so that his Son had been forced
to accept of an Office, that was below him, that is, to be Lieutenant General
of Limoges; but his good Fortune having brought him to Court, and having got
some Commissions, of which he so acquitted himself, that the Court was fully
satisfied with what he had done, he thereby opened the way to this Employment
we are now speaking of: The Lieutenant de Police is answerable to the
Parliament of Paris; and therefore Monsieur D' Argenson, some days, after he
had entered upon his Office, went and paid a visit to the chief President, and
begged the honor of his Protection. This Magistrate, who has a grave Aspect
and affects to appear graver than he truly is, received him the same way, that
he uses to receive all other People, and heard his Complement without so much
as moving an Eyebrow: finding that he had done with it, made him no answer but
these Three Words, Safety, Cleanness, Light; and immediately turned his back
upon him. Monsieur D' Argenson would have been more surprised, if he had not
known his Character; but having known it of a long time, he returned home,
thinking what could be the meaning of these Three Words, and he soon found it
out. He understood easily that by the first, he meant, that he should take care
of the night Watch, that no Robberies or Murders by Night might be heard of in
the City. By the Second, that he should take care, that those who had the
charge of cleansing the Streets, should punctually do their duty; and by the
Third, that he should do the same, as to those, who have the charge of the
Lanthorns: These Three parts of this Office, made Monsieur Bignon nauseate it;
and there were also some other things in it, that were no less disagreable to
such a Man as he is.

However, his niceness, was much to Monsieur de la Reinie's advantage, for he
got Fifty Thousand Crowns from Monsieur D' Argenson, for resigning his place to
him; and he would have got much more, had not the King determined the Price.
The Lieutenant de Police pays no yearly Tax to the King for his Office, as all
the Offices of Long Robe do, except the Chancellor, the Chief President of
Parliament; and..... And the King gave Monsieur D'Argenson, a Warrant of
Retension for a Hundred Thousand Franks; He entered upon the Exercise of it, by
declaring War against all those, whether Men or Women, that used to play at
Lansquenet; He had express Orders for this, from his Majesty; because he had
observed, that in some Years before, that unhappy Game, as well as the other
Game of Basset; had ruined a great number of the Officers of his Army, who had
been forced to quit their Companies, because, they had lost all the Money, with
which, they should have raised Recruits.

Monsieur Bignon Counselor of State, who was the Father of that Gentleman I
was just now speaking of; came to die suddenly, about this time, without having
any time to prepare himself for another World: He had gone to bed at Night,
after having taken his Supper as he used to do, without complaining of any Pain
or Sickness; but the next Morning, he was found dead in his Bed. The Office of
State which he had enjoyed, would have been very convenient for his Son, who
had nothing else to hope for, by his Death; for all his Estate was not
sufficient to pay his Debts; But because the King had declared long ago, that
he would not at all, make those Offices like Here^itary ones, to descend from
Father to Son, he therefore, thought it his interest to proceed cautiously in
this matter, and to take prudent measures, before he should address himself to
the King for it. It was easier for him, than it would have been for another
Man, to bring about this design; because he was the Nephew of Monsieur de
Ponchartrain, who had served the King to very good purpose, ever since the time
that he was made Comptrollor-General, in the place o^ Monsieur le Pelletier.
There were few, who could have acquitted themselves in so difficult a post,
with so much Art and Success, as he has done, at a time, when the public
Affairs were in such a posture, as they have always been in since he was called
to it. It Is certainly matter of Wonder and of Amazement at the same time, to see
the difference betwixt the way of managing the King's Revenues at this time,
and that which was taken under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarin. For when there
was need but of a Million, they were at incredible pains and toil, to contrive
a way how to raise it: Those who are acquainted with the History of those
times, know, that when Dunkirk was taken in the year 1658. it could not be
ransomed out of the Hands of the English, because we had not Three Millions of
Money to give for it; for which Sum we could have recovered it, by virtue of a
secret Treaty with Cromwell; so that the King was forced to add a Million more
to that Sum, when he redeemed it some Years after: Besides, it was needful
then, to use all the Political Arts and Pretenses imaginable, before that such
a Sum could be raised Whereas now, if the King had use for Fifty Millions, he
has nothing to do but to speak the word, and he has it, so to speak, in a
Quarter of an Hour. However, Monsieur Pontchartrain did not rely so much upon
his own Merits, as upon that account to flatter himself with the hopes of
obtaining this favor to his Nephew, because of some difficulties which he
foresaw must be removed, before he could speak of it to his Majesty: The great
difficulty was, that the King had promised to Monsieur de Caumartin, Intendant
of the Kings Revenues, the first place that should fall void, among the
Counselors of State: He knew that the King was mindful of his Promises, and
that he would not forget them, but for very good Reasons; and therefore, he
spoke to Monsieur de Caumartin, and told him, he would oblige him very much, if
he would quit his Pretensions in Favor of his Nephew. As every Man loves to
oblige a Minister of State, so Monsieur Caumartin, promised not to do any
thing, that could put his Majesty in mind of what he had promised him, but the
King remembered it himself; so that when Monsieur de Ponchartrain spoke to him
for (...) B^gnon, he answered, that he was very sorry he could not grant what
he asked of him, but there were two Reasons that hindered him from doing it. The
one was, that he had resolved not to set th^se Offices pass from Father to Son:
The ohter was, that he was under a promise to give Monsieur Caumartin, the
first of those places that should f^ll (...). So Monsieur Caumartin was made
Counselor of State, though he was willing to have renounced it, at Monsieur de
Pontchartrain's desire. The first time that he sat in Council, he pretended to
take his Place, as if he had been always there, from the first Day he was named
Intendant of the Revenues, because these Intendants have a Brief of the Crown.
as Counselors of State; but those whom he would have taken place of, if he had
succeeded in his Claim, opposing him in that matter, the Chancellor, who was
proper Judge in it, determined it in their Favor. Two or Three days before
Monsieur de B^gnon's Death, his Brother, who was chief President of the great
Council, fell sick, when his sickness appeared dangerous, (for he died of it
within Six or Seven days after,) no body would tell him, what had befallen his
Brother, lest he should become Apprehensive that he should soon follow him.

But because his Brother had come to see him in the beginning of his Sickness,
but could not come afterward, (for he was in his Grave) he asked the only
Daughter he had, if he had already forgotten him. He had married this Daughter
to Monsieur de Verthamont, Master of Requests, who was already one of the
Richest Men that wore a Gown, but who came to be much Richer by succeeding him
in his Estate; for this Monsieur Bignon had incomparably a greater Estate than
his elder Brother: He was worth at least Four Hundred Thousand Crowns; yet his
Daughter was nothing the happier for that, for her Husband did not love her at
all: either because he thought she had not Beauty enough to deserve that he
should love her; or because he was too much inclin^d to We^ching to love a
Wife; for it was known that he had Mistress^s, and she was forced to behave
herself obligingly to them, and to keep (...) with them, that so she might be
often in company with her Hu^band, for she had as much Affection for him, as he
had Indifferency for her.

Monsieur de Verthamont's Inclinations to the Female Sex, his been (...) enough
known, of a long time; though somewhile and he ^ell thereby into such an
Inconvent me, as might have discouraged him from (...), for the (...). He was
in love with a young Girl, that had so me Brothers, who were Office^s in the
(...). She was, at least of as good a Family as had as, but th^^ was a vast
diffrence betwixt the is Fortunes; and the was a^ poor as he was rich: The
(...) their Sister to comply with him, (...) take (...) Measures as should
(...) to give her a Portion. Perhaps she (...) though they had not advised her
to it; and if we may believe what is repor^^^ of her, she loved him, as much as
he loved her. However this Girl having given him an (...) is surprised him with
her, and (...) to be (...) hard upon him, if he would not do them Justice. H^
offered them a considerable Sum of Mercy, i^ they would let him go. He had it
not about him, for it was a greater Sum than a Man usually carries in his
Pocket; but having given them his No^e, he thought it even best to pay it,
without more ado, that his misfortunes might not come to be talked of:

If a certain Knight of the Holy Ghost, who is now at Court, could have thus
compounded the matter with his Lady's Brothers, perhaps he had never married
her; But these Gentlemen were not for capitulating on such Terms, as the
Brothers of the former Girl had done; he was forced against his Will, to yield
to their Terms; besides that, it may be, his Note would not have been so well
answered as was Monsieur de Verthamont*s.

But that I may not go farther from my Subject; I say, that this Magistrate's
Lady, having by some pretense or other, satisfied her Father, when he
complained, that his Brother came not to see him; he died, without knowing that
he was gone before him, and that he had paid that debt, that all men must
necessarily pay. Though his Office was but of a late Creation, yet there were
abundance of Candidates for it: for the place of Chief President, and
especially, of such a famous Society as is the Great Council, is not to be
slighted, when there is a fair opportunity of obtaining it. But the King, who
has always a great regard to the Children of his Ministers, when the Offices
they have enjoyed, may, without any bad Con^equence be disposed of, as if they
were hereditary, bestowed it upon Monsieur de Verthamont. For the reason why
the Places of Counselors of State should not be so disposed of, is, that if
the King should let them descend to the Children, or to the nearest Kinsmen, he
should not have, wherewith to reward those who serve him faithfully in the
Counsel, and in the other Offices of the Gown. For they serve not for any other
end, but that one day they may come to be Counselors of State; at least, the
hopes of this, has been their great motive for some time past; because we see,
that the King has chosen Two or Three of that Body to be Chancellors of the
Kingdom, and therefore, every one strives to recommend himself to his Majesty,
by his diligence in his Service; whether in the Intendancies, or in any other
Commissions. We may easily be convinced, how much it is for the Kings Interest,
to have Persons of this sort about him; and perhaps he should not find them so
exact and punctual, in the discharge of their Duty, if it were not, that they
have always that recompense in their View, as the fruit of all their Labors.

There were Two other Brothers, died some days after the death of the Two
Bignons, and there was one strange thing observed of them; that never any thing
happened to the one, but what befell the other at the same time: they were
Twins, and so like one another in the Face, that had not the one been a
Soldier, and the other a Lawyer, so that their different Garbs made them known,
the one would have been often taken for the other. They were both much given to
gaming, and if one lost his money, it was sure the other lost his also, at the
same time. When he who went to the Army was wounded, the other was wounded also
by a fall, or some other Accident. If the one had a Mistress that jilted him,
the other met with the same Treatment from his. In a word, all the difference
that ever was taken notice of, was, that the one continued a Bachelor, much
longer than the other; and there was nothing wanting in their whole life, but
that one thing, to justify what is ordinarily said of Children, that are born
at the same Birth; That whatever happens to the one, inevitably befalls the
other. But perhaps he who continued a Bachelor so long after the other was
married, did so, because he thought his Brother not very happy in his Marriage.
There are some Wives, who give no great Encouragement to Men, to venture upon
Marriage, especially, when they set up for Wits, and will pass a judgment upon
every thing. It is the two Bauquemars of whom I am now speaking; the one of
them, was Marishal de Camp, and Governor of Bergues; the other President of
Requests of the Palace. The King gave this Government to the Count de la
Motthe, Nephew of the late Marshal d^ la Motthe H^udanc^ur who was also
Marishal de Camp. The Count a^ Brion, eldest Son of Monsieur le Grand, and who
had the survivance of Master of Horse to the King, fell at this time into an
Ap^plex^, though he was not at most, but Thirty Five Years of Age: And it was
so extreme vi^^l^nt, that his Face was dis^orted to that degree, that not only
his Mouth stood aw^y, but what was yet more ^mazing, one o^ his Eyes came d^wn
into the Middle of his Face. His Father and Mother sent him to the Waters of
B^urbon, and as he was upon h^s Journey thithe^, he sell into an^t^er ^it of
the same Disease, so that it was beli^ved he was quite gone; yet he recovered
of it, as he had do^e of ^he first, and having made out hi^ J^urney, the Waters
and the n^tural strength of his Youth, r^covered him to a ^etter State of
Heal^h. The K^^g, (...) ^as al^a^s loved his Fat^^^, was ^o goo^ as to (...)
how glad he was at hi^ R^covery. Bu^ (...) gave Ma^ame la (...), (...) and m^r^
sensible ^roofs of (...) every body: She had a (...), c^^cerning the
Inheritance of (...), which she alleged, (...) King alle^ed the contrary; (...)
to be well ^ou^ded, because (...) which the De^^te (...) the Portion of one of
the Sons of (...) F^ance, and re^urned always to the (...) were not Heirs ma^e
to enjoy it. (...) Madame la grande (...), (...) his first Cousin, was not very
rich; (...) gi^e her only Sixty Thousand (...) of (...); for which reason it
is, that she travels only with one Co^ch, which is not very becoming a Princess
of the Blood, and especially a Granddaughter of Henry IV. the King, I say,
considering her Poverty, and that besides, she had some Reasons for her Claim,
which seemed to answer his own Reasons, told her, that if she pleased, he would
let her enjoy her Sister's Estate during her Life, upon condition, that she
should renounce the Property of it. This Princess, who desired only to be rich
by the Revenue, without troubling her self, with what might happen after her
Death, consented very willingly to this Proposal. But His Majesty has since
that time, had some scruples of Conscience, because he had only given her the
Profits of that Estate during her Life, which perhaps belonged to her in
Property, and therefore, he has resigned the Property in her Favor, as he had
formerly done the Revenue. This tenderness of Conscience, that will not allow
this Prince to do any thing, for which it may reproach him, had made him
reflect often, upon many things, that had passed during his Reign, which might
be represented in other Colors than those were, which had been made use of to
persuade him to undertake them. He saw, that his whole Kingdom was in a Flame,
and that there was no other way to extinguish it, but by restoring a great
number of Places, which his Enemies alleged he had taken only by force of Arms;
and because he found it for his own convenience to have them, without having
any other right to them. If he had pleased, he might perhaps not only have let
all Europe see the contrary, since he can give good reasons for what he has
done; but he could have also maintained his right to those Places ^y his Arms,
since in despite of the prodigious Consederacy that has been formed against
him, he has always had the advantage of his Enemies, ever since he first
perceived their Designs against his Crown.

However, as His Majesty has of a long time been chiefly concerned with his
eternal Salvation; the care of which, has made many scruples arise in his
Conscience: So, we admired and were astonished to see, that on a sudden, he had
offered to deliver up the Towns of Strasburg and Luxenburg, which were the
strongest Barriers of his Kingdom; Nay, he offered also to deliver up many
others, which it must be confessed, were taken airly, with Sword in hand, when
his Enemies were Witnesses of his Victories, and could no longer resist his
Arms, though they were all assembled against him; so that it seems just to say,
that he had a right to keep them or at least, to demand the Equivalent of them
But the King considered, that (...) would break this dreadful Conspiracy, and
restore Peace to his People, who groaned under ^e Burden of the most cruel
War, that ever was raised against any Sovereign, he must part with his own
Interests He had sent long ago, the Steu^ de Calli^rs to Holland, to make
Proposals of Peace. He addressed himself to that People, rather than to any
others; because he knew that the States, which subsist only by Trade, would
hearken sooner, than any of the rest would do, when one spoke to them of
putting an end to a War, which troubled them upon all quarters. Besides, the
Dutch could gain nothing, by the Continuance of it; for they were not like the
House of Austria, which flatters it self, that by the Continuance of War, it
shall at last recover that supreme Power, that it once had in the time of
Charles the Fifth. There was not one of the All^es, except only this House, who
could hope to make any advantage of what was then doing in Europe. Insomuch,
that it may be justly said, that all the Princes who were in that Confederacy,
had taken up Arms, only for the Interests of the House of Austria; for all the
Conquests they could hope for from the King, must have belonged to it. And
though the Princes of the Empire had other Pretensions; yet, seeing they find
by long experience, that the Emperor makes use of them (if I may be allowed to
speak so) only as the Ape made use of the Cat's Foot, to take the Chestnuts out
of the Fire; and that he has always known how to make use of the Right of
Sequestration (to which he pretends) to his own advantage and their loss, and
that at the Peace of Nimiguen, he kept Philipsburg to himself, though it
belonged to the Bishop of Spire: They could therefore easily see, that they
exhausted themselves only for his sake, and that they could expect no Benefit
by it themselves. And though they had run headlong into the Confederacy against
his Majesty, when it was proposed to them; yet, that was only, because of the
Fears they were under, from the Greatness of his Power. They considered, that
it was their misfortune, to have their Dominions lying between Two Princes,
whom they ought equally to suspect; and that they should do best to declare
against him, who seemed to be in the greatest readiness to ruin them, rather
than against the other, who was not as yet, in a condition to hurt them. These
were the considerations that formed the Bonds, which united them so firmly with
the Emperor; and which became the more indissoluble, that his Imperial Majesty
found a way, how to keep these Princes in a dependence upon him, by making them
believe, that the King had violated the Treaties of Munster and Nimiguen, and
was a sworn Enemy of the Empire. It was not in His Majesty's Power at that
time, to address himself either to them, to inform them of his good Intentions;
or to the English, because they had set a Prince upon their Throne, whom His
Majesty had not acknowledged as their lawful King; and whom he also considered
as the very Soul of the confederacy, that had been formed against him. It is
true, the Hollanders had a sort of dependence upon this new King, both because
he was their Stateholder, and because of a strict Union between him and the
chief Men of their Republic. Yet, as His Majesty was resolved to acknowledge
this Prince at last for King of England, so he believed, that what Bonds soever
might be betwixt him and the Dutch, they would never coldly entertain the
Proposals, which he cesigned to make them; especially, when they should see,
that by removing this one Obstacle, there would be no great difficulty to
obtain a general Peace: And truly, Monsieur de Callieres needed not to have
been at great pains, to make them sensible, what were like to be the ill
Consequences of the War, as well for themselves, as for the Princes of the
Empire; that he might thereby persuade them, that it was their Interest to
concur with His Majesty, in restoring Peace to Europe. They knew their own
Interests too well, not to be sensible, that their own Safety, as well as the
Safety of many other Potentates consisted in keeping France and Austria in a
Balance, or to speak more properly, in keeping them in equality to one
another; seeing they serve as Counterweights, to all the Princes of
Christendom, to save them from falling under the Power, either of the one or
the other. For just as in a Balance, we see, that when one side is much
heavier than the other, if a sufficient Weight be put into that other Scale,
then both are equal; so has it always been, since these Two Families interfered
with one another. All the Princes of Europe, have acted by the same Rule, in
assisting the weakest of the Two, and putting a stop to the growing Power of
the other. And this Maxim is observed at this time; and has put the Sword in
the Hands of so many Potentates, who were formerly in His Majesty's Interests;
especially the Hollanders, and the Princes of the Empire, who found no
Protection, either so ready, or so safe, as his was; when they were like to
have been subjected to the House of Austria.

However, the Hollanders finding by the Proposals the King made, and his Offers
to deliver up so many Places, that if they could not bring these Two Houses to
a just Equality, yet, they should at least make a Peace, upon such Terms, as
that they needed not be so very much afraid of His Majesty's Power, they gave
Monsieur Callieres a very favorable Reception: yet they would not grant him a
Passport, but by allowance from the Prince of Orange. And before they would
enter into any Conferences with him, they would first see, if the Powers, he
had brought from His Majesty, were in good form. But they could be in no better
form, than they were, since they were sealed with the Great Seal of France.
There was one thing, that much hindered this Treaty, which was, that the
Hollanders would do nothing, without the Consent of England, and their other
Allies. But this was nothing but what Monsieur Callieres expected. For before
he came from France, he doubted very much, that he could persuade them to enter
into a separate Treaty with the King. Yet, that had been done, at the Treaty of
Nimeguen; where his Majesty's Plenipotentiaries found a way, how to make them
jealous of the Prince of Oran^e's Power; so that they made have to make a
separate Peace, which did soon oblige all the other Allies to an Accommodation
with the King. But it was not fit at this time, so much as to propose what they
were able then to effectuate. The Dutch became sensible of their mistake, and
they would take care, not to fall into it again. But Callieres, who as I have
said, had considered of this before, and who had Orders from the King, not at
all to acknowledge the Prince of Orange, for King of England, till he should be
assured of the Peace; found out an expedient, for reconciling the Orders he had
from the King his Master, with this difficulty which the Dutch made, not to
treat without the Consent of their Allies. It was, that they should not come to
a final Conclusion in any thing, without their Approbation; but if they found
reason to agree to any thing, they might communicate it to them; and that
convenient measures might be taken afterward. There was no Inconveniency in
following this Advice, and the Dutch were satisfied with it, and by Consent of
their Allies too. They demanded, as Preliminaries of this Treaty, the
Restitution of Lorrain, and of the Towns of Strasburg and Luxenbourg. Callieres
consented in the Kings Name, both to the one and the other; but upon Condition,
that Lorrain should be restored to the Duke of that Name; upon such Terms, as
had been agreed to, at the Treaty of Nimeguen: The President Can^n, who took
care of the Duke of Lorrain's Interests in Holland, opposed this; under
Pretense, that when his Master engaged in the Confederacy, it was promised,
that Peace should never be made, till he had full Satisfaction. He represented
to the Confederates, that if his Dominions were not restored to him, but upon
the Terms of the Treaty of Nimeguen, he should be so far from reaping any
advantage by the Confederacy, that he should be a loser by it; since he could
have made a much better market, had he taken other methods, by which he might
have been put in possession of his Dominions before the War; but having thought
himself obliged to follow his Fathers example, who would not hear of these
Conditions, near Twenty Years ago; it was very hard for him, now, after so many
Years, to find, that no better Conditions were offered him.

But as great Potentates, who are well pleased to engage those in their
interests, who are much inferior to them in Power, that they may be the more
successful in their designs; take not much care of their concerns, when they
have no more use for them: so the Allies, after having spoke once or twice of
this Affair, thought it not worth their while to insist any longer upon it: Mr.
President Canon, gave in several Memoirs concerning it, and they told him, that
they would take time to consider them, before any thing were concluded. And
though the Emperors Ministers joined with him, for obtaining full satisfaction
to this Duke; yet neither the one nor the other were able to effectuate any
thing. Things being thus far advanced, upon the part of the Dutch; and the
English having as strong Inclinations for a Peace as they had, because of the
many Prizes that were taken from them at Sea, which had brought their Trade
very low; It was agreed upon all Hands, that Plenipotentiaries should be named,
for bringing that to perfection, which as yet was only begun; but they had some
difficulty to agree upon the Place of the Congress. The Emperor would have had
it, in some Town of Germany, and the King would not hear of that proposal: But
his Imperial Majesty's great desire was, to Protract time, for he was not very
desirous of the Peace; because so long as the War should last, he knew that he
was Master of all the Princes of the Empire, who were obliged to obey his
absolute Commands; and he was afraid, that if the Peace should be concluded,
they might come to open their Eyes, and be sensible of their true Interests;
and to perceive, that in being so earnest, for the Increase of his Power, they
should themselves be the Authors of his Usurpations upon their own Liberties
and Prerogatives. But there was also another thing in his View, in which he
consulted his own Interest, when he desired, that the Treaty might be in some
Town of the Empire; For since the Peace with Savoy, the King was superior in
Forces to all the Confederates; having sent all the Troops which had served in
that Country, from thence into Germany: And the Emperor was afraid, lest Mentz
should be besieged; which would have been no difficult Enterprise, had the King
thought fit to employ his Forces that way.

But if he could not obtain, that Mentz should be the Place, yet he thought at
least, they would be satisfied that Frankfort should be it. And that a
Neutrality should be established, for 12 or 14 Leagues round about that Town,
so that Mentz should be comprehended in it. But the King being stiff in this
matter, and the Dutch having proposed the Hague, for the Place of Meeting, it
was (...) agreed to, that those, whom His Majesty should name for his
Plenipotentiaries, should reside at D^lf, which is ^ut One Leagues distant from
it; and (...) were to be named by the other Princes, (...) reside at the Hague,
and that the Conferences should be kept at the Castle of Rys^wick, which stands
in the middle, and is equally distant from these Two Places.

Though the Emperor consented to this, as well as the rest of the Confederates;
yet, it was a long time before he sent his (...) thither; which was a Proof,
that he loved manner that the War should continue, than that a Peace should be
concluded^^s for the King, he made no de^ay to name Monsieur Courtin Counselor
of rate his Plenipotentiary; a Man every way capa^le of such an Employment, and
who had acqui^ted himself very honorably in many Negotiations of great
Importance: But he befought the King to excuse him in this, because he found
his Eyes so bad, that it was to be feared, he should lose his sight altogether.
It vexed the King to think that he m^^^ look out for another; and he was at
pains to examine him, if perhaps there were some secret Reasons, which hindered
him from embracing this Employment; but having at lust found, that (...) in
good earnest; he nam^d in his place, Monsieur de Harlay, the Chancellor's
Son-in-law, who is also a Counselor of State: He gave him Monsieur do Creci
for his Colleague, and honored also Monsieur de Callieres with the same Title
of Plenipotentiary. There were great things talked of this Man's Conduct;
though I do not see, that there was need of much Art, to do all that he did;
for a man has no occasion to show, how well he is qualified for Negotiations of
State; unless he have to struggle with great difficulties, which at last he
overcomes by his prudent Conduct, and brings the whole affair to a happy Issue,
for the Interest of the Prince that has employed him: But this could not be
said of Monsieur Callieres, who had made the Confederates listen to his
Proposals; only by promising in the Kings Name, that he would deliver up to
them, a great number of Places, which they could not have been able to retake
by force of Arms, in Twenty Years time, though they had been much stronger than
they were. Monsieur de Harlay, had been already employed in some secret
Negotiations, but had not been successful in them; but he and Monsieur
Callieres, had a third Person joined with them, in the great Affairs they were
now to be employed in; who could direct and assist them, when they met with
difficulties, that were too hard for them; I mean Monsieur de Creci, who is one
of the best qualified Men in France, for Affairs of this nature. He and
Monsieur de Harlay took their Journey together, that they might be at the place
of the Congress in due time; but they were not very well satisfied with one
another Company; Monsieur de Harlay was d^ssatisfied, because Monsieur de
Creci's Reputation eclipsed his own; and Monsieur de Creci, because Monsieur de
Harlay carried it so high, as if he had undervalued him.

The Dispositions they were both in made them soon give some Proofs, that they
were dissatisfied with one another; for being come to L'Isle; there was one Le
Normand, a Farmer-General, who took upon him to Regale them; He was one of
Monsieur de Creci's Friends, upon which account he detained them there, a whole
day longer, than they intended to have staid: And that they might not blame
him, for making them lose so much time, he gave them Flying Coaches, to carry
them Ten or Twelve Leagues farther on their Journey; but he put his Friend
Monsieur de Creci into the finest Coach, with the finest Horses in it; while
Monsieur de Harlay got but a sorry Coach, and Horses with such Collars as
draught Horses use to have instead of Harness. This vexed Monsieur de Harlay
very much, who presumed, that if there was any distinction to be made between
them, it should have been to his advantage. The Farmer-General, might have
perceived by his looks, that he did not take it well of him, and he was heard
to say behind his Back, that those who from nothing came to possess good
Estates, could never learn to behave themselves like Gentlemen. However, he
made use of the Coach and Horses, such as they were, but gave not many thanks
to him who had provided them.

These Two Plenipotentiaries had met with a number of People, betwixt Paris and
L'Isle, who wished them a good Journey, and in the mean time besought them
earnestly to put an end to their Miseries, by concluding a happy Peace. They
were not at all surprised at this, for before they took their Journey, they
knew, how much France needed it. And we may easily judge, how much the Treasure
of the Kingdom was exhausted, when we consider what Taxes and Subsidies must
have been paid to the King, to enable him to resist so many Forces, as had
conspired against him. He had no less than 500000 Men under Pay, by Sea and by
Lard; which no doubt will appear incredible to Posterity: It was necessary,
that People of all Ranks and Conditions within the Kingdom, should bear their
Proportionable share of this Burden; so that in imposing the Taxes, there was
a necessity to do every thing, so to speak, by Weight and Measure, that no man
might be oppressed, or obliged to pay more than his Proportion. And this is
what the King's Ministers have done, with so much Conduct and Prudence; that
though every man is sensible of his own Loss; yet it is nothing, in comparison
of what it would have been, if those Affairs had been managed by Persons of
less Skill and Art, than they are. However, these Plenipotentiaries saw the
same thing in Flanders, that they had seen in France; that is, they saw, that
the People there were no less weary of the War, than the French; They likewise
besought them, with the greatest Earnestness, to use their utmost Endeavors
for succeeding in the Treaty, which they were going to negotiate. At last they
came to Delf, where the Houses were become so dear, since the People of that
Town knew, that they were to come thither, that they could scarcely be had for
Money.

While these things were a doing, the Procurator-General, whom the King had
ordered to enquire into the matter of the Duel, that had been fought between
the Bailist d' Auvergne and the Chevalier de Kailus, gave him an Account of the
Discovery, he had made in it: But it was not at all to their advantage: He
reported, that according to the Affidav^t's that were made before him it was
far from having been an accidental Rencounter, as their Parents had alleged;
that never Duel was more clearly proved, and therefore he desired to know, what
Orders His Majesty would give about it. His Majesty ordered, that they should
be Arraigned, Indicted and Tried as Criminals; so that the same Officer, having
caused it to be published, through the City by sound of Trumpet; as is usual
upon such Occasions, the Parliament met, and outlawed them. By His Majesty's
Edict against Duels, they ought to have been hanged in Effigy. But the King
consented privately to remit something of that Rigor, because of the Kindness
he had for their Parents; and they were only condemned to lose their Heads,
which was accordingly executed at the Greve, where their Pictures were put up,
but were not suffered to be long there: For there were some People took them
away about an hour after, that is, in the Twilight of the Evening. These sorts
of things, are very ordinary in France; insomuch, that it is commonly said, that
there is not one Great Family in the whole Kingdom, but what the like has
happened to; and what has had Ladies and Daughters of naughty Lives. And
therefore, the Parents of these Two unhappy young Gentlemen, were not much
afflicted with the Loss of their Sons; nor were less in favor at Court, than
they had been before* The Cardinal de Douillon, who is the Bailiff d'
Auvergne's Uncle, made a Jest of what his Nephew had door; and of what had
befallen him. In which his Eminence was not like many other people, who had
rather be e^gaged in the most difficult Affair in the World, than ^e
accountable for a Duel. And it is certain, that the M^ssicurs de la Frette,
could never extricate themselves out of those Troubles, which they brought upon
themselves, 34 or 35 Years ago; by quarrelling with the Prince de Chalais, as
they were coming out of the Palais Royal. They ^^^ght (...) against ^our, but
though all of them, or at least the greater part of them, were of the first
Fa^^lies of the Kingdom; nay, though the P^pe himself interceeded for a
Remission to them, yet the King would never grant them one, so that some of
them died, making their escape to one part, others to another, and of all those
that were engaged in that Duel, I know none alive, but the elder La Frette, and
the Marquis de Flammarin. It is true, the Marquis d' Autin, the eldest Brother
of Monsieur de Mont^^pan, lost his Life in this Quarrel, having been wounded in
the Vena cava, so that he died upon the spot. I^ the Count d' Auvergne was
afflicted for the loss of his Eldest Son, he was in some measure comforted, by
what the Monks of Cluni did for one of his younger Sons, when he was not
thinking of it. The Cardinal de Janson, the King's Ambassador at Rome, had
desired, that his Majesty might be pleased to recall him, and the Cardinal de
Bouillon, had got a Commission to succeed him; and he being Abbot of Cluni he
visited that Abbey, as he was going to Rome. He is always very obliging, and
engages all that know him to wish him well. So soon as he told these Monks,
that he was going to Rome, and that perhaps, he might never see them any more,
they replied, that they should be very sorry, if that should happen, but if it
should be the good will of God so to order it, they would at least before they
took leave of him, give a Testimony of the deep Sense they had of that Kindness
and Concern, which his Eminence had always shown for them: They told him no
more of it that day, but on the Morrow, they ordered that a Bell should be
tolled for a meeting of the Chapter, and then they chose Monsieur d' Auvergne,
who is the Cardinal's Nephew, for his Coadjutor. They brought this good News to
his Eminence, who knew not the cause of their meeting, and they told him at the
same time, that since he was going to Rome, and that it belonged to the Pope to
confirm their Election, they did not doubt, but he should obtain that favor of
his Holiness, when ever he thought fit to ask it; and they took leave of him,
with this Compliment, for which his Eminence thanked them very heartily. For
this is one of the most genteel and most honorable Abbeys in France, though it
be none of richest. Yet it has Seven or Eight Thousand Livres of Revenue. But
that, for which it is most to be valued, is, that it has Benefices, at it is
Gift, to the value of near a Million of Revenue; so that the Abbot of this
Place, has many opportunities, to make new Creatures to himself, and to reward
those whom he has already.

The Cardinal de Bouillon would fain have carried along with him Monsieur de
Coulanges, who is a pleasant sort of a man, and what he says, is very
diverting; he drinks, composes, and sings; and he has good Skill in Sauces and
Ragoo's; and in a word, he knows how to spend his time agreeably, which makes
many People desire his Company: He had once stayed with his Eminence, in his
Abbey of Pontoise, where he had always People of his own choice, at his Table.
He had formerly traveled to Rome, with Monsieur de Chaulnes* and he was as
well known there to the Cardinals, as was the Ambassador himself. But he
refused Cardinal Bouillon, what he had granted the other; and excused himself,
under pretense of some Affairs: Whether, what he pretended, was true, or not, I
cannot tell. The Instruction of greatest Importance, which his Eminence carried
to Rome, was concerning the Affairs of Poland; where the question was, who
should be chosen King of that Kingdom: Because John Sobieshi who had possessed
that Throne since the Year 1674, died in 1697: He had left many Children by his
Queen, whom he had married before he was promoted to the Royal Dignity; her
Maiden-Name was Francoise de Nation, Daughter of the Marquis d' Arquyen, of
whose Family there was once a Mareshal of France, under the Name of Montigny.
Her Birth should have united her closely to the French Interests. But Women
resent the Affronts or the Refusals they meet with, more highly than others do.
She had become an Enemy to the King long ago; because he would not grant her
the favor she desired of him, which was, to make her Father Duke and Peer of
France; ever since which time, she has done all was in her power against
France, and has not kept those measures, that Prudence and Civility obliged her
to; insomuch, that she caused some Insolences to be done to the Marquis de
Vitrich the King's Ambassador. The King her Husband, who though he was a man not
only of as great Valor, as any in the World, but of great experience in War,
of which he gave sufficient Proof, at his raising the Siege of Vienna, when the
Infidels besieged it, Ann, 1683. yet he was not a man of so much Prudence, in
other Actions of his Life. For while he was upon the Throne, he behaved himself
rather like a private man, than a Sovereign; his chief care was to hoard up
Money, without taking any pains to make Creatures and Friends to himself, and
his Children. He never considered, how necessary these were, for placing one of
his Posterity upon the Throne, after his Death; or if he did consider this, he
has thought, that they could always make themselves Friends, by the Treasures
which he should leave them. And therefore, he sold all the Palatinates that
came to be void; as well as every other thing, with which the former Kings of
Poland used to gratify the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom. These
Practices, had alienated the hearts of his Subjects from him, as well those who
had bought those Places, as those who expected to have had them in Gift, and
without Money: So that, his Children were far from having any ground to hope,
that they should have the same good fortune that Three several Families, who
possessed this Crown successively had formerly had; I mean the Families of
Mamcllus, Jagellon and Palatin, whose Children, so long as they had any,
succeeded to the Throne; so that it did not pass into any other Family, than
their own.

However, the King having advice of all this, thought to place a Prince of his
own Blood, upon that Throne, who was a Subject, and such a one too, as the
Polanders must always have to be their King. For they are a People that soon
despite their Prince, unless he be a brave Man, and capable to lead their
Armies himself in Person, without which qualification, he has buy a melancholy
Life among them.

The last of the Palatins who enjoyed that Crown, was an Instance of this: And
it is known, that this people, obliged him to apdicate, so soon as they
perceived that his Conduct did not answer to that of his Ancestors. The Prince
whom the King proposed, was Francis Lewis de Bourbon Prince of Conti; who in
this War, which his Majesty had maintained against the greater part of Europe,
has given such extraordinary Proofs of his Valor and Conduct; that all the
Army said openly, that the very Spirit and Soul of the late Prince of Conde his
Uncle, who was one of the greatest Captains that ever France had, was returned
to this World, and had taken possession of the Prince of Conti's Body, that he
might save his King and his Country from the Confederacy that was formed
against them. I know that this way of expressing themselves, was altogether
extraordinary and new; but as it was impossible for them to express more
emphatically, the just E^cem they had for that Prince, as a singularly brave
Man; so this way of speaking, passed so current, and was so often repeated,
that his Reputation for true Courage, is established in foreign Countries, as
well as in France. Though this Prince is not rich, yet he sent 200000 Crowns of
his own Money into Poland, to gain the Suffrages of those who had already
Inclinations for him, only upon the Account of his great Fame. For, as this is
the only time of Harvest with the great men of Poland, so a Prince needs never
pretend to their Crown, unless he will sow before hand, that they may reap the
Fruits of it. The more that this Prince had of true merit, the more was
Sobieski's Widow-Queen, enraged against the King. She entertained hopes to have
her eldest Son Prince James, chosen to succeed his Father; and for this very
end, she had married him to a Sister of the Empress's, and of the Queen of
Spain's, that he might have the Emperors Assistance. But all the Assistance in
the World, being of no use in that Country, unless it be supported with liberal
Donatives, and she being narrow and penurious that way, as her Husband was. The
Prince of Conti, would have soon carried it against Prince James, had there
been no other Competitors for it.

The Queen of Poland finding, that she could hardly succeed in her designs for
her eldest Son, endeavored to persuade Monsieur l' Abbee de Polignac, the
French Ambassador, to alter his measures, by offering, that if he would
recommend the Duke de Vendome to be chosen King, instead of the Prince of
Conti, she would unite her friends with his, upon condition, that the Duke,
should marry her so soon as he was chosen. At the same time, she sent two of
her Sons to Paris, under pretense of traveling, but her true designs was, that
they might be Spies at the French Court; and might see, if the King was in such
a Condition to support the Prince of Conti's pretensions, as the Abbee de
Polignac pretended. For it was reported in Poland, and almost in all foreign
Countries, that France was drained both of Men and Money, and that it was so
far from being able for such an undertaking, that it was upon the brink of
ruin, unless a peace was speedily concluded. The Abbee de Polignac gave the
King an account of the Queen of Polands Proposals, but at the same time advised
him not to trust her. And assured him, that she would rather make her faction
join with that of the House of Austria, than with the Prince of Conti's. For
she had so far forgotten, that she was a born Subject of France, that she
thought of nothing so much, as how to embarass all his Majesty's Projects and
Designs; In the mean time, the two Princes, Alexander and Constantine, younger
Brothers of Prince James, came into France And that they might make the French
Court entertain a better Opinion of their Mother, than i^ did from the Account
that the Abbee de Polignac had given of her, they brought along with them, near
three Millions of Gold, and put Eight hundred thousand Crowns of it into the
Townhouse i. e. the Bank of Paris. The Queen of Poland designed by this, to
let the world see she had not renounced France, as the Abbee de Polignac had
insinuated: And that she was resolved to settle her two Sons in that Kingdom,
in case they could not (...) with Honor. But besides, that this (...) seemed
for her interest, she made also (...) strantage by that Gold which she had sent
(...) for as to its fineneis, it was much below the standard of the French
Coin, yet it was taken into the Mint as if it had been the finest Gold in the
world, for the King stood so much in need of Money, that he was content to take
it as it was. When these two Princes were come to Paris, and to the Court, they
were soon convinced by the Luxury they saw in both these Places, that the
reports which had been industriously spread in Poland, were altogether false.
They betook themselves to those diversions that Princes of their Age do usually
entertain themselves with: They went to all the Balls that they heard of, and
there was one thing besel them that deserves we should give an Account of it.

Being at one of these Balls, with Five or Six Gentlemen of their Retinue, who
were Masked as well as themselves, there was there one of the Mousquetaires of
the Kings Household, who had put on the habit of a Counselor, and was therewith
Disguised. He chanced to meet with the young Princes, whom he did not know, and
told them very Gravely, that it was to no purpose, that they should put
themselves to so much trouble in a business wherein they could not succeed and
therefore as their Counsel he would seriously advise them, to agree with their
adversary, otherways, they would be cast in their suit. The two Princes had
received letters from Poland, the day before, wherein they had the bad News,
that the Queen their Mother despaired of succeeding in her designs; and this
News had spread through the Town, so that they never reflected, that this
discourse was said Innocently and without any other design, but that it might
suit with the Garb he had then put on; They Imagined on the other hand, that he
had spoken with relation to the news they had received, and they were so
enraged against him, that they thought it not enough, to call him Villain and
Rogue, and that he was but an insolent Rascal, to behave, himself with so
little respect to them, but they also Bastinad'd him Soundly. The poor
Counselor, finding that he had but a bad cause to plead for himself, began to
cry out, What do this to me, a Mousquetaire, to me? as those of the Company of
Mousquetaires use to do, when they find, that they have to deal with too strong
a party. But the Princes of Poland pulling off their Masks, that it might be
known who they were, there was not so much as one Person that would come to the
assistance of the poor bastinado'd Mousquetaire. He marched off with the blows
he had received, and resolved to complain to the King, from whom he expected
more Justice; No doubt he had reason to demand it, and would certainly have
obtained it, if he had had to do with those of hit own Rank. But the Princes
were beforehand with him in complaining to his Majesty. And he had the hard
fortune to be sent to prison, so soon as he offered to speak of it. By this
treatment, and by what he had before met with, he became sensible, that it was
not for his Interest, to take up a Trade that he had no skill in; and therefore
he resolved never to profess it any more, or if he did, he would never give
counsel but to those who asked it of him. The one of these Princes was much
handsomer than the other. And the King was resolved to give them the blew
Ribban, i. e. to make them Knights of the Holy Ghost; This was to do good for
evil. For the Queen their Mother, never failed to do all that was in her Power,
to traverse his Majesty's Designs. When they gave her Advice of this, she sent
an Express to them, and told them, that she was surprised to find, that they
had so much as listened to such a Proposal; since they could not but know, that
if they accepted of it, they should thereby act directly contrary to the
Interests of their Family; that they knew how a^ she was engaged in the
Interest of the House of Austria; and that they must follow her Example, in
adhering closely to that House. By this it is manifest, that she had altogether
forgotten her Native Country, ever since she was put to it, to keep up the
Splendor of her Childrens Family, by endeavoring to raise her Eldest Son to
Royal Dignity. These Princes having received these Orders from their Mother,
gave the King thanks for the Honor he had offered to do them, but excused
themselves for not accepting of it: They frequented the Balls as formerly, though
they were sometimes engaged in other Business; as particularly with the Marquis
de Coaquin, a Person of Quality in Brittany, who had but a little before,
married one of the Marshal de Noaille's Daughters.

This was no ill Match for him, especially, seeing the Mareshal was so much in
favor. The King had given him the Command of his Army in Catalonia, though he
was not a Man of so much Experience as many others; for except, that he had
commanded some Troops, in the time of Peace; because he was first Captain of
the Life-guards, all the Preferment he had come to, was to be Aid de Camp to
His Majesty. But the King added yet another Honor to this, and made him
Mareshal of France, in the Year 1693. though no body could see, that he had
done any great things to deserve such a Preferment. However, whether it be that
His Majesty knows Peoples Merits better than others do; or if Fortune, which
has favored him in all his Undertakings, designed to approve of his Choice;
this Mareshal gained very soon a considerable Battle: He had formerly taken the
Towns of Roses and Gironne; and then it was said of him, that though he had not
done any thing to deserve the Mareshal's Staff, when he first received it; yet
he had afterward made it appear, that he was worthy of it. His Father who was
one of Cardinal Mazarin's Creatures, had been also a Captain of the
Life-guards; and it was his Fortune to be raised to that Post when he was least
expecting it. It was in the King's Minority, and the Occasion of it was this:
The Queen Mother had become jealous of the Count de Terms; who was provided of
the same Charge, so that he was forced to remove from the King's Person, at a
time when it was his Turn to have waited upon him. When he was dismissed, she
ordered that another Captain of the Guards should take his Batton; but they had
all promised to one another, to do nothing to the Prejudice of their
Fellow-Officer; for which the Count de Charost was banished; and Monsieur de
Chandenier, was yet more unfortunate; for the Queen took his Commission from
him, and gave it to the Marshal de Nouailles's Father, so that he was never
able to recover it, though he lived a long time after. It was not for want of
Time, that he could not succeed; nor was it for want of Conjunctures, that
seemed favorable enough for him, for he was of the same Family, that Madam de
Morte^pan was of: And since he was not more guilty than the Count de Charost,
who was soon recalled from his Banishment, and made Duke and Peer of France; it
may be said, that there is nothing in this World, but good or bad Fortune: For
this Man was so far from being in a worse condition because of his
Disobedience; that he raised his Fortune to such a degree, that he could not
desire to raise it higher; while the unfortunate Marquis de Chandinier, was
quite undone with his Fall.

Though it be to the only late Duke de Nouailles, that his Family owes the
present Greatness, to which it has arrived; yet it must be confessed, that it
is an ancient and honorable Family. I know that the present Madame de
Bouillon, when she was striving for the Door with the Duchess de Nouailles,
spoke of her and her Family with so much Disdain, that if her Word could have
been taken for it, the Family of Nouailles should have been thought a very
despicable one: I know also, that she produced some old Papers, by which it was
found, that one Anthony de Nouailles, had been Steward of the House, to the
Viscount de Turenne; but as Stewards of the House at that time, were usually
Gentlemen, and as there are younger Brothers of good Families, who are forced
to condescend to meaner things than he did; so that One Instance, ought not to
give us any mean Opinion of that Family, which is certainly very noble and very
ancient. And it cannot to be said, that the Marquis de Coaquin matched below
his Quality; when he married a Daughter of it, though it be true, that his
Family has sometimes made greater Alliances: For not to go far back, his Mother
was Rohan Chabot, and his Grandmother Orleans Longueville. He had a great
Estate in Brittany, which his Mother resigned in his favor, as she did almost
every thing she could claim by her Marriage-Contract, and for her Dowry. For
this is a Lady of extraordinary Virtue, and so soon as she had put her Affairs
in order, she resolved to retire into a Convent, and reserved nothing to
herself, but 10000 Livres per Ann. which was by very much less than what she
had a Right to, if she had exacted so much as she might have done. Her Son was
but 18 Years old, when he married Mademoiselle de Nouailles, but he was as tall
a Man as he could expect to be at 25; and his Mother importuned him to take a
Wife, because he was the only Child his Father had left. This Lady had not been
very happy in her Marriage, though she was of an agreeable Complexion, and of a
very good Air, yet she had not so much Beauty as to please her Husband; and
since she knew by her own Experience, what Disgusts Husbands use to take at
their Wives, when they are not altogether agreeable; she ought at least to have
chosen an handsome Lady for her Son, that he might not fall into the same
Immoralities, that her Husband had done. But this was what she had thought
least of, and she had soon reason to repent of it. For upon the Morrow after
the Marriage, when some of her Sons Friends came to pay him their Compliments,
upon that Occasion; he could not forbear telling them, that they needed not
give themselves that trouble; that his Mother had chosen a Dwarf for him,
instead of a Wife: That it seemed she who was a devout Lady, had made this
Choice, because the Duke de Nouailles was devout also. But for his part, he
wished his Wife more so than either of them; that he might not be troubled with
lying with her: And that he was resolved henceforth to treat her as a Relic;
that is, that he should never come near her, but upon Holy Days. From that day
he gave such Proofs of his want of Affection to her, that all the Family took
notice of it: They all consulted, what was fit to be done in such a Case; that
Monsieur de Coaquin, might not engage himself in those lewd Cour^es, that
Husbands use to betake themselves to, when they come to despise their Wives.
The Archbishop of Paris, who is the Mareshal's Brother, was called among the
first, to give Advice in this matter: And they all agreed, that because the new
married Lady was pale as Death, which made her the more disagreeable to her
Husband, it was therefore necessary to find out some Expedient, to give her a
better Color, they had recourse to Painting, which is highly esteemed among
the Ladies, who by daubing their Faces with white and red, make themselves look
to be of as fine Complexions as they plea^e. But many of the more scrupulous
sort of People, were surprised, when they heard, that so good a Man as this
Prelate, and so devout a Lady as the Dowager of Nouailles, had advised such a
thing as that. But though the Archbishop of Paris, and the Duchess de
Nouailles, did not only cause this Lady's Face to be painted with white and
red, but also caused Shoes to be made for her, with Heels that were a Quarter
of an Ell high, that she might thereby appear so much the (...); yet she was as
unlovely in the Eyes of her Husband, as she had been before; nay, he thought
her the more ugly, upon this very account; insomuch that instead of conversing
with her, he entreated his Friends, who spoke to him sometimes of her and of
his Father in Law, that if they would oblige him, they would not so much as
speak either ill or good of them. In the mean time, he endeavored to comfort
himself, as well as he could with good cheer, and in the Company of some
Ladies, whom he visited, not upon the account of any familiar converse, but
that he delighted to vex them, and they were never more out of humor, than
when they saw him come into their Company, so that they would gladly have gone
out at the Window, to shun any converse with him, if they could have done it.

The Mareshal de Nouailles who has had more than twenty Children by his Lady,
though she be not to this time much above forty years, had as yet another
daughter to marry, there was a great difference between her and Madam de
Coaquin. The one was as agreeable, as the other was deformed; which made one
say to the Marquis de Coaquin, that the Mareshal had given him Leah, but had
kept Rachel. There was abundance of young Gentlemen who were Suitors to this
new Rachel, both because her Father was much in favor at Court; and because
she herself was so great a Beauty: The Count d' Estrees (who came to be happier
than the rest; for it was he that married her;) was of the number of those who
made their Addresses to her. His Ambition carried him to this, as much as any
thing else. He considered, that though he was of a Family, which is in the
Possession of more Honors, in the Person of his Father and his two Uncles,
than any other Family is, yet that was nothing to him, unless he could attain
to the like Honors: For though his Fathers elder Brother was Duke and Peer of
France, and that his Son had succeeded to him in the same Honors, and though
his Father was Mareshal of France, and his Uncle a Cardinal, yet he himself had
no Place or Rank at Court, and was only considered there, as a Person of
Quality, as Ten Thousand others are. So that he saw nothing that could satisfy
his Ambition, unless he went aboard of the Fleet, where he would be obliged to
signalize himself, because he had the Survivance of the Office of Vice Admiral,
which his Father was in Possession of: His Uncle the Cardinal, who had a
greater Kindness for him, that for the Duke d' Estrees, though he was his
Nephew as well as he, and by his elder Brother too, advised him to this
Marriage; and he used his utmost Endeavors to bring it about, as the only
means whereby he might be made a Duke, as his Cousin was. And he was so earnest
in this Affair that he sent Word to the Duke de Nouailles, tha^ if he could
presume so much upon his favor, a^ to employ him to procure a Dukes Patent to
his Nephew, he should marry his Daughter without one Farthing of Portion: And
he promised also to make him his Heir, and to make the Inheritance as good as
he could. The Duke de Nouailles, who had not much Money to give with his
Daughter and who had given no great Portion with Madame de Ceaquin, though he
had made a show of contracting for (...) Franks, but it was in Cats are Rats,
(...) to (...) that is, he had given him a Regiment, and some other lesser
Preserments; the Duke I say, was not so rich, but that he had (...) to be (...)
and sparing of his Money; and he was well (...) with the Proposal, but he was
(...) to be ^ond of it. And (...) to him (...) in the (...), had better (...)
to that Honor, upon the a^ (...) Fathers great Services (...) had with the
King; but (...) to marry his Daughter, (...) he had to (...) was true, he had
more (...) others, to carry on such (...) he was Captain of the (...) him an
easy Access to the King's Person; but that was not enough for a matter o^ so
great Importance, and therefore he ought no to trust to it so much, but that
besides marrying his Daughter, he should take all the same measures he would
do, if he were to marry another: But it was very difficult for the Count d'
Estrees, to take those measures; because the Mareshal would not give him so
much Money, as was necessary to put his Affairs in a good Condition. For want
of this, they resolved upon all hands to deal with one Madame de Thoist, a rich
Lady; she was the Widow of a Maiere de Comptes, and she had lent a considerable
Sum to the Cardinal d' Estrees, and was not paid of it: And besides, she was a
Friend of the Duke and Duchess de Nouailles; and because she had no Children,
they told her so often, that she ought to adopt Mademoiselle de Nouailles, for
her Daughter, that though they could not prevail with her to leave her all her
Estate, yet they persuaded her to do something for her. And she offered at
last, to give her what the Cardinal d' Estrees owed her. But because they would
have more, the matter is put off to this time; for she will not give away all
her Estate in her own Lifetime; yet she promises, that besides the Sum which
the Cardinal owes her, which she is willing to part with presently, she shall
also consider this young Lady in her Will; so that she shall be sure of
something more at her Death. That which sell out between the Princes of Poland
and the Marquis de Coaquin, was not at all for his Advantage; if we may believe
what is commonly reported. In the mean time, they took their Journey to return
into their own Country; after they had been magnificently regaled, by many
Persons that belonged to the Court. Monsieur de Langlee, who is none of the
least considerable of them, if we consider nothing but his expensive way of
living, was the first who gave them a splendid Entertainment; and acquitted
himself very handsomely in it. He is now in possession of being the first who
regales Strangers of great Quality upon their arrival: Which made the King say,
some time ago, i e. before the arrival of the two Princes, that Monsieur
Langlee seemed to be made for no other end, but to entertain all the strangers
that came to Court. But he entertains Persons of Quality, who are of the French
Nation, as Magnificently, as he does strangers. There is not a Man about the
Court that regales our Princes and Princesses so often, as he does, and he has
got into a Custom, of providing a Collation for the Dauphin, as often as he
comes to the Opera. It is but of late that he was in a condition to acquit
himself well in such an undertaking, for though his Father who was once but a
poor man, and of mean extract, made up some small estate to him, yet it was far
from being sufficient for such costly Entertainments. He has raised his Estate
by gaming; which has put him in a condition to build so many fine Houses, and
by which, he has so great yearly Revenues. And considering the first years of
his gaming, and now that he is become rich, it may be said of him, what was
once said to the President Bellievre by one that designed to flatter him. I
confess that the beginning of this Discourse would be insipid, but that it is
agreeable to the first beginnings of his fortune, and that the last part of it
would be impertinent, but that it suits with his present Circumstances.

This President, who was the chief Man in the Parliament of Paris, had always
some Debate with Cardinal Mazarin, whom he did not much Esteem, and it may be,
the Cardinal had as little Esteem for him, and perhaps he was in the right too.
However, the Man I just now spoke of, knowing, what Opinion this Chief
President had of his Eminence; said to him once, whilst they were speaking of
him, that no great Account was to be made of such Men, whose fortunes were
volatile, and what show soever they made, yet they were but like glaring
meteors, which disappeared in a short time. But on the other hand, he said that
the Presidents fortune was built upon a rock, and that he must be a Man of very
little sense, who did not see a great difference, between the one and the
other. We may easily perceive, that the Man who spoke so, was best acquainted
with old customs, since he magnified a chief President so much, and undervalued
a chief Minister. And at most it is only during a Kings minority, that this way
of reasoning will hold good. But now a days, he should be accounted a Madman,
or one that had returned from the other world, that would speak at such a rate.
In a word, if Monsieur de Langlees fortune, might have been compared to a
Meteor, while his high spending was ^ounded only upon what he gained at game,
yet he has now settled it upon so many fair Buildings, in Paris and in the
Country, that we may say, what the Man said to the President, that he had now
founded it upon a Rock. Madame la Marquise de Bethunes, who is the Queen of
Polands Sister, gave also a Magnificent Entertainment to the two Princes her
Nephews. There were many Persons of Quality, of both Sexes, at this feast, and
it ended with a splendid Ball. Yet this Marchioness is not at all rich, nay
she is very poor to be sister of a Queen; yet it was her own fault, that she had
not a better estate. For when her husband was Ambassador in Poland, the Queen
her Sister was resolved to make her rich; But she became jealous, that the
Queen was in love with her husband, and that it was for his sake, that she made
so kind Offers. Her jealousy made her commit a thousand follies, which so
displeased that Court, that her Husband dying there, all that she brought to
France from that Country, was a gift of a hundred thousand Crowns, which the
Late King of Poland gave her, upon the Estate of the Late Duke de Longueville.

This Monarch had lent this Money, while he was but great Mareshal of Poland,
and when the Duke de Longueville was aspiring to that Crown. But his Sister the
Duchess de Nemours refused to pay it, as well as all the other sums, which he
had borrowed at that time, that he might attain to Royal dignity. She
pretended, that her brother was under age, when he borrowed these sums, and
therefore, she was not obliged to pay them. This gave occasion to a Law suit,
before the Council, and it appeared intricate and doubtful. For the Law forbids
to lend Money to Minors; unless it be manifestly for their advantage, and
therefore. Sobiesky ought to lose his Money; because the Duke was not of age
when he borrowed it. But the Marchioness de Bethunes, as well as the Dukes
other Creditors, answered to this, that what might be considered in the case of
ordinary Loans, ought not to be considered in such an extraordinary case as
this was, when the borrower of the Money, designed to employ it for obtaining a
Crown; and that this had been always the Opinion of the Prince of Condee, who
while he was alive, was still desirous that Monsieur l' Abbee d' Orleans, who
was Brother and heir to the deceased Duke de Longueville, should pay punctually
the full interest, of all the Money that had been Borrowed upon that Account
That it was he, who took care of all the Affairs of the Family of Longueville,
because L' Abbe d' Orleans, who was the Duke's elder Brother was but a weak
Man, and unfit for Business. That, their Sister the Duchess de Nemours dared
not to have spoken any thing against the payment of those debts, so long as her
Brother was alive. But now that he was dead, and that the Prince of Condee, who
had always supported the Claim of the Creditors, was dead also; she who loved
Cavils and litigious debates, had brought them to the Trouble and Expense of a
Law Suit. It was first debated before the Parliament of Paris, but at last it
was brought before the Kings Council. Either because the affair was of
importance, or that it ought in course of Law to have been carried thither. And
it was truly the Kings Interest to take cognizance of it himself, especially at
such a Juncture as that was, for it was his concern to gain the Polanders to
the Prince of Conti's Interest, and not to give them cause to complain, that
they were cheated by the Duke de Longueville, who had borrowed Money of
Sobiesky, and of several other Persons of Quality among them. Therefore the
King Ordered the Marquis de Barbesieux to consider the case, and to report it
fully in his Presence. For the Secretaries of his Majesty's Commands, of which
this Marquis is one, are also Counselors of state, and have the same
Commissions, so that the King may Charge them with all sorts of business, as he
can do any of the rest of that number. But after some days, his Majesty
considered, that so young a man as the Marquis de Barbesieux, was scarcely
capable of an affair of such importance; and that an old and experienced
Counselor of state, would be much fitter for it. He therefore took it out of
the Marquis's hands, and Committed it to Monsieur de Ribere. But Madame de
Nemours's Council had found so many shifts, that this has been put off from
time to time, and is not as yet determined. Yet it is believed that she will be
cast in it, as she was in another Law-^uit, which she had against the Prince of
Conti, before the Requetes du Palais. This case was of yet greater importance
than the former; and there were some Circumstances in it, that were very
considerable, and therefore I shall give a full Account of it.

Monsieur l' Abbe d' Orleans, whom I just now mentioned, having renounced his
right of Primogeniture, in favor of the Comte de St. Paul his younger Brother,
who thereafter took the Title of Duke de Longueville, he was in a short time
restored to all his rights, by the Death of that Prince, who like a fool, was
the Occasion of his own Death, as he was passing the Rhine. Monsieur l Abbee
was willing to have made over the whole Estate to his Uncle the Prince of
Condee; but this Prince, who enjoyed eighteen hundred thousand Livres of yearly
revenue, thought, that he had already more than was sufficient to make him
happy, if Riches alone can make us so; and therefore he advised him to give it
to his Mother, Madame de Longueville, who had more need of it than he. The
Abbee was a man that did every thing he was advised to, especially if the
Advice came from a Person of Authority, like the Prince de Condee: so that he
agreed, that those who managed his affairs, should draw up his will, and that
he should sign it. It was done as the Prince of Condee was pleased to order it,
and the Abbee altered not so much as one word in it. By this will he gave over
the Principality of Neufchatel in Suitzerland with some other possessions, to
his Mother the Duchess de Longueville during her Life. But after her Death the
Prince of Condee had Right to them by the same will, if no new will should be
made. But he who had already refused them, was resolved not to make any
advantage of the Abbees will for the future, and therefore, he caused his right
to be made over to the Prince of Conti, after the Death of the Duchess. The
Prince of Conti, had need of a good Estate, for his Fathers Marriage was
disadvantageous for his Fortune, as well as for his Honor. He had resigned the
Abbacy of St. Denis, with many other good benefices, for the sake of a Niece of
Cardinal Mazarins, who was truly a Virtuous Lady, but her Uncle gave her
nothing in Marriage, though he had so pillaged France, that he might have given
her a great Estate, without pinching himself in the least. Yet he had promised
him Mountains of Gold, as he always used to do, when he had a design to cozen
any body, but having dealt by her and her Husband as he usually did by all
those, with whom he had any business, though he might at least have put some
difference between him and others, both upon the Account of his Quality, and
because his Niece was Married to him. This Prince died very poor for a Person
of his Rank. However The Duchess de Nemours being informed of the Will, which
her Brother had made, importuned him so, as that she prevailed with him after
the Prince of Condees Death, to make it void; and to make another will, by
which he left the whole Inheritance to her. Now this Abbee dying soon after,
and the Prince of Conti pretending, that the will which had been made in his
favor, ought to prevail against this Last will, the Requetes du Palais were
the proper Judges, in the first point of the controversy. The Reasons of his
plea, were, that Monsieur l' Abbee d' Orleans was non Compos when he made the
Last will, so that it ought to be considered as if such a thing had never been
done. If Madame de Nemours had been well advised, she would have said the same
of him when he made his first will, and she would have had no difficulty in
proving it; so that the first being no better than the second, she should have
succeeded by law, to the whole Estate; without any sentence in her favor,
because she was his sister. But her Council it seems was as Visionary, as those
who live beyond the Alps, who plead for the Popes Infallibility. They
maintained, that the Testator was sound in his Judgment, when he made the
second will, whereby the first was made void. And they had no other way to
prove this, but by the Popes Infallibility, who had put him into Priests
orders, at the very time, that he made this second will. And they alleged,
that it could not be supposed, that the Pope would have ordained him Priest, if
he had not been in his right wits. And they thought this so good a Reason, that
they could not conceive, how it could have been answered. So that they
neglected all other reasons, and adhered only to this one, to support their
Cause. The Prince of Conti desired, he might be allowed to prove, that the
Abbee was nonCompos when he made his last Will, which he offered to do by
Evidences that could not be excepted against. He was allowed to prove it, and
he produced his Evidences, upon whose Deposition the whole Cause depended. The
Question was, if Monsieur l' Abbee d'Orleans was sound in his Judgment, when he
made his second Will. But there was no great diffi^ulty to resolve this
Question, for there were Evidences that told things of him, that could not have
been said of any Man, but one that was fit for a Bedlam. And among other things
they deposed, that when he was going to say Mass, the first time after he was
ordained Priest; he stopped when he came near to the Rails, which usually
separates the Sanctuary and the Altar from the Neve of the Church, and there he
tried if he could jump over the Rails, with his Feet close together. They
deposed al^^, that when he found he was not able to do it, he came back about
20 Pac^^, that he might give himself more Force by running; and in this mann^^
(...) the Holy Sacrifice unto God Almighty; and (...) g^ve a Thousand other
Proofs of his being a Fool, an Account of which would be too tedious. Madam de
Nemour's Council were aston shed, when they heard the Evidences depose such
things as these, and they wished then, that they had not relied so much upon
the Popes Infallibility, and that they had taken better measures, but it was
now too late. The Judges proceeded to pronounce a Sentence, by which that
Prince, the Abbee, was declared to have been non compos, when he made his
second Will.

Although the City of Paris, and all the Court were overjoyed, when they heard
that the Prince of Conti, whom they loved so dearly had gained his Cause; yet
Madame de Nemours appealed to the Grand Chamber, where she is still prosecuting
it; but no body doubts, but that the Sentence which was pronounced, will be
confirmed by a Decree. Some time before this Sentence was pronounced, Madame de
Nemours acted her part very dexterously, and like a Lady of good Conduct: She
knew, that she had a strong Party to deal with, in her Lawsuit; and therefore,
as her Brother's Heiress, she had given the Principality of Neufchatel to the
Chevalier de Soissons, a Bastard Son of the late Count de Soissons, who was a
Prince of the Blood, and her Uncle: For she was the Daughter of one of his
Sisters; who was married to the Duke de Longueville her Father, and after whose
Death, he married the Prince of Condee's Sister. Now, when she gave this
Principality to this Chevalier, she had obliged him to marry the Marshal de
Luxenbourg's Daughter; hoping that the need the Kingdom had of the Services of
so great a Captain, in so formidable a War, as it had to maintain against so
many Enemies, would give her an Interest with the King, sufficient to balance
the Prince of Conti's. But this Marshal died to his Daughter's great Loss,
before that the Sentence which I have given an account of, was pronounced; So
that the Hopes vanished, which Madame de Nemours had comforted herself with,
when she contrived that Marriage. Though it must be confessed, she took very
good measures to bring about her Designs. But there was something in it, that
was still worse for the Chevalier de Soissons; for he had resigned a good
Abbacy that he might marry a Lady, who was neither rich nor handsome, and he
had also taken the Title of Prince of Neuf^hatel, when he was upon the point of
losing the Principality.

Though the gaining of this Cause, was for the Prince of Conti's Advantage, yet
it was nothing in comparison of the Crown of Poland; which perhaps the King had
obliged him to think of, more than he would have done, had he followed his own
Inclinations: For he was become passionately in love with a Lady of great
Quality; Insomuch, that though a Crown be so considerable, as that it deserves to
be preferred to all other things; yet he seemed not to to be too much concerned
with it, lest he should have been obliged to quit his Mistress. But it was
quite otherwise with Madame the Princess of Conti; the thing in the World she
wished most was, that her Husband might be a King: Ambition, which is natural
to Persons of her Rank and Quality, made her passionately desirous of this; but
besides, she hoped, that the Crown of Poland would take off her Husband, from
the Affection he had for the other Lady; which yet she durst not complain of,
for fear of displeasing him, and for some other Reasons that must not be
published. However, this Design for the Crown of Poland, met with great
Opposition, and as the House of Austria, was mindful of its own Concerns in the
present Juncture of the Affairs of Europe, that it might by all means procure
that Crown to one, who would closely adhere to its Interests. So the Prince of
Conti, was not the only Person, that was in Competition for it, with Prince
James. Prince Lewis of Baden, General of the Imperial Forces, and whose Merits
were not much short of his own, was also one of the Competitors; and King
William seemed to favor his Pretentions against Prince James; but this was
only a sort of Phantome, which was brought forth upon the Theater, to frighten
the Actors, while his Imperial Majesty had resolved underhand in his
Cabinet-council, to cause the Elector of Saxony to be chosen, who for some
Years past, had been closely in his Interests, and commanded his Forces in
Hungary, This Elector was a man of true Courage, as well as the Prince of Conti
and Prince Lewis of Baden; so that the Polanders could not refuse him upon that
Score: For they are People, who will not have a King, but one that is capable
both by Courage and Conduct, to head their Armies in Person, when it comes to
fighting. But the great difficulty that they had to remove was, that he was a
Lutheran; and this seemed a very great one, because among the many Laws, that
the Polanders have made, for the Government of their Kingdom, they have
established this, for an unalterable one; that no Man shall be chosen King of
Poland, but he who is of the Roman Communion. And therefore, when the Emperor
communicated his Designs to the Elector of Saxony, of advancing him to the
Throne of that Kingdom; he insinuated to him at the same time, that there was a
necessity for him to change his Religion: At last, whether it was that he had
but little Religion, as ordinarily the Great Men of the World have but a small
share of it, or if it may be imputed to any other cause, I do not know; but he
not only agreed to do what was desired of him, but he also abjured it
privately, before the Bishop of Javarin; yet he did not this, till he saw, that
there was a Party in Poland formed for him, which was capable to put the Crown
on his Head: The Designs of this Party were kept so secret, that Monsieur L'
Abbee de Polignac, had not the least notice of them, but continued to believe,
that he had no body to grapple with, but Prince James, whom he was not much
afraid of, because of his disobliging Conduct: And the People were generally of
Opinion, that he would follow his Example in too many things. So that Monsieur
L' Abbee wrote to the French Court, that he hoped in a short time to bring the
whole matter to an happy Issue. The Bishop of Cujavia, whom the whole House of
Austria did chiefly rely on, for making its Designs effectual; being afraid
that he should not be successful, because all the People had so great an Esteem
for the Prince of Conti, and especially the Ladies, who all desired him for
their King; thought it best to deal craftily in this matter, and to manage it
to the best advantage he could for himself, when he found that he was at the
Head of a Faction, that at least might make the French Ambassador jealous of
him, though it was not as yet so strong as his own. He caused it to be told him
underhand, that if he desired that he might not cross his Designs, it was in
his Power to hinder him from doing it. That he knew he aspired to be a
Cardinal, and that he considered, that the only way how he could attain to that
Dignity, was by his being successful in his Negotiations for the Prince of
Conti But if he would renounce all Pretentions in his favor, he would join
Interests and unite Factions with him, by which means the Crown of Poland,
would be infallibly secured to that Prince. No good Subject would have refused
what this Bishop desired, though perhaps no Man would have yielded to it, but
with some Reluctance. But Monfieur L'Abbee scorned to hearken to such a
Proposal, and did not so much as communicate it to the French Court, but
pursued his former Designs; while the Bishop strengthened his Faction, by
bringing over into it, the Party that had been for Prince James; for his Mother
the Queen of Poland, was so enraged against the French, because they had
traversed all her Designs for her Son; that she had rather the Polanders should
choose any other Man than the Prince of Conti; so little did she remember the
Place of her Birth, or that the King of France had been so instrumental as he
was in the Election of the late King her Husband. Yet among all the Factions
that were among the Palatinates, there was one thing in which they all agreed,
that what Person soever they should choose for King, he should purchase their
Suffrages with good round Sums of Money; so that the 200000 Crowns, which the
Prince of Conti had sent into that Country, was but as a drop of Oil in a great
Fire; but the King supplied his Indigence, and sent thither at one time and
another 4000000 of Crowns. The Elector of Saxony borrowed Money with both
Hands, from several Princes; that he might satisfy the covetous Desires of the
Polanders; and King William lent him great Sums as well as the Elector of
Brandenburg: In the mean while, this Prince made some of his Troops march
toward the Confines of the Duke of Saxony's Dominions, that lie nearest to
Poland; as if there had been some Difference between them, and the Elector of
Saxony took Occasion from that to carry his own Troops out of Hungary, under
pretense to defend his Dominions against the Duke of Brandenburg. But all this
marching of Troops on both sides, was only that they might join their Forces
together in case of need; that is, in case there should be a double Election,
as there was great appearance of it; that so the Duke of Saxony, might make
good his Election by Force of Arms.

While these things were doing, the Prince of Conti diverted himself the best
way he could, as if he had not in the least been concerned in any Business of
Importance. He spoke of buying a House at Berci, as the Dukes de Chaulnes and
de Gesvres had done; for each of them had one in that Town: The Duke d'Elbeuf
who has that in common with many other Persons of Quality, that he does not
always speak truth hearing him speak of a particular House, that belonged to
one of the Farmers of the King's Revenues, whose Name was -- with which he said
he was very well pleased; offered immediately to deal effectually with the
Landlord, and that the Prince should have a good Bargain on it: And that he
might believe, that he could persuade the Farmer to do any thing, he told the
Prince, that if he pleased to sup in that House to morrow night, he would
oblige the Master of the House to provide a Supper for him, and then he should
have an Opportunity to see the whole Contrivance, and all the Conveniences of
the House. The Prince of Conti was well pleased with the Proposal; and told him
that he was engaged to be with the Duchess de Bouillon at that time; but he
would rather disengage himself than miss such an Opportunity: So they made an
Appointment at that House, to morrow in the Evening. But while the Prince of
Conti was at Dinner, the Duke d'Elbeuf sent to tell him, that the Appointment
could not be kept, because the Landlord, who was not accustomed to entertain
Princes of the Blood in his House, was con^ounded with the Thoughts of it: as
for himself, he was resolved to take the Advantage of that Disappointment, and
that if the Prince was pleased to put off the Appointment till to morrow, he
would do himself the honor to entertain him at dinner in the same House, with
Seven or Eight of his Friends; such as he should choose. The Prince of Conti
said to the Man who brought him this Message, that he thanked the Duke d'Elbeuf
for it, and that he accepted of it, and would be timely at the House to morrow,
that he might have time to take a full View of it and consider it. He invited
the Marquis de Coastin, the President de Mesmes, Monsieur Caumartin, and some
other Persons of Quality, to go along with him; but on the Morrow's morning
came another from the Duke to make an Apology, that he could not wait upon him
as he had promised, because of some Business of Importance, that had
unexpectedly fallen out, and which he was obliged to look after. But there was
not so much as one Word of all this true: He did not so much as know the Man to
whom the House belonged; he had not given him any Notice of the Appointment,
which the Prince and he had made to sup at his House, nor had he any design
himself, to entertain him at dinner in the same House; so that there were as
many Lies as Words, in all that he had said to him upon that Head. The Prince
of Conti made a Jest of all this, with his Friends, without troubling himself
any more about it. There was one Mr. Chapelle, who had been formerly one of the
Prince's Domestics, but at this time a Farmer of the Revenues, hearing one
speak of it to Mr. Caumartin; went to his old Master and told him, that though
he was far below the Duke d'Elbeuf's Quality, yet he should acquit himself
better of his Promise than he had done, in giving him an Entertainment at that
very House, provided the Prince would not take it amiss, that he had presumed
to invite him to it. The Prince answered, that he was well satisfied with it,
and made a new Appointment with his Friends, to be there to morrow in the
Evening, and Mr. Chapelle regaled him splendidly. There were at this
Entertainment many Persons of Quality, both of Civil and Military Employments;
and among the rest there were present those, whom the Prince had invited, when
he was to have supped there upon the Duke d'Elbeuf's Invitation. They
discoursed about a great many things; and as it was impossible they could
forget the Duke, so they took occasion to speak of a Visit, that his Mistress
had lately paid to the Archbishop of Paris; because he had made an Ordinance,
wherein this Lady found herself concerned. There were many Persons who had
taken advantage of his Predecessors easy Temper, and had obtained leave of him
to have Chapels in their own Houses; and under pretense of hearing Mass in
these private Chapels, they came so seldom to Church, that they scarcely heard
Mass there, at the Four great Festivals of the Year. Now the Archbishop thought
it necessary to remedy this Custom, and for that end he suppressed all those
Licenses, that his Predecessors had granted; and ordained, that all those who
desired to have the Benefit of them for the time to come, should appear before
him, that he might examine the reasons upon which the Licenses had been
granted. The Dukes Mistress had got one of these Licenses, and she paid a visit
to the Archbishop, and entreated him to confirm what his predecessor had done.
But this Prelat, having heard of her Lewdness and Licentious way of Living,
which was so public, that even her son had made no scruple sometime before to
say to the King, when he asked him, if he would be ready in a short time, to go
to the Army; that he could not be so soon in a readiness to go thither, because
his Mother had been more concerned to get ready the Duke d'Elbeufs Equipage,
than his. This Prelat I say, who knew all this, and a Thousand other ill things
of her; answered her coldly, that those who would wo^ship God acceptably, must
first know him, and fear him, and that those who did know him and fear him,
would always think their pains well bestowed, when they went to Church where
the rest of his s^rvants use to serve and worship him; and without saving any
more to her, he refused to Grant her requests. The Prince of Conti, and all the
Company Commended the Archbishop, for having spoken to her after this manner,
for tho it was but a word or two that he had said; yet it was Enough, to make
her reflect of her own ill Conduct. The most part of them said also, that the
Duke d'Elbeuf was much in the wrong, to deal so unkindly as he did, by his own
Lady, for the sake of an old antiquated Whore, who had the Impudence sometimes
to boast of the fineness of her Complexion, when it was well enough known, that
it was Entirely owing to painting; But there were some, who undertook to
justify the Duke, though they could not justify this Lady his Mistress. They
pleaded in his behalf, that since he had nothing to Live by, or to support his
Character, except his Government, he could not be much blamed, for having a
Kindness for a Lady, that rewarded him so Liberally as she did; That she was
frequently giving him good sums, and therefore he dispensed with her age. That
there were several others who would do the same thing, if they were in his
circumstances: and in a word it was an ordinary thing among the young Beaus of
the Court.

This was not the only Lady whom they had put on the foot of paying them well.
In the mean time, it had been always the fate of King Charles the 2d. who had
been mightily in love with this Lady, to have Mistresses who fought only to
enrich themselves at his expense, and with his spoils to enrich others before
his face. Another Duchess, whom this Prince had Loved, before this, had used
him the very same way as this did, and the Chevalier de Chalillon, who is known
at present in the world, under the name of Marquis, had continued to render her
good service as long as she had wherewithal to recompense him; and she thought
she employed her Money very well, because he was handsome and very well shaped,
and besides, he was always ready when she had a Mind for him. For she was a
woman that gave no quarter to her Lovers, and paid them only in proportion to
their services. She had learned from a Lady that was her friend, and who had
Learned it herself from an old Countess de Vertus, that things ought to be done
in this manner, and at least that this was the practice of the old Countess her
self, who passed amongst the women of her time for the Cunningest that was
among them all. The world indeed had accused her of weakness of judgment, but
they had done her the greatest injustice that can be done to a Woman; since so
far from being a Fool as was Pretended, she had made it appear by one of the
Principal Actions of her Life, that never any Lady had better understanding:
for being grown old, and yet the prick of the flesh continuing to torment her,
she took the Method that any honest Woman ought to take, which was, to find out
a Husband for herself, tho she was quite decrepid. In the mean time, knowing by
the experience that she had of the world, that she might come to be deceived,
unless she took all the precaution that prudence could possibly suggest, she
did two things which show the greatness of her Judgment. One was, to cast her
Eyes on a Man whose figure promised fairly; The other was, to make a bargain
with him, to oblige him to his good behavior. This Man was the Chevalier de la
Port, who after the same manner as the Chevalier de Chatillon is now from
Chevalier come to be a Comte. He was of a good Family, and tho he was not come
of the Dukes of Br^tagne, as her first Husband was, yet she could put him in
his place, without being accus^d of making a mean Alliance. So being satisfied
both of his Person and of his Birth, the Question was only how to secure
herself against the disgusts, which a Husband usually takes, especially when
interest has obliged him to take the burden of an old Carcass, which he never
marries but in the view and hope of being quickly rid of it. A Woman of so much
knowledge and Experience was not easily to be deceived, and behold too, what
Measures she took to avoid it. After she had expressed the tender Sentiments
she had for him, by which he reckoned himself extremely Honored, because he had
nothing, and she was very Rich, then she showed him a strong box, in which
there was Fifty Thousand Crowns of ready Money. Having opened it too, that he
might be the more fully assured of what was in it, and having let him look on
it as long as was enough to make him in love with it, she told him, that here
was, what she intended to give him, on Condition that when he was her Husband
he should use her kindly. The Chevalier de la Port, who knew as well as any
Man alive, how to make Promises; swore to her, Mountains and wonders, to
persuade her, that if ever she did him that favor, he had rather dye a
Thousand Deaths, than ever to be guilty of Ingratitude. It seems he thought she
would trust to his Swearing. But the Countess retaining still her former
sentiments, told him, that though she believed him a Man of Honor and in that
Quality that he would keep his word to her, nevertheless that she would take
such Precautions with him, that she should have no reason ever to repent of;
that a Husband very often laughed at the Promises which he made to his Wife;
that she had no Mind to be disappointed, and therefore had resolved to tell him
once for all, that if he would have her 50 Thousand Crowns, he must merit them
by using her obligingly; that the best thing a Husband can do to a Wife is to
caress her frequently; that on her part she promised to give him ten Louis
d'ors for every time he caressed her, and as often and as far as he erred his
performances, he might reckon to be paid accordingly. At this rate, if he
caressed her but three times a Night, there was thirty Louis d'ors sure for him
in the Morning, but if he pushed his valor further, he might quickly make the
strong Box pass from her Closet into his own. This clause and Condition was not
very agreeable to the Chevalier, tho on other occasions he had been often at
work, without being so well Rewarded. But having a Passion for this Money, he
consented to gain it with the sweat of his Brow. The Lady married him
privately, and keeping her word to him every Morning in Proportion to his
services, he had quickly emptied the strong box, if the Lady's Children had not
perceived the intrigue betwixt them. They spoke to her of it, as a thing that
made the world talk strangely of her conduct, and the Lady, finding herself
straightened in this point, told them at last, that they were unjust to suspect
her of Lewdness, that she did nothing but what was Lawful for her to do, that
she was Married to the Chevalier, and that she would lie with him as often as
ever she pleased. Her Children knowing that she had ready Money, and that this
was the high way to squander it, endeavored to get the Marrige annulled, on
pretext, that her great Age, for she was at least Seventy and two, had made her
Incapable to know what she was doing. The Affair being brought before the
Judges, the Advocates pleaded on both sides; these for the Children, alleged
strongly what they had been told, that the Lady was moap'd and silly, and that
the Chevalier had surpised and imposed on her Weakness; but the Advocates on
the other side, having utterly run down this Pretext, by producing the Bargain
which she had made with the Chevalier, and which she had given him fairly in
Writing; the Children had certainly lost their Cause, but the Judges would not
suffer the Chevalier, whose Desire to empty the strong Box, had brought him
almost on his last Legs already, to go on to kill himself.

They considered likewise, that the Lady by this means, would ruin her
Children; for if this Coffer were once emptied, she would sell all that she
had, rather than fail to fill it again, in order to entertain the good
Services, which the Chevalier had not failed to perform very constantly. So the
Marriage was annulled by Decree of Parliament, who nevertheless appointed the
Chevalier to have 20000 Crowns, for the Reward of his Labor.

The King of England's Mistresses used him much after the same manner, and made
him pay as dear for his Pleasures, as this old Lady paid to the Chevalier;
especially she to whom this little History was told, and whom the Marquis de
Chatillon did so drain of her Acquisitions, that she is now as poor and
miserable as once she was opulent. As for the other, whom the Duke d'Elbeuf
frequented, she managed it a little better, though in the mean time she stuck
at no Expense or Reward, when he threatened to leave her, and go and push his
Fortune elsewhere.

But, let us now pass to some other Subject: We must know then, that she who
was Lady of Honor to Madam la Duchess, being resolved to retire from Court,
her Place which is worth 2000 Crowns of Pension per Ann. was sought for, by a
great many Ladies of Quality; who besides the 2000 Crowns which they had in
their View, considered also, that thereby they should have Opportunities to get
into His Majesty's Favor; for he desires to have one always about Madam la
Duchess, who will give him an exact Account of all that she does: And it is
of for that reason, that he has appointed these sorts of Ladies of Honor, both
for her and the other Princesses of the Blood; and that he himself has settled
pensions upon them. And he has a politic design in it, for thereby he keeps
both them and their Husbands in their Duty, because they know, that they have
one in their House, who takes notice of every thing they do; so that they dare
not adventure upon any thing that may in the least displease the King. The
Marchioness de la Port, whose Husband was once Admiral of a Squadron, and
Nephew of the Comte de la Port, whom I spoke of just now, having but a small
Estate to live by, thought, that it would be very convenient for her, to have
that Post, especially she having been a Widow for several Years. She had
several Friends, and among others, the Marquis d' Angeau, who has some Interest
at Court, and did his utmost to have carried the Place for her. He was once in
a fair way to have succeeded in it, but that it was told the King, that this
Lady was not of sufficient Quality for so honorable an Employment; yet no body
adventured to speak any thing against her Conduct, for though she be no great
Beauty, yet she is of so great Virtue, that she is as much esteemed, as those
who are much more beautiful: And the late Monsieur de Croissy, was once afraid,
that his Son, who is now Secretary of State, should be so taken with this
Lady's true Merit, as to make a secret Marriage with her; and therefore he sent
him into Italy, where he made him stay some Years, and did not recall him, till
he thought it probable, that his long Absence had cured him of the Wounds,
which his Converse with her had given him.

But her Enemies made use of another Argument against her; to which, had she
got but a fair hearing, she could have so satisfied the King, that no doubt she
would have obtained her Desire. But they imposed upon His Majesty, and told
him, that there were Two Families of la Port in France; that the one of them
was a good Family, and the other was naught, that she was of the last, and
Monsieur de Mazarine was of the first, and if he should prefer her to be Lady
of Honor to Madame la Duchess, People of the lowest Rank might pretend to
Advancement, as well as she. And by this means, they prevailed so far, as that
she was excluded, and the Marchioness de l' Angle, was preferred to that Place.
Though in the mean time, she could have justly pleaded, that her Husband was of
as good a Family as the Marquis de la Port, for the Marquis was of la Port de
Vesins, and Monsieur de Mazarin was of another la Port. At least this was said
when the Mareshal de la Milleray, who was the Marquis's Father, had made his
Fortune under the Ministry of Cardinal Richelien, with whom he was first
Cousins. It is true, there were some who then alleged, that his Father the
Advocate la Port, was not descended of the Family de la Port de Vessins,
though he pretended to be of it; and the Marquis de Vesins was not well pleased
with his Pretenses, insomuch, that he would have challenged him for taking the
Coat of Arms, that belongs to his Family, but that he was so afraid of the
Cardinal's Greatness, that he spoke nothing of it, unless it was to some
particular Friends, to whom he would sometimes say, by way of Jest, that those
who advised him to enter into a Lawsuit, with the Mareshal upon that account,
gave him bad Counsel; that he did not see how it could be pretended, that the
Mareshal had done him any Dishonor, by entering himself a Descendant of his
Family, that on the contrary, he looked upon it, as an evidence that the
Mareshal considered his Family, as better than many others, for which he was
much obliged to him.

This was not the first time, the King had been imposed upon, on such
Occasions. The late Marquis de Renel, had some Enemies at Court, who insinuated
to His Majesty, that he was but of a very late Family, so, that though he was a
Person of great Merit, yet the King who has great Considerations for Birth,
looked upon him, as one of those, whom he ought not to advance so soon as
others; for there are People, of certain Names and Ranks, who have some Right
to hope, that they shall not languish so long as others do, in the mere
Expectation of the Favors, which his Majesty uses to bestow upon his Subjects.
However, this Marquis having a great Desire to be Lieutenant General of the
King's Armies, and thinking, that he ought to have been preferred sooner, he
took occasion to speak of it one day to the King, and fairly represented to
him, what good Services he had done him. The King gave him a favorable
Hearing, as he always uses to do to those, who address to him, though few of
them have the Honor to be known to him. But when his Majesty was pleased to
answer him, the Marquis was surprised to hear him say, that he was in the wrong
to be so impatient, and that he believed, he had done as much for him, as for
any Man of his Rank. That every Man ought to do him so much Justice, as not to
think he was forgotten or neglected; though Persons of great Quality were
preferred to him. That it was true, that Merit ought to be rewarded, wherever
it was found, and that he had always had a special Regard to it, ever since he
had governed by himself, but that there were certain Families, which he thought
fit to prefer to others, for they had been always in possession of the most
honorable Offices, and the highest Preferments, both at Court, and in the
Army; and that he could not without Injustice, deprive their Children of them,
unless he found that they had degenerated from the Virtue of their Ancestors.
The Marquis soon perceived by this Discourse, that his Majesty had been
possessed with a mean opinion of his Birth: But he was so far from cont
adicting what his Majesty had said, in favor of those who had been of
honorable Families, that he told him, it was for that very reason, that he
thought himself neglected, that though he was not a Duke and Peer, or had not
so much as any Office of the Crown, yet he was of as good a Family, as the most
part of those, who had been advanced to higher Posts: That his Ancestors had
had the Honor to do good Services, to his Majesty's Royal Ancestors, and that
so long as he followed their Example, he did not see, why he was not capable of
any of those Offices, that are designed for Persons of the best Quality. If the
Marquis was surprised at His Majesty's Discourse, the King was no less
surprised at his. He had always thought, that the Marquis was one of those
upstart Marquises, of whom there are so many at Paris, and especially of
Citizens, who take upon them this Title, though the Foundations of it were laid
only in their Fathers Coffers, or in some Offices of the Gown, which some of
their Family has enjoyed. And being desirous to be fully informed in this
matter, he asked him, if it was not true, that had been told him, that he was
only de la Noblesse Bourgeoise, i. e. one who derived his Pedigree, only from
rich Citizens, or from those who had enjoyed Offices of the Long Robe, as was
said of the late Archbishop o^ Paris. When I speak after this manner, it is in
Imitation of the Bishop of Noyon. For that Prel^te, who is the Glory of
Prelates, yet not in the (...) in which he ought to be it* but only, beca^^e he
thinks, that no Man is comparable to him, for the Quality of his Ancestors: and
speaking one day of the Family of that Archbishop, he said, that it could not
be called an Honorable Family, but only one of the best of those Families,
that have been raised by Lawyers, or that had made a Figure among the Citizens
of Paris. What he said was true upon the matter, for there is a great
difference between a Family that is truly honorable, and such a Family as he
was speaking of; but sometimes, all the Truth should not be told, especially if
there is a great man who may take it amiss: for some days after the Chief
President of the Parliament, who is descended of the same Family, that the late
Archbishop was of, made the Bishop of Noyon sensible of his Folly. The Bishop
being come to dine with him, and his Coachman having carried home his Coach
Horses, resolving to return with them in the Afternoon; the Chief President,
who had been informed of what he had said of his Family, and who is seldom upon
the Reserve with any man, especially, if he have any Quarrel against him, no
sooner saw him, but he gave orders to the Steward of his House, not to serve up
dinner, till he was gone. The Bishop staid till the ordinary time of Dinner was
past, and longed for it, but seeing no appearance of it, he asked the President
if that was one of his Fasting Days, he told him plainly, that it was not, but
that he had given Orders, that no Dinner should be served up, till he was gone,
because it would be too great Presumption in him, and a Token that he had
forgotten the meanness of his Birth, which was but of the Noblesse Burgeoise,
if he should offer to entertain at his Table, so great a Seig^e^r, and one of
such an illustrious Descent, as he was of; to this he added some other Words to
the same Purpose; and the Bishop was puzzled what to say to him; but after some
dull Apologies, he was forced to go home and dine at his own House; yet he
would fain have staid dinner with the President, because his Coach Horses were
not there; but the President chose to let him have the use of his Coach, rather
than he should have staid dinner at his House. But to return to the Marquis de
Renel, he said to the King, that he knew no such thing in his Family, as la
Noblesse Burgeoise; that every one of his Ancestors, wore a Sword by his Side,
and if there were any of the Family that had not done it, it was because he was
consecrated to the Church, as was the Cardinal d' Amboise, who had the Honor,
to be the first Minister of the Crown. When he spoke of this Cardinal, the King
perceived, that he had been imposed upon, by those who had made him believe,
that the Marquis was but of a late Family, and of mean Extract. So that,
afterward he did him Justice, and gave him what he had asked.

The Duke de Choiseul, who had discorded with his Lady, was reconciled to her,
after his Return from Savoy. She could hardly be prevailed with to live with
her Husband, and though she was fully as much to blame, as he was, for the
Breach that was betwixt them; yet she pretended, that it was not safe for her
to live with him. But the King told her, that she had but one of two Things to
choose, either to cohabit with her Husband, or to go into a Nunnery. The very
Thoughts of a Nunnery, is enough to fright a Lady, especially, when she has any
Inclinations to be a Coquette, so that the very speaking of it, was enough to
oblige her, to obey his Majesty's Commands. But the King's Care extended
farther than to those Ladies, who did not live as they ought to do with their
Husbands, he took care also, to curb the Extravagancies of many others, even
though they did not belong to the Court, and being informed, that Monsieur l'
Abbee Lionne, the Son of the late Monsieur Lionne, Minister and Secretary of
State, and who enjoyed the Abbacy of Marmoutier, with a great many other rich
Benefices, did not behave himself so well, as his Character obliged him to do,
he sent him a Letter de Cachett, ordering him to retire into a Seminary. He
also appointed one to stay with him, and to take care, that when any Benefices,
that were at his Gift, became vacant, he should neither diminish the Revenues
of them, nor bestow them upon unworthy Persons. Monsieur l' Abbee Roullier,
whose Father had made so great an Estate by the Post Office, that he settled
all his Children, as if they had been Persons of some Quality, was also sent to
the Seminary of Notre Dame de Vertus, with an Order to those that had the
Inspection of him, that they should not allow him to correspond with any
Person, and that they should oblige him to do Penance; for all this was
necessary, to reduce him to a right sense of his Duty, seeing he had become a
Rake, and led such a profligate Life, that he equally disgraced the Character
of an Abbee, with which he had been honored, and that of a Magistrate, with
which he was also clothed; for he was Counselor Clerk of the Parliament of
Paris: But he had so little Regard to what became the Dignity of those two
Places, that there was not a greater Debauche in all the City. But
notwithstanding all the Care his Majesty took, to repress Immoralities, and to
oblige all Persons, to live suitably to their Characters; yet the Generality of
them, were so far from answering that Design, that there were greater Abuses
committed than ever. For where there was one, that was thereby prevailed upon,
to abandon his former vices, there were Thousands, who thought it enough, if
they were so far Hypocrites, as to please his Majesty by an outward Appearance:
so that Hypocrisy began then to come in fashion, and there were never so many
Tartuffes, or Hypocritical Puritans, as began to appear at that time, among
People of all Ranks, especially, among the Courtiers, though one would think,
that such a Character, did less become them than any others. For it seems to be
peculiar to the Court, that though Dissimulation may be Learned there, better
than in any other Place, yet it is a diffimulation of a quite other kind, than
what I am now speaking of. For when a Courtier dissembles, he does it, that he
may procure to himself as many Pleasures and Conveniences, as he can, and to
shun Troubles and Inconveniences, and not to be his own Tormentor and
Executioner, as the Hypocrites; who makes himself miserable in this world as
well as the next, so that it is an ordinary saying, that an Hypocrite is tho
Devils Martyr. Those who had new Opinions to Publish, could not have found a
time more Convenient for their Purpose, than this was. There was a certain sect
which had lain hid under the Ashes, ever since Molinos had Adventured to broach
his wild sentiments at Rome, and it began now to appear again at Versailles.
The Archbishop of Cambray, who was Preceptor to the young Princes of France,
and had the reputation of a very devout Man, declared himself zealous for this
Sect: Those who were of it did teach by a subtle kind of reasoning, though to
speak the truth they did not avow it plainly, that the Body might do all sorts
of wickedness while in the mean time, the Soul might be altogether Innocent and
unconcerned, as to what the Body did, for if the Intention of the Soul was
directed to God and for his Glory, then it was not in the least to be blamed
for the ill that the Body did, which is under a strange captivity to the
corruption that is in man's nature. There was one Madame Guyon, a Lady of no
great Quality, but of so great an Estate, that she had Married her Daughter to
the Comte de Vaul, Eldest Son of Monsieur Fouquet, who had already endeavored
to Propagate this abominable Doctrine, for which reason she had been sent to
Vincennes. But the Archbishop, of Cambray undertaking to defend her Publicly,
he Published a Book, in which by an abstract way of Reasoning, which no Body
was capable to comprehend, he endeavored to show, that this Doctrine was not
in the least erroneous. He alleged the Writings of St. Francis de Sales to
justify himself, and pretended, that he taught nothing, but what had been
formerly taught by that Holy Man. Every Body was astonished at the sight of
this Book, and it had never been Printed, if the Author had been obliged to ask
a license for it. But the Bishops have a Privilege to Publish what Books they
Please, though their works be not Examined, by those who are Authorized to give
Licenses for Printing Books: And this piece was published, before it was known,
that he had begun to write it. All the Hypocrites were overjoyed, that a way
was found out, for them to gratify their sensual appetites, while they
outwardly appeared virtuous, which they thought themselves obliged to do, lest
they should lose the Kings Favor. But they were not suffered long to boast of
this Imaginary victory: For as soon as this Book appeared, the Archbishop of
Paris, The Bishops of Meaux and Chartres, with many other Prelates declared
against it; and the Bishop of Meaux began immediately to write a refutation of
it; and besides, he joined with the Archbishop of Paris and the Bishop of
Chartres (both which had a great Interest at Court) to deal earnestly with his
Majesty, that the young Princes, the Dauphins Sons, might not be kept any
longer, under the Direction of a Prelat, whom they accused of the most horrible
Impieties, that had ever appeared in the Church.

The King knew not well what to say to this, because he had always looked upon
the Archbishop of Cambray, as a Man of good Morals, and of Exemplary Piety. And
it must be confessed, that there was never any Prelat appeared more zealous for
Gods Glory; for he was so far from having ever given any bad Example, that on
the Contrary, he had been very useful for the Edification of those, who saw him
or conversed with him. However, the Archbishop of Paris, and those other two
Bishops, gave his Majesty no rest, till they had obtained what they desired,
and what they thought necessary to be done upon such an occasion, and they
prevailed with him at last, to order the Archbishop of Cambray, to retire to
his own Palace, till fa^ther orders. But before he came there, he had occasion
to Practice the Doctrine which he had undertaken to defend; it is commonly
called Quietism, the meaning of which is, that a Man ought never to be troubled
at any thing, that can happen to him: Now the Archbishops Palace had taken
fire, by the fault of some Servants whom he kept there, and it had consumed not
only all the Buildings, but also all the Furniture of the House, which had been
very richly Furnished. Every Body desired to know, how he would take this
accident, but he appeared still as firm and unconcerned, as if he had been
altogether dis-interrested, Mean while, many Persons of Quality were suspected
of the same Errors, that were charged upon him, and among others, the Duke de
B^a^villiers and his Brother in Law the Duke de Chevreuse. The first was
Governor to the young Princes of France, whose Preceptor the Archbishop of
Cambray had been; and the thoughts of this were uneasy to the King, till he
was satisfied in it by the Duke himself; the King discoursed with him a long
time in his Closet upon this Subject, upon which he had likewise a long
conference with the Duke de Chevreuse; after which it appeared, that his
Majesty was undeceived, both as to the one and the other; yet their Ladies, who
had always been of the Number of those, who went to Marli, did not go there to
often as they had used to do before that time, which made some People believe,
that the King Dissembled a little in his Carriage to them. The Archbishop of
Cambray wrote in his own Vindication, and pretended, that all that he had said
in that Book, was true and orthodox, and offered to submit himself to the Court
of Rome, while the Bishop of Meaux accused him of Heresy more than ever. The
Abbee de la Trape, who had some years before, Renounced the Quality of an Abbee
that he might complete his Penance, which he had been long under, in the
Quality of a simple Monk, Declared himself also Mr de Cambrays Enemy, without
waiting till his Holiness should Pronounce any thing concerning his Book, tho
this Archbishop had sent it to Rome, that he might know his thoughts of it. The
Abbee wrote two Letters upon this Subject, which the Bishop of Meaux caused to
be Published, in the beginning of his own Book; he thought by this to
strengthen his cause, and that since he had to do with an Archbishop, who was a
Man of Learning and had many Friends, he ought not to neglect any thing, that
could in the least support him in it. He also sent his Nephew Monsieur l' Abbee
Bossuet to Rome, that he might there employ all his Interest to have the
Archbishop condemned; at which, many good People were offended, for they
thought, that when a Man acted only through Zeal, it was not fit to create him
so much trouble. Madame Guyon, who by the Interest her Friends had made for
her, was set at Liberty, fell into another Enthusiastic Fit, in favor of this
Sect. she propagated it every where, and infected the House of St. Cir with it,
so that it was found necessary, to put some of the Nuns of that House, into
other Convents. In a Word, the King took all the Measures, that Prudence could
suggest to him, to crush these Errors, before they should do any harm to the
Church. While he was at so much pains to prevent the ill Consequences of this
Debate, there were other debates broke out, in the Churches of Rheims and Roan.
The Archbishop of this last City, had made a List of some Books, which he had
recommended to those of his Diocese, to be made use of, for resolving cases of
Conscience; but had not mentioned any of those Books, which the Jesuits think
fittest for that purpose: these good Fathers took this so ill, that some of
them appeared in Print against him: the Archbishop accused one of their Number
as the Author, he pretended to know his Style, and demanded of the society of
Jesuits, that they would do him Justice in punishing this Author. The Fathers
denied that he was the Man, and he denied it himself; and they sent him to
Paris, that he might withdraw himself from the Effects of the Archbishops
anger, who was doing all the mischief he could against him, as well as against
all the rest of that Society. He made an exact search after the Printer of the
Pamphlet, that had been Published against him, and having kept some of them in
Prison for some time, the whole business vanished into smoke for want of
evidences. The Schism that broke out in the Church of Rheims, was also
Occasioned by a debate between the Archbishop and the Jesuits. These had
publicly maintained in the Schools of the College which they have in that
City, two things that the Bishop was not Pleased with. The first was, That the
Doctrine which Molina taught, concerning Grace, had been virtuous in all the
attacks, that its Enemies had made against it The Archbishop of Rheims, who is
no Molinist, censured these Theses, as full of Falsehoods, and published an
Edict, declaring that they did not contain the true Doctrine of the Church: he
therein also censured some other Passages, which they had cited in another
Thesis, and this Edict being conceived in Terms, that they were very much
dissatisfied with, they did much the same, that those of Roan had done. They
wrote against it, and exposed it. So that the Archbishop, to oblige them to do
him Justice, was advised, to cause the Provincial and the Three Rectors of
their Houses at Paris, to be cited, that they might declare, if this Pamphlet,
which had been Printed in that City had been done by their Order, or without
their order. The Author had been more circumspect than to put his Name to it,
and the Bookseller and Printer had concealed their Names: But the Author had
said enough, to let the World know, that he had composed it, by Order of his
Superiors; and it was upon that account, that the Archbishop would oblige the
Provincial and the Three Rectors, to make their Declaration. After they had met
in a Chapter, upon this Business, they were so foolish, as to declare, that the
Pamphlet contained nothing, but what was consonant to Truth; and what they were
ready to defend, So that having made this Confession, the Archbishop of Rheims,
gave in his Address to the Parliament, desiring, that Judgment might pass
against them, and that they might be obliged to make a public Reparation of
the Injury they had done him, in publishing so scandalous things against him.
In this Address he said, that if they pretended, as it seemed they did, that
they had been injured by his Edict; then the Laws and Customs of the Church
taught them, that there were but Two ways, by which they could have Redress.
The one was, to have made it known to himself, by representing to him, wherein
he had injured them: But if they thought, that he would be too partial in his
own Cause, and would not retract what he had once done, how unjust soever it
might be to them; then the other way was, to have addressed themselves to the
Primate. He represents also, that it was not becoming private Men, to expose
the Conduct of an Archbishop, by seditious Pamphlets. That such a thing might
be of dangerous Consequence, besides, that it was a Breach of Charity. The
thing which had given occasion to all this, was capable to have revived the
great Dispute concerning Grace, which had made so much noise in the beginning
of this Age, and therefore the King thought it necessary to put a stop to this
Lawsuit, and told Father de la Chaise, that it was his Royal Pleasure, that
the Society of Jesuits, should give Satisfaction to the Archbishop of Rheims;
and having called the Chief President of the Parliament to Versailles, that he
might give him such Orders, as he judged necessary about this Affair. He took
up I know not how much time, in discoursing with him of the best Methods, for
putting an end to it. The Jesuits, who had made a foolish Step, in justifying
every thing that was in the Pamphlet, were very glad, that the King had fallen
upon a way, how they might evite the Shame and Disgrace, which would have
infallibly come upon them, if the Parliament had proceeded to pronounce a
Sentence. They went to the Chief President, and told him, they were ready to
obey the King's Orders; the President told them, he was glad, they were come to
a Resolution, that was so much for their Interest, as well as reasonable in it
self. He concerted the whole matter with them, that they should draw up a
Writing, by which they should acknowledge, that they had taken wrong measures,
in not addressing to the Archbishop himself, as they ought to have done; that
he might have been pleased to have heard them in their own Vindication; and
promising that they should take that method for the future, if ever they should
be so unfortunate, as to have occasion to complain of him. And that in this
Writing, they should entreat the Archbishop to pardon what was past, and to
receive them and their Society again into his favor. The President
communicated this Writing to the King, before it was signed, that he might know
how his Majesty was satisfied with it. The Archbishop could not demand any
more, so that he was content to put an end to the Debate, provided they should
sign that Paper. Perhaps they would not hay done it, if the King had not
interposed his Authority, but the good learned Fathers, knew better than others
did, that Scripture commands us expressly to obey superior Powers; and
therefore it was no hard matter to persuade them to do what the Archbishop had
demanded of them.

About the same time that the Archbishop of Cambray's Opinions (of which I have
already given some Account) made so much Noise, the Princess d' Harcourt, was
obliged to go to Normandy, where her Husband's Estate lies, to look after his
private Affairs: She had been long at Court, and had always found a way to
preserve her Interest in it, in all the Changes that fell out; though there
were many others that were fully of as good sense as she, who were not able to
do so much. So soon as she was gone from it, it was reported, that it was
partly upon her account, that the Archbishop had been cast out of favor. And
many were of opinion, that she was a Quietist, and so much the rather, because
she retired so often, sometimes into one Convent, sometimes into another. But a
Lady, who thought she knew her better than others did, said to those who were
speaking of her, that they were mistaken as to that Princess, and that she was
not for creating trouble to herself, by an indiscreet Zeal; and that she could
be Surety for her, that till the King, as well as his Ministers became
Quietists, she should not be one: But if they should declare themselves once in
favor of that Party, she would not then promise for her; for never Lady was
more inclined than she, to perform exactly what was enjoined by St. Peter, to
obey every Ordinance of Man, whether the King as supreme, or those who are in
Authority under him. Those who were concerned in this Lady, and had been under
some fears, that the Reports of her being Quietist might be true, were well
satisfied with this Account of her. Soon after, she returned from Normandy, and
was not behind with any Lady at Court, in exclaiming against Quietism; and
spoke upon all occasions, of no less than Fire and Faggot, for those of that
Persuasion.

About this time, the Chief President's Son, was made a Counselor of State, in
the Place of Monsieur Pussort, who at last had paid that Tribute, which all men
owe to Nature, after he had been Two or Three Years, without being able to go
to the Counsel, of which he was Dean. He was Uncle to the late Monsieur
Colbert, Minister and Secretary of State, and he was as his Right Hand to him,
when he was contriving ways and means for enriching the King, at his
Subject-Cost. For he had laid down some Maxims of his own, by which he
determined always in favor of the Exchequer. And it was never seen, that he
had been so much as in one single Instance, prevailed with, even by the
strongest Arguments, to determine otherwise. So that in the Council, he got the
Name of Pussort the Fiscal. And when any man was so unhappy, as to have a
Lawsuit with the King, he had reason to give over his Cause for lost, if it
depended upon his Vote. But at last, when he found himself at the point of
Death, he began to reflect, that he must give an account of all these things;
the Thoughts of them, put him under great fears. His Confessor endeavored to
encourage him, by representing to him the Mercies of God, who pardons all the
Sins a man has been guilty of, so soon as he comes to repent of them. The
Archbishop of Roan, who was his Grand Nephew, and to whom he had left some part
of his Estate, as he did to all these, who were within the same degrees of
Kindred to him; nay, and to the Marquis de Seignelai's Children too, though they
were farther removed than the rest. I say, the Archbishop spoke much to the
same purpose to him, that the Confessor had done. But the poor man was still
afraid, that he did it only as thinking thereby to comply with his Humor. And
he was the more confirmed in this, when he observed, that the Archbishop, when
he had gone into the Withdrawingroom, to bring the Viaticum, chided the Parson
of St. Roche, that he had not caused him to be put in his Bed, instead of
exciting him, who was a dying man, to pay that Respect and Veneration to that
God, in whose presence he then was. However, in a short time, he was called to
give an account of all his Actions, before God's Tribunal; and his Heirs had
500000 Crowns of Estate, which he left them to divide among themselves. And
there was not so much as one of them, had any use for his House to dwell in;
and therefore they sold it to Monsieur Bertin, Treasurer of the casual
Revenues, who is a man of the greatest Curiosity of any in Paris, in the matter
of Household Furniture. And as those at Court entertain the King, with accounts
of every thing that falls out, so it was told his Majesty, that Mr. Bertin had
bought the House, and that when he came to dwell in it, it would look quite
another thing, than it did while Mr. Pussort was alive. They told him also,
that he had the finest Carpets in the World, better than any that were in his
Majesty's Palace. The King had the Curiosity to go and see them, and he asked
him, how much they had cost him, and where he had bought them. He answered,
that he had paid 200 Crowns for the Piece of them, at the Auction of the
Marquis de Segnelai's Furniture. The King said before all the Court, that that
Minister had always dealt so by him, so that when any fine thing, was brought
from the Indies, he gave him the Refuse, and took all the best to himself. And
he added, that he had never known a more vainglorious man, than that Marquis;
or one that was so conceited of his own Personage, that his Vanity had made him
oftimes fail in point of good Breeding, and in the Respect he owed him; for
without considering that he was speaking to his King, he would have asked him
sometimes, if he did not think he was well dressed, and if he had not a good
Air. Mr. Bertin finding that the King had a desire for the Carpets, entreated
his Majesty to accept of them from him; the King took them, but would not have
them in a Gift; but caused him to be paid the Money that he had given for them.
There were Three Ladies who had been Friends of Mr. Pussort, that expected, he
would have considered them in his Will: And for that end, had complied for
several Years, with all his Humors; they had every Night entertained him with
Diversions suitable to his own Fancy, and he had never given them so much as a
Cup of Water for a reward, except Two Meals that he gave them a Year. The one
of them was Marchioness de Merce, who was his Wife's Niece, and the other Two
Persons, I shall not name; but they had fully as great a Desire to have their
shares of his Money, as she had. But they were quite frustrated in their Hopes,
as well as she. There were a great many who made Interest for his Place of
Counselor of State, as well as for his other Place of Counselor of the
Council of the Royal Revenues, by which he had 18000 Livers of Sallary: But the
King gave this last to Monsieur de Pommere^, and the other to the Chief
President's Son, as I have already said. He had been Attorney General before;
but because he had made no great Figure in that Post, his Father addressed to
the King, that he would be pleased to bestow this upon him, and frankly told
his Majesty, that his reason was, because his Son was not sufficiently
qualified for being Attorney General; that when he purchased that Office for
him, he believed that he had been capable of discharging it; but he found, he
had been in a mistake, and that therefore he would be glad to have him eased of
the Honor of that Burden, which he was not capable to bear. This was thought
an odd sort of a Compliment, from such a man as the Chief President of the
Parliament: And those who heard of it, asked one another, if it was necessary,
that a man, that was of the Parliament, should be of greater Parts, than he who
is of the Council, where the nicest Affairs of the Kingdom are treated of. For
it could not be said, that it was the want of Memory, or the Art of speaking in
public, that made him incapable of the Office of Attorney General; for while
Monsieur Talon had been in that Post, he had shown a way how to supply those
defects; he had always read his Pleadings, and as it was no shame to imitate a
man, who as all France confessed, had acquitted himself honorably in that
Office, therefore they concluded, that certainly his Father knew of something
else, that made him incapable of it. However the Father's Merits supplied all
the Son's Imperfections; insomuch that the King, not only granted his Request,
but another favor also, which he had not asked. For he allowed him to sell the
Office of Attorney General to the best Advantage. Upon which, there were a
great many offered for it, who were as incapable of it, as the President's Son
was; and who had much more Money than Merit. They considered also, that as the
Incapacity of his Son, had been the Cause of his being promoted to be a
Counselor of State; so they might at last come to some Promotion for the same
reason. Among the rest, there was a Master of Requests, who was the Son of
another Master of Requests, and he concluded, that this was the only way, how
he could raise himself, to the greatest Offices of the Council. And therefore
he offered Money for it, as others did, and believed, that he ought to have
been preferred to them, because he excelled them in the Art of pronouncing ill,
and stuttering in his Speech; and had lately married a young Girl, which had
made him be much considered. But the Chief President, made an ill step in
Politics; for whereas he ought to have chosen one of the meanest
Qualifications, that he might thereby let the World see, that his Son was not
the only Person, that was incapable of that Em Employment: The Man he bargained
with was Monsieur Joli de Fleuri whose Father had been Counselor of the Great
Chamber. He got Four Hundred Thousand Franks for it, which was more by 50000
Franks, than is usually given for such an office. Then People began to say of
this New Attorney General, that it seemed he had no mind to be Raised to the
Office of a Counselor of State, in that way that the Presidents Son had been
Raised to it. For so soon as he was Instal'd in his Office, he made it appear,
by his Eloquence and his great Capacity, that he was far above the Ordinary
sort of Attorneys.

While these things were a doing among the Lawyers, the Duke de Lausun, who has
been so tossed by Fortune, ever since he first appeared upon the stage of the
World, was very diligent in a Law suit he had against his Ladies family. When
he was near Sixty Years of Age, he had Married a Daughter of the Mareshal de
Lorges, who was not above Sixteen. In which he Played the Fool as much as when
he put in for the Command of the Army in Ireland. For it is Equally ridiculous,
for a Man of Sixty to Marry a Girl of Sixteen, and for one that has never had
any Command but over his own Domestics or Day Lobourers, to Command an Army.
Yet as good sense would qualify him for the one much more than for the other,
so he managed his Wife in such a way, that he never became one of those
Husbands, whose wives make them to be Pointed at in the streets; he gave her as
many fine Clothes as she Pleased, and as much Money as was Needful for her
diversions. But it was upon Condition, that she should not keep Company, but
with some old Dotards, of whom he was not much afraid. For as to the young
Sparks about the Court, she was discharged in any terms to see them, or to
admit of any visits from them; For by his own Experience he knew the Frailty of
young Ladies. All these Precautions were the more justificable, because if it
was in his Power to Secure this young Lady for himself alone, she was well
worth all the Pains he would be at in doing it. And he left nothing undone,
that was Necessary for that End. The Governess, whom he appointed to wait upon
her, was well Advanced in years; she had once been with Madame de Guise, and he
trusted much to her Virtue, she was as seldom from her as was possible for her
to be, and it was a rare thing to see this young Lady without her Guardian. She
had great advantages secured to her by her Marriage Contract, without which the
Mareshal de Lorges would not have given her in Marriage to him. But the
Mareshal and his Lady had not given him any portion with her, yet Fremout, who
had ammassed many Millions of Money, by farming the Kings Revenues, which had
been his Employment almost fifty year, supplied the want of a Portion, for in
the Marriage Contract he had Engaged to Leave them a Hundred Thousand Crowns,
after his Death, and when he died sometime after, the Duke de Lausune was
surprised, that his Son Mr. D'Onneuil and the Mareshalls Lady who was his
Daughter, had renounced all Interest in the Estate, and had brought from
Languedoc, a Little Girl of Eleven Years of Age, who called herself his
Relation, and Pleaded she should be his heiress by the benefit of his
Inventory. His Widow had also Renounced, yet before she did it, she had
Concurred with his Children, to put the best and most Valuable things out of
the way. Upon this the Duke found himself under a Necessity, either to Content
himself with any Effects that he found still Remaining of the Inheritance, or
to Enter into a Law Suit, against the Widow and her Son. For as to his Father
in Law and Mother in Law, he could not ask anything of them; For they had not
signed the Grant which his Ladies Grandfather had made, in Prospect of the
Marriage. Besides that, they adhered to that Grant, which he had made to
themselves, when they were Married together, so that he had not any Reason
Imaginable, to sue them at Law. But he su'd the Mother and the Son, and
pretended that they had secret Conveyed out of the way, the Effects of the
Estate, and, that they ought to be Ordered to pay him an Hundred Thousand
Crowns, in Ready Money, without putting him to the pairs of seeking for
Payment, out of such Remains of the Estate, as did still appear. But this was
not all he Craved of them, For besides this 100000 Crowns, for which, Fremon
had paid Interest so long as he Lived as of a thing that was already acquired,
he had promised them, a Hundred Thousand Franks, out of the whole Estate; but
his Widow and her Son had adjusted matters so, that all that was Remaining of
the Estate, after the Debts were Paid, was but at most 100000 Crowns; so that
they Designed to have frustrated the Duke of 100000 Franks, besides that they
would have left him in hazard, of being called to an Account, by the King and
his Ministers, as ordinarily all those are, who Marry the Daughters or Grand
Daughters of Farmers of his Majesty's Revenues. Unless the Marriage Portion has
been Paid in Ready Money. The Duke de Lausun who had no great Skill to Dispute
his Ground in Ireland, chose rather to quit it in time, than to Expose himself
to the dangers that Threatened him; if he had Stayed to Dispute it with Sword in
hand; thought, he could better understand the Debates of the Pallais; and though
he had no more Served an Apprentiship in this, than he had done, in the war yet
he Armed himself with a strong Resolution to plead to the utmost; rather than
Do, what Monsieur d'Onneuil would have obliged him to. The case was Brought
before the Requetes du Palais because of the Quality of the Parties who had the
Right of Committimus, for Mr D'Omneuil, was Master of Requests, besides that
the Duke was not obliged to appear before any other Court of that kind, unless
he had Pleased to do it. He was enraged above what can be Expressed, at the
Methods that were taken by Madame de Fremont and Mr. D'Onneuil in which they
had engaged the Mareshal de Lorges and his Lady, and therefore he enjoined the
Duchess, that she should not see either of them: this did very much trouble
this Lady as well as her Mother the Mareshals Lady, who Loved her Daughter
tenderly, but the Duke told his own Lady, That when he Enjoined her this, It
was not so much for satisfying his own resentment of the Injuries they had done
him, as because her Interest was Concerned in the debate. For he could not
expect to Live Long, and after his Death, she could not expect any thing of his
Estate, but what was provided to her, by the Marriage Contract, and therefore,
It was Necessary, he should use all sorts of Means, for Preserving to her, what
she ought to have from him. That if she had nothing, but what they now offered
her, the Effects they would give her, would be liable to a Chamber of Justice,
whenever it should please the King to erect one, and that they might even make
him pay a Tax, by the first Order of Council that should be given in that
matter. And that therefore, she ought to make her Mother sensible, that there
wa^ not any hopes of a Reconciliation with her, unless she should oblige her
Brother and Madame de Fremont to do him Justice. These words made a great
Impression upon the Duchess mind, and as it is Natural for very Body to desire
Riches, even to the Prejudice of a near friend, so she observed her Husband^
Commands so Exactly, that she refused to be present at the Ceremony, when one
of her Sisters was to put on the Nuns habit, and to Enter into a Convent at
Conflaus, till her Husband told her, that he was satisfied, she should go
thither.

About this time Monsieur de Phelypeaux, the only Son of Monsieur de
Pontehartrain Minister and Secretary of State Married his Lady. Who was a
Daughter of a Sister of his Fathers, who had been Married to the Count de Roye
of the Family of Rochefocant. He had gone to pay her a Visit, and the Marriage
was Concluded, within three Days after. The Bride had but 24000 Livers of
Portion, and the King gave her 6000 Livers of Pension, of which she had 4000
before, which the King had granted her, when she Embraced the Roman Communion.
For her Father had Dyed a Protestant in England, where he rather chose to End
his Days, out of his Country, and deprived of the Honors which he might have
Expected, upon Account of his Birth and Merits, than to Renounce his Religion.
The Countess de Roye was also in that Kingdom, and had Carried thither three of
her Children, that she might Educate them in their Fathers Religion; while the
Rest of them, which were many, chose Rather to Embrace the Roman Religion. this
Lady whom Mr. Phelypeaux Married, was in a Convent at Soissons, when her
Marrige was Concluded, And her Relations having sent a Coach for her, and
having appointed Changes of fresh Horses by the way, that she might come in all
have, she came to the Countess de Roucy Lodgings, who was her Eldest Brothers
Lady; Monsieur de Phelypeaux paid her a visit there that very day, and he
returned upon the morrow, and dined with her. The Chevalier de Roye, who was
this young Ladies Brother, was at dinner with them, and finding that Monsieur
de Phylipeaux had caused a great many pieces of Clothe of Gold and Silver to be
brought to him, that he might choose what Pleased him best, he said to the
Countess de Rocy that if she did well, she would take him off a Vest of one of
the pieces, of that was sold for 20 Louis D'Ors the Ell. Madame de Roucy was
not over hasty in doing it, and the young Bride, having Chosen what Pleased her
best, The Mercer went home, before the Chevalier de Roye had his desire. But
after he was gone the Chevalier fell a Jesting with Madame de Roucy and said it
was a mean thing in her to have let the Mercer go away, with the Brocado stufs,
before she had done what he desired of her, that it was the least she could
have done for the Honor of her Sisters marriage. Monsieur de Phelipeaux seemed
not to take any Notice of what he said, but so soon as he was gone home, he
sent Orders to that Mercer, that the next morning he should wait upon the
Chevalier de Roy, by the time he had got up, with that piece of Stuff, and that
he should let him have as much of it as he desired, the Mercer obeyed his
Orders, and made his Compliments to the Chevalier, and told him the Commission
he had got. The Chevalier finding he might take what he pleased of the whole
Piece, took not only as much as would be a Vest, but as much more, as would
line him a Coat. The Marriage was solemnized within two Days after, and the
King gave only 50000 Crowns to Monsieur de Phelypeaux, though he used to make a
Present of 200000 Franks, to the Son of one of his Ministers of State, upon
Occasion of his Marriage. But he told Monsieur Pontchartrain, that he was not
so liberal as he used to be, and that the then Juncture of Affairs was the
Cause of it. For the War forced him against his Will, to be a good Husband of
his Money, but that the present Loss should be made up to them another time.
Monsieur Pontchartrain was a man of too great sense, not to take this
Compliment as he ought to do. And being very glad to have a Daughter in Law of
so good Quality, he had the Satisfaction to hear every body approve of the
choice he had made for his Son. He certainly quite outdid all that the former
Ministers of State had done, for raising their Families, and those of whom his
Daughter in law was descended, were far more illustrious, than the Families of
the Souvrees, or the Alegres, or the Matignons, with whom Tellier, and the
Colberts had marched, and the Family of Crussol of which the Marquis de
Barbesieux's first Lady was a Daughter, was far short of them, though it was
honored with the Title of Duke and Peer of France. Next morning after this
marriage, there was 500 Louis d'Ors, put under the young married Lady's
Toilette. Which was but a small Sum for a Lady of her Quality, there being
ordinarily a greater Present made, to a Partisans Daughter. But the Evening
before, she had got a Present of a little Box, with a great many fine Toys in
it, and she found in the Bottom of it, a little Box full of Ear rings and
Jewels.

Every Body went and paid Visits to the new married Couple, and the Duchess de
Lausun, having gone to pay her Compliments, she saw her Mothers Lacqueys in the
Antichamber, by which she knew, that she was there. And being unwilling to be
found in Company with her, least she should ostend her Husband, she went out of
the Room, designing to go home, though she had already caused notice to be
given, that she was there. This was told to Madame de Phelypeaux, and to Madame
de Pontchartrain, who was then in company with her, and who sent to call back
the Duchess, and went and spoke to her, and brought her into a Closet, and put
her in company with her Mother. The Duchess was once in hopes to have been
married to Monsieur Phelypeaux and his Mother Madame de Pontchartrain would
have been extremely glad, that she had been her Daughter in Law: But the Duke
de Lausun, making his Addresses to her at the same time; the Mareshal de
Lorges, who knew that the Duke was worth 100000 Livers a Year, loved rather to
see his Daughter a Duchess, than Daughter in Law to a Minister of State. This
had made some Misunderstandings for some time, between Madame de Pontchartrain,
and the Mareshal's Lady, but they were reconciled by this Marriage, and she was
the first that told the Duchess, that she ought to live in a better
Correspondence than she did with her Mother. The Mareshal's Lady told her the
same, and charged her with Ingratitude, since she knew well enough, how
tenderly she ^ad always loved her. The Duchess told her, that if she pleased,
she might easily remove the Cause, which she had to complain of her. That she
wished for nothing more, than to see her frequently, and to live in good Terms
with her, and that it was very unpleasant to her, to be deprived of that
Happiness. But she was obliged to obey her Husband, and it was in her Mothers
Power, to cause Justice to be done him, and then all difficulties would be
removed, that besides, if she loved her, as much as she said she did, she would
cause ready money to to be paid to the Duke and her, that what they got might
be exempted from those after Enquiries, to which the Estates of Farmers of the
Kings Revenues are liable. The Mareshal's Lady having no Inclination to do any
such thing, or perhaps being afraid that the doing it, might discover all the
Effects, which had been conveyed out of the way, that her Mother, Brother and
herself, might be secured from such an Enquiry, answered her, that she demanded
what was impossible for her to grant: That she could not expect more than what
she could have out of her Grandfathers Estate, and that to ask more, was a
Proof, that she considered her own Interest, rather than what was reasonable.
The Duchess replied, that notwithstanding all she said, yet the Duke her
Husband believed, that he did not demand any thing, but what was reasonable,
but since she and her Friends were all of another Opinion, and he was positive
in his Resolutions, it was not likely they would soon agree, that for herself,
she was extremely vexed at it, because she found herself deprived of all that
sweet Converse, she might have with her Parents, without any hopes of a
Reconciliation, because she knew her Husband to be of such an humor, that it
was almost impossible to dissuade him from any thing that he had resolved upon.
And he was certainly as headstrong, as a She-Mule, when he had got any thing
once in his Head, and instead of being softened, by the Account the Duchess gave
him of her Mothers Grief, because she and they were not good Friends, he was
more incensed against them, than before. And he not only prosecuted his
Lawsuit, but petitioned the Council, that he might be allowed to bring it
before other Judges, pretending that he having accused Madame de Fremont and
her Son, for having intermeddled with the Estate of the deceased, they ought to
plead their Cause before the Court of Aides, and not before the Requetes du
Palais, by which we may perceive, that while he endeavored to secure himself,
against an Enquiry, he endeavored to expose his Lady's Grand mother and her
Uncle to one. This enraged them more than ever against him, especially because
it was their Interest, that the World should not know, that Monsi^ur Fremont
was so rich, as he truly was when he died. For it is a Crime for those who farm
the Revenues, to die so rich, and their Heirs are ordinarily called to account
for it. They had a Thousand Instances of this in other People, and though they
had not had any, yet they had lately had an In^^ance that concerned them
nearly, and which no doubt, put them under great Apprehensions.

One who had been a Deputy or Clerk to Mr. Fremont, was dissatisfied with him,
perhaps because he had not considered him in his Will, or it may be, because he
had not made any great Fortune, while he was in his Service. However, he came
to Monsr. Pentchartrain, and informed him, that he knew a certain place, where
his deceased Master had hid 4000000^ of Money, that he himself had assisted in
putting it there; so that he spoke nothing, but what he knew to be certainly
true. He was so positive in what he had said, that it was impossible for (...).
Pentchartrain^ o^ to believe him; and therefore, he sent Orders to the
Intendant at Roan, to go to the place, where this Deputy had told him the Money
was hid, which was in a Cellar of a Castle, which Fremont had bought in
Normandy. This Dep^^^ went ^nither also, by order of the same Minister, that he
might point out the very Place, where it was hid. But when the Intendant had
gone thither, and made as exact a Search, as was possible for him, there was
nothing found. The Deputy thought to have excused himself, by saying it had
been taken away, since the time that he had put it there: But as no Man should
think to deal thus by a Minister of State; for they would be every day imposed
upon, if those who offered to do it, were not punished for it: He was sent to
Prison, and no doubt he deserved it, though he had not been guilty of any thing
but of designing to ruin the Family of that Man, by whom he had acquired all
the Estate he had; however the Duke de Laus^n, pretending that if it was not in
that place; that Madame de Fremont and her Son, had hid her Husband's and his
Father's Treasures; yet as he pleaded before the Council, the Case ought to be
referred to the Court of Aides; and his reasons were, that it belonged to that
Court, to take Cognizance of the Estates of Farmers of the King's Revenues,
wherein the King himself was concerned directly or indirectly. That in the Case
between Madame Fremont, Mr. Onneuil and him, the King's Interest was manifestly
^oncerned, seeing the Question was, if they had concealed the Effects, that had
belonged to a man employed in the King's Revenues. There was scarce any Person
of Note or Interest, whether at Court, or in the City, but solicited the one or
for the other Party: And though the Mareshal de Lorges and his Lady, seemed not
to concern themselves in the Business, in which it was thought, that if they
would declare themselves, it would be in favor of their Son in law and their
Daughter, rather than for Madame de Fremont, and her Son; yet they solicited
underhand for these. They considered, that besides that the Memory of the
deceased ought to be dear unto them, not only because he was the Father of the
Mareshal's Lady, but because he had been a great Benefactor to them, both
before and after their Marriage. They ought therefore, to do all that was in
their Power, for saving his Estate from being seized. They thought it was very
likely, that though the Stroke could not fall upon themselves, because of the
Precautions they had taken, both in their Marriage Contract, and in the Gifts
they had afterward received, yet it might fall upon their Daughter, who
instead of having the 100000 Crowns, that Madame de Frem^nt and Mr. d'Onneuil
were willing to pay her, she might be in hazard of losing the whole of it.

These Solicitations and underhand Dealings, how close soever they were kept,
yet came to the Duke's Ears, and enraged him to a greater degree, against his
Father in law and Mother in law; so that it was observed of him, that he took
as much pains, to obtain what he had desired of the Council, as he did Four or
Five Years ago, to shun the Weight of King William of England's Arm. But all
the pains he took, turned at last to his Confusion, for he was cast before the
Council, and the only thing that the Chancellor said to him that could please
him, because of the Hatred he bore to his Lady's Grandmother and Uncle, was,
that when such People as the deceased had been, did marry their Daughters or
Grandaughters to Persons of Quality, it was the first Step they made, to
restore to the Public, what they had robbed it of, but by the good leave of
that Magistrate, I do not think, that the Name of Restitution, agrees well to
such an Action as that. For to restore a thing, is to give it back, after it
has been taken, and to give it back to the rightful Owner too; but for a Man to
laden his Children or Grandchildren with Money, and by great Wealth to
purchase to them a Blood that cannot mix with theirs, without some sort of
Shame, and then to call this Restitution, was an odd way of speaking; and it is
the first time I ever heard it called so. The Duke de Lau^un, being cast by the
Council, and the Case remitted back to the Requetes du Palais, their Friends
offered to mediate for an Agreement between them. They persuaded the Duke, as
well as Madame de Fremont and her Son, to submit the Cause, to the Arbitration
of Two Counselors of State; and having chosen Monsieur de la Reine, and
Monsieur de Ribe^re, they told the Duke, that these Two Magistrates, being
great Lovers of Justice, would give him as much satisfaction, as the Requetes
du Palais would do, provided he had a just Cause. But having got private
Intelligence, that he could not expect great satisfaction from these Two
Counselors of State, and that they had said, that they did not think, that the
Widow or Children of a Donor, could be obliged to pay ready money, when the
Deceased had not left any, he became so suspicious of them, that he recalled a
Blank he had signed, with an Obligation to acknowledge them for Judges. And
would prosecute the Matter in all the Forms, before the Requetes du Palais, who
laughed at his Pretensions, and a merced him in the Expenses of the Suit.

If Fre^ont's pretended hidden Treasure mde^ a great noise, and made many
People say, that there was never a Par^isan, i. e. one that Farms the King's
Revenues saved, since he, who had robbed the People of so much money by his
Extortions; had not been at pains to restore any part of what he had robbed;
yet there was one of them, that gave some grounds to think, that there are some
People of that Employment, who sometimes think of their own Salvation. But I do
not know, if it be enough for a man to think upon it, only as he did; for I
think if a man be as much concerned in it, as he ought to be, he must join
Effects and Deeds to his Thoughts, whatever may be the Result of them. However,
this Business made as great noise, as the pretended hidden Treasure did, of
which I gave just now an Account. One of these Farmers of the Revenues, (whose
Name I have forgot) died, and left Two Children, behind him, who did not live
in great Friendship together; which happens often betwixt Brothers. The Father
had in his Will considered the one, much more than the other; with which this
last was very ill pleased, and resolved to make his Brother uneasy, and
threatened to tell Mr. Fonchartrain, of their deceased Father's Management;
unless he would let him have an equal share in the Estate. I know not if he was
such a Fool to do what he threatened, or if one who had been his Father's Clerk,
had done as Mr. Fremont's Clerk did. But Mr. Ponchartrain, being informed soon
after their Father's Death, that there was something found among his Papers,
that might turn to the King's Advantage; he sent a Commissary from Paris, to
seal up all the Papers, which he had in the place where he died. It was within
the Generality of Alencon; and Mr. de Pommereu's Son, who was Intendant of it,
receiving Orders to be present, when the Cabinets, Coffers etc. were to be
sealed; the whole Business was done, with all the Precautions, that could
possibly be taken, in a matter, wherein they were afraid to be cheated. And the
Intendant left a Garrison to continue there, till the Seals should be taken
off. This Business frightened all the Partisans, who were afraid, their Children
and Goods might be used the same way after their Deaths. But because in the
time of so burdensome a War, the Court had often need of them, it was not
thought convenient to discourage them, and therefore a Report was spread among
the People, that the reason why the Papers etc. of the deceased were sealed up,
was because he had made a Will in favor of the King. When they had observed
all the Forms that were usual on such Occasions, so that there was no reason
could be given for any farther delay, the Intendant returned from Alencon, to
assist at the opening of the Seals, which was done with all the usual
Formalities, and in the Inventory of the Papers which had been left by the
Deceased; it was found there were Two Papers, by which the Partisan had
declared, that God had given him Grace to examine his Conscience, and that he
would not adventure to go into the other World, without restoring what he had
taken wrongfully. In the first of these Papers, which clearly appeared to have
been first done, though it was neither dated or signed; he said, that he had by
indirect and unjust methods, gained 100000 Crowns, during the time he had been
concerned in the Revenues, so that it was his Will, that his Heirs might
restore that Sum to the King; as for the other Paper, it was found to have been
written after the former, for it contained a Declaration, that after a mature
and serious Reflection, upon all the Business he had been concerned in, he
found that he had made an unjust Acquisition of 400000 Livers; so that it was
his Will, that his Children should restore it to his Majesty, out of his
Estate. The Intendant sent Copies of the two Papers to Mr. Pontchartrain, who
in such a matter, would not rely upon his own Judgment, which was, that though
they were not dated or signed, so that they would not signify any thing
between Two private Persons; yet it might be otherwise, when the King was
concerned in them. He therefore consulted all those, whom he thought capable to
determine so nice a Question; some were of one opinion, and some of another.
Those who were more for the Forms of Law, than for material Justice, did not
think that the Heirs of the deceased could be sued in Law; seeing such Papers
were not regarded in any Court of Justice. But on the other hand, those who
followed the Maxims of Mr. Pussort the late Dean of the Council, (who, as I
have already said, voted always in the King's favor whether his Majesty was
Plaintiff or Defendant) made use of his Authority to prove, that the King had
good reason to demand the 400000 Livers mentioned in the last of the Two Papers.

Besides this Authority, which they reckoned upon as a Law, that had taken
place in the time of a great Minister, who had reformed the State, and had put
the King's Affairs into an excellent Condition; by the prodigious Taxes that
had been laid upon the Partisans; they alleged also, that when a man did
acknowledge, in a Paper written with his own Hand, that he had unjustly
acquired such a Sum of money, that was by a Thousand times a more convincing
Proof, than all the other Proofs; that could possibly be had. Mo^sieur
Po^chartr^in was much of the same opinion, as the truth is, a man can hardly be
of another: Yet there are certain Rules of Law, which must be observed, least
the Laws themselves, to which they r^late, should be violated: And therefore he
spoke nothing either for it, or against it, unless that it was to be wished,
that all the Partisans, which had been formerly taxed, had done as this man
did; since that would have been an established Rule by which the King might
have legally demanded, what they had cheated him of. Because of this
Expression, it was thought that he was much of Mr. P^ssort's mind, as to the
Partisans; yet it was an Expression no man could find fault with; for besides,
that common sense will not allow a man to accuse himself unjustly, he was
obliged to say all this, as suitable to his Office: However, all the Effects of
the deceased Farmer of the Revenues were seized, so that, though he who had
been the Informer in this matter, had not promised to find out 40000000 as Mr.
de Fre^ont's Clerk had done, yet the Information was found to be truer. The
great need the King had of money at that time to support the War, was the
reason, that this Minister thought it not proper, to neglect such a Business:
Though to speak the Truth it was so small a matter, in comparison of what was
needful to the support of that War, that it was no more capable to do it, than
it is for a drop of Water to quench a great Flame.

Though the King had been already necessitated to make a great many Edicts, yet
he was still obliged to make new ones; and one among the rest, which gave
occasion to a witty Expression of the Duke de Ferte's, at least it was reckoned
witty, by some little pretenders to Wit; though I confess, I am not of their
mind, whether it be that I am but an ill Judge, or that they have been mistaken
at that time. This Edict was concerning Coats of Arms belonging to Families.
All the People of Quality were striving, who should make the best Projects for
bringing in Money to the King; for they knew His Majesty would reward them for
it; and most of them had need of some reward, because of the great Expense they
were at, in the Army and at Court. The Duchess of Roquelaure was the Author of
this Project, and had a good Reward for it, and being come to Versailles some
days after, with a very rich Petticoat; many of those little Pretenders who
were standing round about the Duke de la Ferte, who made them sometimes laugh,
desired him to take notice of that rich Petticoat, and to admire it. He said
that it was no wonder it was rich and fine, seeing it was strewn and decked
with all their Scutcheons. This was the witty Expression that was so much
talked of: Though I thought there was as little Wit in it, if not less, than in
another which he had some days after, upon occasion of the King's going to S.
Germain en Lay to pay a Visit to K. James and his Queen. Those who were with
the Duke asked him, why the King went so often thither, he said, he did not
exactly know what might be his Majesty's Reason, but he guessed, that the
General Peace being now upon the point of being concluded; so that K. James
could not stay any longer in that Kingdom: The King went to acquaint him with
the Article of Six Months stay: Every body was persuaded, that seeing by this
Peace, the King was to acknowledge King William for Rightful King of Great
Britain; K. James would not stay and see his Ambassadors come to His Majesty's
Court, and that therefore he would go to Rome, or at least to Avignon, to
conceal his Misfortunes. But as he has learned by the Exercises of Piety and
Devotion, which he has practiced these many Years past, to take the saddest
events as from the hand of God; so it is now found, that the Duke de la F^rte,
was out in his guessing, when he thought that this Prince would soon leave S.
Germains. Yet K. James resolved not to let the Peace be concluded, without
making the Confederates sensible, that the Alliance they had entered into, with
K. William, for setting him upon his Throne, might be of dangerous consequence
to themselves. He caused a Manifesto to be drawn up, and copies of it to be
given to all the Ministers of Princes and States, that were concerned in the
Conferences at Reswick. In this Manifesto, he vindicated himself from an
Imputation, that his Subjects had charged him with; which was, that he had been
always so strictly in the Kings Interests, that he would never enter into any
Treaty, with any other Potentates, for reducing his Power which was become
formidable to all Europe. And the Confederates themselves, who had often
endeavored to gain him, but could never prevail (whether it was that he was
really in his Majesty's Interest, or that he thought it was for his own
Interest, not to engage in War against him) made also use of the same pret^xt,
when they deserted him. For when he sent some of his Servants to their Courts,
(after K. William was entered into England) and desired them, that they would
not give any assistance to that Prince, they met with so very cold a reception,
that it is impossible to find its Parallel. And the Pope himself did as it were
mock at him, so that the Person whom he sent to Rome, brought nothing back, but
Beads instead of Sums of Money; though he informed his H^liness, that the true
Reason of his Misfortunes, was, that he had zeal^usly endeavored to
re-establish the Roman Catholic Religion in his Dominions; but how much soever
it was the Pope's Interest to have protected him upon that account: Ye^ his
Holiness had his own share in those fears, which the King's great Power gave to
all the other Princes of Europe; so that he would not hearken, either to what
Religion advised him to, or to what the Ordinary Interest of Popes uses to
suggest to them on such occasions. After K. James had published his Manifesto,
he met with the same treatment be had met with before; for though he cleared
himself, as well as he could, from the accu^ation I have already mentioned; and
endeavored also to make the Consederates sen^^ble, that they might come to
fall under as great Misfortunes, as had befallen him, if they should sufter
that by the T^eaty of Peace, which was upon the point of being concluded, the
Prince of (...) should be acknowledged King of England: Yet they did not think
it convenient, to treat him better than they had done before. So that there
being no hopes left him, of being restored to his Throne, unless some great
Revolution should happen in his Country: He entreated the King, that what
Treaty soever he should make with his Enemies, yet he ^ight never oblige him,
to go to any great distance from his Court. He thought Prudence obliged him to
ask this of his Majesty: For he remembered, how after his Father's misfortunes,
his Brother and he had been forced to depart out of F^ance, where they thought
to have found protection.

The End of the First Part.
MEMOIRS Of the Court OF FRANCE, And of the City OF PARIS.
PART II.
K. James's Manifesto had no effect. It being the Interest of all the
Confederates to keep K. William upon the Throne, that he had mounted by the
unanimous consent of his People, they took no notice of it. The
Plenipotentiaries, at the Reswick Treaty, carried on the Conferences without
any great Concern in his Interest. All that France could do on his behalf, was,
a secret Article providing for the ^^een, his Wife's Jointure, to be signed at
the same time with the Treaty. The insignificancy of this Manifesto, appeared
in his most Christian Majesty's Declaration to all the Allies; that he owned K.
William as the lawful King: Without which Article, he could expect no
Accommodation. This accknowledgment did not ^uch perplex that Prince, who went
upon sure grounds: For in the Articles of Peace proposed by the King, when his
Plenipotentaries offered to state that Article, he advised 'em to dash it out,
because he knew, very well, how to keep up the Dignity conferred upon him by the
Parliament of England, with the Succors of his People and Allies: So that this
Question was to bear no Figure among those contested by the respective Parties.

In the mean time, the Armies, pursuant to their usual Custom, made
preparations for the Field; and the King having re-enforc'd his Troops, with
those he had recalled from Italy, would not listen to the Truce that was
offered to him by the Allies. The Mareshalls Villeroy, and Boufflers, Commanded
the Army in Flanders, which was the most considerable. But though they succeeded
to the command the Duke of Luxemburg had before his Death, yet they were far
short of succeeding to his Reputation. Villeroy, for his first Adventure,
suffered the Prince of Vaudemont to escape, whom he might have entirely
defeated: And his carelessness, not to mention his Insufficiency, occasioned the
loss of Namur Boufflers having thrown himself into that Place, made so sorry a
Defense, that, after his return from that Expedition, L' Apparat, who was chief
Engineer at the Siege of Barcelona, told him to his Face, That if he had been
within the Walls of Namur, it had either been still in the King's Hands, or
else he had cut off a great part of K. William's Army. The Mar^shal was
mightily surpised with this Discourse, which seemed to charge him either with
Cowardice, though, indeed, L' Apparat was mistaken if h^ took that for his weak
side, or else with want of Experience: for one of these two must needs have
occasioned the loss of that Place: However he replied, That his success before
Barcelona made him take such measures as became him very ill; and that he would
make him eat in his words, were it not that he knew he had received some Blows
on the Head, which had turned his Brains. L' Apparat made Answer, That the
Mareshal ought not to apply to himself what he mean'd of another: that he
prayed God to forbid that ever he should censure his Conduct; that he was very
sensibIe of the deference and respect that was due to him; that he only mean'd,
that Mr. de Megrigny, who was employed to defend Namur in the Quality of
Engineer, had acted his part so very ill, that he would not stand to affirm
that he either wanted Courage, or at least, had forgot himself. By this means,
L' Apparat cleared himself: And the Mareshal was very well pleased to see him
throw upon another, what he had applied to himself. But Soldiers do not always
examine things so nicely; whoever has the General Command, they impute all
their good or bad Success to him. The whole Army regretted the loss of their
late General. Besides, there was a vast difference between him, and those who
filled his Post. Mareshal Villeroy was puffed up with a great Opinion of
himself, though, at the same time, he never had done any thing upon which he
could ground so much concei^edness. On the contrary, the Soldiers called to
mind, how contemptuously his Father treated him upon his return from the Siege
of Lisle, by reason of some Charge laid against him, insomuch, that if he had
not, by a desperate turn, retrieved his Reputation in the Conquest of the
County, which happened the next Year, he had run the risque of never returning.
As for Mareshall Boufflers, it is true, he could not be charged with any such
thing; for he was so cautious and irresolute, that 'twas manifest he was a
stranger to that Presumption, that rendered the other unsupportable. But, after
all, this irresolution spoke him diffident of himself; for which reason, the
Soldiers said, The Duke of Luxemburg read what he had to do in his Hunch; but
neither of the present Generals could find any thing in their Heads.

Some Hours before that General's Death, he called the Duke of Montmoran^y, his
Eldest Son, to his Bedside, and gave him to know, that to make him easy, he
behooved to give him a Promise, which would afford him some Comfort in his
Passage to the other World. The Duke of Montmorancy promising Obedience to his
Commands, the poor dying General buoyed up with Hopes, told him, That since he
had been long (...) Marchioness ^f Belle^onds, (...) be the Fool to Marry her,
^^on (...) des^^'d he would (...), upon (...), not to Marry her, when his Eyes
were (...). This Lady was the Duke of Mazarin's (...): Her Father's Devourness
occasioned her being Married to the Marquis of Bell^fonds; for the (...), his
Father, was as devout as the (...); but the Ma^quis was not a proper ma^^^ for
her: ^or he had ^^i^^er the Estate, nor a thousand other things, that a Lady,
of her Quality, might have expected in a Husband. However, as Children do not
always follow their Father's ^oot-steps, so the Marquis was not near so devc^t
as the Maresh^ll; upon which account, the Duke of Mazarin frequently repented
that he had made him his Son-in-Law. At last, after the Marquis had lived some
time with the Duke's Daughter, he was Killed at the head of his Regiment in the
Battle of St^enkerke. The Government of Vincennes, being given by the Duke of
Mazarin with his Daughter, became vaca^t by the Marquis's Death; so that the
Marchioness was but in sorry circumstances for a Lady of Quality: For though the
King gave that Government to her Son, and the survivorship to the Maresh^ll of
Bell^fonds, yet the incomes arising to her out of her Husband's Estate, were
but very narrow. 'Twas for this reason, that the Duke of Luxemburg feared his
Son's Marrying of her, he being then a Widdower by the Death of his Wife, who
was a Daughter of the Duke of Chevreuse. The Duke of Montmorancy, whom his
Father never press d to any thing that was not to his advantage, readily
complied with his Father's Demands in giving his Promise. Two Days after, the
Duke of Luxemburg Died, and his Son resolved to stand to his Promise, though he
continued still to visit the Widow, and even became more in Love with her than
before: However having no Issue by his Wife, and being a Person of a great
Figure in regard of the Government of Normandy, which his Father had procured
him, he had a mind to Marry again. The Marchioness of Seignelay was a proper
match for him, both for Estate and Quality. She was very handsome, and her Age
bore a suitable proportion to his. But this Lady, being the Widow of a
Minister of State, in whose lifetime every body stooped to her, stood upon the
point of Honor, when she preceiv'd that the Duke's Agents pretended, that she
behooved to give the Duke considerable odds, because she had Children; after
which she would never hear of the Proposal again. She thought, that
notwithstanding her Widdow-hood, she was, at any time, as good as the Duke of
Montmorancy, who had assumed the Title of Luxemburg after his Father's Death;
and that it became him to treat with her at even hands. The Duke finding she
would not give him any thing, looked out for a Wife elsewhere; and having
pitched upon the only Daughter of the Marquis of Clerembaut, who had formerly a
place in Monsieur's Household, Married her a few Days after. She was but
fourteen Years of Age, and was very Pretty, though she was not a Beauty. Her
Mother being the Widow of Count du Plessis, the present Duke of Choiseul's
Eldest Brother had Married her Husband for Love; and being acquainted with the
Pleasure of the Conjugal State, when Man and Wife live in perfect Union, would
needs put her Son-in-Law upon the same Foot with the Marquis of Clerembaut. She
used all manner of perswasives to oblige him to keep Company with no Woman but
his Wife. But the Duke of Luxemburg having Married her Daught^r only for his
Interest, and having always Loved the Marchioness of Bellefonds, did not like
her Remonstrances. He told her, all the World was not like her Husband; and
scarce any body but himself, could confine their Addresses to one Woman. His
Mother-in-Law, not discouraged by this answer, renewed the attack several
times. She would even oblige him never to see his Mistress again: But the Duke
would never give her his Promise to that effect; upon which she put the shrew
upon him, and treated him, just as if the regulation of his Conduct had been
her Province. The Duke did not like her ways: However, to make her sen^sible,
that that was not the way to win, or break him, he re-doubled his visits to the
Marchioness of Bellefonds. This put the Old Woman into a Passion. She teased
her Son-in-Law so incessantly, that he was obliged to tell her, he would either
take away his Wife to another House (for they lived all together, the
Mother-in-Law and her Husband being obliged, by the Contract of Marriage, to
give them both Lodging and Diet) or else Dine and Sup always abroad. And,
indeed, he was as good as his word: But when he saw all his Remonstrances were
ineffectual, he began to lie out in the Night: sometimes in the Bagnio's, and
sometimes in Luxemburg-House, which was still furnished. But all this was so
far from producing the proposed Effect, that his Mother-in-Law grew still more
uneasy, and troublesome, insomuch, that he was quickly obliged to leave her for
good and all.

This Duke had three Brethren, and two Sisters, one of which Married the Prince
of Neuschattel, as I intimated above; The other was shut up in a Convent, but
would willingly have come out if she could. As for the Brethren, one of them
was hunch-back'd like his Eather: For which reason, the late Duke of Luxemburg
designed him for the Church, pursuant to the common Practice of Persons of
Quality, who allot only to God Almighty, what is not fit for the World. The two
other Brethren were Count Luce, and Chevalier Luxembourg: The former being
already a Brigadier in the King's Army, and in good repute among the Soldiers,
quickly assumed the Title of Duke of Chatillon, upon the Death of the Duchess
of Mekleburg, his Aunt, who made him her universal Heir, and, among other
things, left him the Duchy of Chatillon, with the Lands of Marlau, which
brought in better than forty thousand Livres a Year. The King revived that
Dukedom in his Favor; for it had lain extinct by the Death of the Duke of
Chatillon, his Aunts first Husband. This new Duke Married afterward
Mademoiselle de R^han, descended of an infamous Branch of the House of
Tremouille; for the Marquis of R^han her Father, and her Grandfather, as well
as the Abbot of Tremouille, her Uncle, were Persons that did not deserve such
Illustrious Titles. As for Count Ol^nne, her Father's Elder Brother, it is true,
he had more Sense than either her Father, or the Abbot, and did not love
Drinking as they did: But, after all, he had never been much known in the
World, if his Wife had not made up that Defect; for the care she took in
spreading his Reputation, was Crowned with such admirable success, that there
were Generals in the Army who were not so much spoken of as he. However he did
one thing that met with a general Approbation from the World, namely his
separation from her, as soon as he saw her bestow upon others, what was only
his due. But having inured himself to her Customs while they lived together, he
retained a Tincture of 'em after her departure. He loved to see a great deal of
Company in his House, as she did in hers; and a great many met there, and G^m'd
every Night. By th^s means, His Majesty, who always discouraged Impiety, came
to be informed, that he w^nt beyond many others in a dexterity of Coin-^^^
Oaths. Upon this, His Majesty sent him word, That if he continued in that
course, ^e (...) ^^me to repent it ere long. This Compl^^ent made him wiser
than he was before; so that what further Progress he made in his wonted Course,
was done Incognito. 'Twas to be wished, that the King's Authority could have
reformed his Brethren as soon as himself. Though Swearing was not their Crime,
yet one would not have taken them for Persons of Quality, unless he had known
them. The Chevalier de Rohan, and the Abbot Tremouille, lodged in a scandalous
Tippling-House; though the last was worth almost ten Thousand Livers a Year, and
the first had enough to Live upon. Upon this account, a Gentleman belonging to
the Court, to oblige them to recollect themselves, sent 'em a great Packet,
Counter-sign'd by a Secretary of State, as if it had come from the Court: 'Twas
addressed, To my Cousins, the Abbot Tremouille, and Chevalier Rohan, at the six
Monks Tavern, in Paris. 'Twas delivered to their Landlady, at a time, when they
were abroad; and though they had not much Sense, yet they understood it to be a
ridiculing of their Drunkenness. The name of Cousin, in the Subscription, was a
Privilege that all their Family formerly enjoyed, though, at present, it is
confined to the Eldest: So that if they were not Dukes and Peers, as they are
at present, yet the King would always Dignifie them with the Title of My
Cousin, unless His Majesty pleased to take that Prerogative from them, as he
has sometimes done to other Families.

For instance, the Counts of Clermont Lodeve, whose Posterity the Marquis of
Sessack pretends, at present, to renew: This Family, I say, in former times,
were entitled to the same Privilege; and it is only of late, that the King
deprived 'em of it, and that upon this occasion; The Elder Brother of that
Marquis, being ordered to the Bastile, by reason of a Blow he gave to the
Bishop of Londeve, in Languedock, was in a quanda^y whether he should obey the
Order, or not, because he was not styled Cousin in the Sealed Letter that was
sent him. However, Count Olonne, who was worth almost forty Thousand Livers a
Year, having no Children, resolved to marry Chevalier Rohan, his Brother, in
hopes that the Offspring would not resemble the Father. There being few Ladies
of Quality, though never so Ordinary and Poor, that would accept of him for a
Husband; He fixed upon one of his own Cousins that had nothing, namely,
Mademoiselle Noirmoutier, Sister to the Dutchesses of Brachiane, and Lanti: She
was likewise of the Tremouille Family, and the Daughter of the Duke of
Noirmoutier, who had so great a hand in the first Paris War. As soon as he
opened the matter to her, she trembled from top to toe, as being acquainted
with the Character of her designed Husband; but his promise of settling his
whole Estate upon his Brother, in case the marriage went on, and a great many
other things that he represented to her as matter of Comfort, did so tame her,
that she presently complied. And thus she married the Man in the World, that
deserved least to be Loved; and upon other scores, had so little knowledge of
his own Character, that some time after, when some Citizens came to Game at her
House, ^^e of 'em, not knowing the Chevalier, and seeing him offer her a Seat,
bid him give her another, because that one did not please her Mademoiselle
Noirmoutier, who then enjoyed the Title of Marchioness of Rohan, was obliged to
put up a great many other Affronts. But, Gaming, which she loved to the last
degree, made amends for every thing; and the Profit she drew from it,
compensated the avarice of Count Olonne, who having made her Husband his Heir,
was so sharp set, that he would give him nothing while he Lived. Mr. Harlei,
Son-in-Law to the present Chancellor, loved Gaming as passionately as she, and
used to game in her House, where he made such a Voyage, that a few such more
would have ruined him. She, and Madam Thereon, won twenty Thousand Crowns of
him, at one bout; and upon such losses, it being natural to offer some Plea or
other for not paying, he did not do as Mr. Verthamont did; for instead of
paying the Money without any words, in order to stifle the scandal, he gave it
out, that he was Cheated. The Chancellor displeased with his Conduct, told him,
'Twas a sorry Excuse, and that when the King had caught a Man cheating him, he
expelled him the Court; which was a Lesson for others, that it behooved him to
follow. In fine, he gave him twenty Thousand Crowns to be delivered to those
that won that sum of him. The Marchioness of Rohan, had several such little
Jobbs, which helped her out while she waited for Count Olonne's Death: At last
he Died, as well as her Husband, who left her only one Daughter. Upon this, she
resolved to breed up her Daughter as a great Heiress, and to enjoy her self.
But, as the saying is, Man proposes, and God disposes. Her self was snatched
away soon after 'em. She was seized with a violent Pain in a very sensible
Part; and to appease the unsufferable Pain, and procure her some Rest, she took
a Dose of Opium that was somewhat stronger than ordinary, immediately after the
taking of it, she slept effectualy, but so as never to awake; for next Day she
was found Dead in her Bed. 'Twas her Daughter that the Duke of Chatillon
Married: And though she was the Daughter of a Father and Mother that were not
very well spoken of, and withal, not so agreeable as her Sister-in-Law, yet she
found out the secret of living more happily with her Husband, than the Duchess
of Luxemburg did with hers: For that Duke continued still to visit Madam
Bellefonds, which enraged his Mother-in-Law so much, that if she had had her
Will, she had taken her Daughter from him: But, as there are some Rules in the
way of Justice, that one is obliged to follow in spite of all that may happen;
so it behooved both she, and her Daughter to be patient.

At the same time, the King gave a Pension of six thousand Live^s to Madam de
Cav^is; and when he bestowed the Gift, gave her to know, that he was angry with
himself for being so late in gr^ti^ying her; and that she should lose ^^thing
by staying so long, for that the Pre^^^t he then made her, was but a Pattern of
what he designed to do for the future, both for h^^, and her Husband. Mr. de
Cavoy was grand Marshal of the apartments of the King's House, a place that
entitled his Predeces^ors to the order of the Holy Ghost. But at the last
installment, he had not that Dignity Conferred upon him; though many others, that
had not so much reason to expect it as he, were then invested with it. The
reason was said to be this. He appeared to be too much interess'd in some
things, for which he employed the Marquis of S^ign^l^y's I^terest, being in
very good terms with that Minister. For the purpose; the Scene was l^id between
him and a Merchant, to whom he promised, upon a consideration of Ten Thousand
Crow^s, to release a Vessel of his that had been s^iz'd as a true Prize. And in
effect, he pro^^r'd the Restitution from that Minister, upon whom it depended.
But as every Man has En^mies; so those that had an interest in the Confiscation
of the Ship, took occasion to acquaint the King, that Mr. Cavoy, in
consideration of a private Interest, had caused a seizure to be restored
without a valuable Ransom. Up on this, His Majesty reversed the Decree that
the Counsel had given on the Merchant's behalf: So that his Ship and Cargo was
confiscated anew, and sold for the King's Benefit. This done, Mr. de Cavois was
obliged to return the ten Thousand Crowns he had already fingered: And
forasmuch as he did not repay it, till he was pressed and urged to it, It came
to the King's Ears, for there are always People about Court, that are never a
sleep when they have an opportunity of injuring their Neighbor. Besides, a
chief reason why they would not forgive Cavo^s, was, That there was a
misunderstanding between the Marquis de Louv^is, and the Marquis de S^ign^l^^;
and the Creatures of the one, hunted only for opportunities of ruining the
Creatures of the other, presuming that ^^ch a Sacrifice would be very agreeable
to their ^^tron. In fine, the Death of the Marquis de S^ign^l^y, had, in a
manner, Buried Mr. de Ca^^^s, in his Master's Disgrace, when the King ^eviv'd
him by this his bounteous present. He had bought a House at Lo^vettienne, a
small Village about a Muske^ shot from Marli. At this place, his Wi^e, a Native
of Bri^tany, kept a Dairy, and having made some Butter after the fashion of her
own Country, made a Present of it to the King, as an acknowledgement of his
late Bounty. His Majesty liked the Butter above all things in the World,
insomuch, that he desired her to send him some, not only to Marli, but to
Versailles, when he returned thither.

In the mean time, the Marquis of Cascaye, Ambassador from Portugal,
entertained the Public with a very diverting Scene. He was a very Rich Man,
and brought as much Silver Plate to Paris, as might have served for twenty
Ambassador's Tables. He was a passionate lover of Gaming, especially at
Lansquenet, which was always in vogue, notwithstanding the efforts of a n^w
Lieutenant of the Police, to suppress it, who, for that end, went about to
several Houses of the City where the Gamesters Assembled. Madam le Camus
Destouches, having a House in the Arsenal, and being fearless of that Officer's
Visits, kept two days in the week for that Game. The Ambassador went thither,
and having lost all his Money, began to play upon tick. An Adventurer that
played at the same place, and lost his Money as well as the Marquis, being out
of Humor, happened to say, 'Twas a strange thing to see Men loose their money
every day, and yet play upon Credit. The Gentleman spoke it with reference to
some others that distinguished themselves that way, as well as the Ambassador.
But the Ambassador applying it to himself, testified his Displeasure by giving
him two Blows upon the spot, with all his force: And to entertain him yet
better, ordered his Gentleman of the Horse, who always followed him, to give
him some Blows with the flat side of his Sword. The Gentleman of the Horse put
his Master's Commands in Execution, before the other could put himself in a
posture of Defense; so that he was treated at a very handsome rate. Madam de
Frenoi being present said; She wondered that a Man, especially one of his
Character, would give such usage before Ladies, there being several in the
Company be sides her self. This she spoke in a finical way affecting the air of
Quality, and that in such words as might make her pass for such. But the
Duchess de la Ferte, having a design upon her, either because de Frenoi was
handsomer than she, or because she was one of the losers; replied, That it did
not become a little Cit, like her, to censure the Actions of a Person of the
Marquis of Cascay 's Quality. The Scene being thus changed, they were so intent
upon the new Dispute about Decorum, that they forgot what had passed; only the
poor Man that was banged, kept a heavy clutter, Swearing and blustering, that he
would Die by it, or have satisfaction for the Affront he had received: But
whatever was in it, it is now almost a Year since the thing happened, and I do
not find that he has done any thing suitable to his words. As for Madam de
Frenoi, she was as good a Tongue-pad as the Duchess, and managed her Point to
the advantage. Some days after the Ambassador came again to the Royal Palace,
to play at the House of a Lady of another sort of Quality than Madam
Destouches. The Duchess of Ferte happening to be there, and retaining a
resentment of the disagreeable words that Madam du Frenoi had uttered upon the
account of his Conduct, asked him, if he ordered his Gentleman of the Horse
always to follow him; for he was with him then, and, indeed, at all times
followed him as close as a shadow does the Body. The Ambassador was about to
give her some answer or other; but she interrupted him by setting forth, that
there was no body in the Company to beat, so that the Champion would loose his
time in staying there: That it was a thing unheard of among Ladies of Quality,
such being in that Company, to converse with a Man that at the last meeting,
had treated their Sex without Respect or Honor; and, that if such things took
in Portugal, it was not so in France, where the Ladies knew better things. This
last Article the Ambassador would not grant to her. He had taken too much pains
to learn of the Court and City Ladies how to play at Cards, to quit the
Profession so easily. But, as to the first Article, He made Answer, That since
she desired his Gentleman of the Horse should be sent away, it should be done.
The new Quarrel being thus put up, they went to Gaming: In the mean time, the
poor Fellow that was Drubb'd, run up and down Versailles and Paris, in quest of
reparation for the A^tront: But his Interest being insignificant in either, He
lost his Labor, and put up the Blows He had received.

The Marquis of Ceaquin continued still to slight his ^ady; and Her Relations,
understanding that He went often to the Opera, and had and (...) a she Creature
retaining to it, ob^^^^ (...) His Majesty an Order, Prohibiting all (...) of
Quality, or any others to stand upon (...): For 'twas there that several
In(...) were first set on Foot, which were afterward improved behind the
Scenes, and at last finished elsewhere. This unsow'd a great many little Sparks
that went thither only to belch out a thousand smutty and rank Stories among
these Women, who did not so much as wrap up the foulest Bawdry in clean Linen:
For they were all so very Lewd, that they did not blush to speak themselves
such things, the very hearing of which would, at other times, have covered them
with Confusion and Disorder.

The Chevalier de la Hilliere, Governor of Ro^ro^ Died about this time. He had
formerly been a Lieutenant in the Lifeguard. He did not much distinguish
himself in his Lifetime; and I remember to have read some where or other, That
as he walked one day before the King, the point of his Sword having pierced
through the Scabbard, gave His Majesty a prick in the Leg; upon which the King
told him, He believed his Sword never hurt any body before. I shall not confirm
this piece of detraction, of which His Majesty is less capable than another;
for whatever occasion Men of Quality may have given him to complain, he never
spoke to any of them in disobliging Terms. But it is certain, that though this
Knight was not much talked of in his Lifetime, yet it was otherwise after his
Death. He made a Will that many wondered at; which was much of the same Nature
with that made by the Farmer of the Revenues mentioned in the First Part of
this Work: Nay, it was rather more valid; for instead of choosing soft smooth
Words, to signify that he had cheated the King, he downright owned himself
guilty of Robbery. He set forth, in plain terms, that he had Robbed the King of
twenty Thousand Livers, while he was Governor of the Place abovementioned; and
ordered his Heirs to make Restitution of the same, before they appropriated to
themselves one Farthing of his Estate. A great many put in for his Government;
for there were People enough about Court ready to take the alarm upon any
vacancy, who wanted some Subsistence of the King, because they had spent most
of what they had in his Service. But Mr. Bartillac, Lieurenant General of His
Majesty's Forces, had the best luck. He had served a long time without getting
any thing; and the King having gratified all the old Officers, would not let
him be the only One that could say, He was forgot*

In the mean time, Marshal Boufflers represented to His Majesty, That he was
dissatisfied with one of his Lieutenant Generals, not that he was a Coward, and
unworthy of his Post, but because he was so Saucy, that he had all the trouble
in the World to make him receive his Orders. The King replied, that he ought to
discard him, and that would quickly make him easy. This Marshal, who is a
younger Brother of the House of Piccardy, served first in the Guards in the
quality of Aid-Major: After that, his Eldest Brother Marrying Madam Guenegaut,
the Daughter of Mr. du Plessis Guenegaut, Secretary of State, paid him down
his Portion. Then he bought the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and began to
distinguish himself at the head of it in the Battle of St. Francis. Upon this,
Mr. de Turenne, who studied to serve all the World, spoke so much of him to the
King, that His Majesty had a deep impression of his Character. After that; he
served, as the rest did, till Turenne, his good Friend, Died. Marshal Crequi,
who succeeded Turenne, in the quality of a General, could not endure Boufflers
at first, and charged him with intermeddling Officiously where he was not
desired, and very often without knowing well what he said. He drew this check
upon himself, by boasting of some intelligence he had received of the Enemy:
For the Marshal being a proud Man, did not like such doings, alleging, That
they insinuated an accusation against him, as if he had not taken all the
necessary Measures for having as good intelligence as he. Whatever was in it,
Mr. Boufflers, by his Patience, conquered the General's Aversion, and they
became such good Friends, that General Crequi was the first that confirmed to
His Majesty the Character that Turenne had given him of Boufflers. And that
Marshal having, in the latter part of his Life, retrieved the eclipse he met
with, at Consardick Bridge; his Confirmation did Boufflers no harm; for the
King befriended Mr. Boufflers, and having made him a Lieutenant General (...)
after the Peace of Nimeguen, raised him a^^^^wards to a higher Post. He was
already Coll^^^^ General of the Dragoons; and the late Duke of Lesdiguieres,
lent him Money to buy that Post, perhaps, more to disoblige the Marquis of
Louvois, than to oblige Mr. Boufflers; for that Minister designed the Post for
the Chevalier Tilladet, his Cousin German, though all the Army said, he was less
worthy of it than the other. Considering his Interest at Court, and Mr.
Boufflers his incapacity to purchase it, he thought he could not miss the
procuring of it to Tilladet, especially since Tilladet had the most
considerable Post next to Boufflers, in the Regiment. His design in procuring
it to Tilladet, was to transfer it afterward to one of his own Sons; for which
reason he was not pleased with the Duke of Lesdiguieres, for lending the Money:
And Mr. Boufflers was, for sometime, doubtful, whether the Marquis was his
Friend, or his Enemy. But at last, that Minister finding that Mr. Boufflers had
the King's Ear, and that His Majesty looked upon him as another Turenne, not
with reference to his capacity which was, far short of that General's; but by
reason of his being dis-interess'd like him, and his inviolable respect for his
Person; That Minister, I say, upon these considerations dropped the spite he had
against him, and accordingly did not oppose His Majesty's Bounty to him. He was
made Governor of Luxembourg, after the King took it; and Marshal Crequi Dying
some time after, His Majesty bestowed upon him the Government of Lorrain, which
was vacant by the Marshal's Death. After that, the War broke out, (...) he gave
him the Command of an Army; though he was then but a Lieutenant General; and
ordered Rubantel, a Lieutenant General, and Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment
of Guards, to receive Orders from him. This disobliged Rubantel the more, that
he had ^een Eldest Captain in the Regiment, when the other was but A^d-Ma^^r;
having succeeded to his Brother's Company, who was killed in the Siege of
V^len^^^nnes. He would have shown his Resentment before the Judges; but his
Interest was not great there, because he had refused to marry Madam S.
P^^anges, who was since married to one Verne^^l, Judge of the Court of
Requests: So that they were not troubled at this his Mortifi^ation.

He served under this New General with a great deal of discontent; but he
quickly met with a greater Aff^ont; for Mr. Boufflers his Interest at Court
gr^w so much, that he had not only a blew Ribband, but was made a Marshal of
France, Governor of the French Flanders, and Colonel of the Regiment of
Guards. This last piece of Honor conferred upon him; disobliged Rubantel more
than any thing else; for being Lieutenant Colonel of that Regiment, he was
obliged to obey his Orders every Day, whether in Camp, or at Court. Some time
after, the King designing a review of that Regiment, Boufflers made his review
first, in order to remedy all Deficiencies before the King saw them. During
this review, Mr. Rubantel sat upon Thorns; and as soon as Mr. Boufflers gave
orders, that the Regiment should file off before him, mounted his Coach, and
came to Paris, to avo^d the necessity of saluting him with Pike in hand. The
Marshal complained of this to the King: And this was the Person that Boufflers
pointed to, when he told the King (as we intimated above) that he was
dissatisfied with one of his Lieutenant Generals. His Majesty finding it his
Interest to prevent such an occasion of scandal in his Army, in which the
measures of Subordination must always be maintained, ordered Rubantel to be
reprimanded by the Marquis de Barbesieux, the Son of the Marquis de Louvois,
who had Died suddenly, and whose place of Secretary of State he had succeeded
to. This did not make Rubantel the wiser; for upon several other occasions, he
displayed an impatience in being subject to the Marshal; upon which the King
was so Angry, that he resolved to take his Commission from him. His Majesty
discovered part of his mind to the Duke of Rochefoucaut, who told him, that
though Rubantel was in the wrong, yet, if his Majesty would be pleased to
consider the Case, he would find that his Crime, as great as it was, did not
deserve so severe a Punishment; that he had been Captain of the Guards Forty
Years; and though he was bound to give a blind Obedience to whatever Superior
his Majesty placed over him, yet considering 'twas natural for a Man not to
love to see himself commanded by another that had been long his Inferior, 'twas
very possible for him to depart from his Duty. These words softened the King's
Humor; but his Majesty being obliged to put another in his place, by reason of
the ill consequences that might ensue upon the failure of an exact Discipline
in his Regiments, commanded the Marquis of Barbesieux, to order Rubantel to
resign his Post in Favor of Count Avejeant, an old Captain of the Guards, and
Marshal de Camp. This Count was the Son-in-Law of the late Mr. Valot, the
King's first Physician; and was at first looked upon by his Wife's Family, as a
person unworthy of their Alliance; for she had a great Estate, and he had
scarce any: But the King had a kindness for him, because he was bred up his
Page, and changed his Religion betimes; and in the progress of time, he, whom
they looked upon as the most scandalous Member of their Family, such as it was,
became, not only the Ornament, but the support of the same. The like happened
before to the Family of Bourdeaux, which made almost as sorry a Figure as
Vallot's. The Eldest Daughter of the Intendant of the Finances, a Widow of a
Member of Parliament, being Courtted by Mr. Sanguin, the Father of the Marquis
of Livri, first Steward to the King, inveighed so bitterly against him, that
she was heard say, He was unworthy of being received into her Family. But,
after all, she was so wise and happy as to Court him, when she saw him in
Favor: And if she had not engaged him in her Interest, she had been at a loss
upon several occasions.

To return from this Digression: The Marquis de Barbesieux, having delivered
the King's Commands, told Rubantel at the same time, That his Carriage to
Marshal Boufflers had so displeased the King, that he would never have done any
thing for him, if the Marshal had not interceded on his behalf; that upon his
Intercession, his Majesty bestowed upon him the Government of Baratu-Fort, with
a Pension of four Thousand Livers; and that he behooved to return thanks to the
Marshal upon that score. Rubantel, considering that a great many of his juniors
had some of them Governments long before, and others more considerable Posts,
was so incensed upon the Compliment, that he immediately returned the Marquis
this Answer, That he would rather choose to receive no Fa^ours, than to
purchase them at that rate; and that so long as he had the honor to serve his
Majesty, he thought he had done his Duty, in such a manner, as to deserve some
grants, without needing the recommendation of any one. This said, he went away
without staying for any reply; and the Marquis Barbesieux having given the King
an account of his Answer; His Majesty said aloud, before all the Court, That he
was not much surpised with his procedure, because he had known him long before
to be a Man of that Kidney. He spoke likewise some other words, which gave
Rubantel's Friends a jealousy, that he might come to be committed. Thereupon
the Duke of Rochefoucaut, being touched with Pity toward this unfortunate
Man, whose long Service seemed to deserve a better Fate: This Duke, I say,
presumed to offer to His Majesty all that he thought was capable to appease his
Wrath. His Majesty replied, That he would consider all his Remonstrances; but
that he had suffered so many things from him already, that he wondered himself
was so late in doing what he had then done; that this was not the first time he
had given him occasion to be Angry with him, and that he had met with other
instances of his insolence, when he did not seem to take notice of it. These
words displaying still a resentment, the consequences of which were to be
feared: The Duke of Rochefoucaut took the Liberty to make Answer. That, though
His Majesty had bore something of ill humor in that Man, yet he would be
pleased to consider, that he had stood the brunt of many a Musker-Shot in his
Service; and for the space of forty Years, the Regiment of Guards was never
employed in any Siege, but he appeared and ha^arded himself as well as any of
the Regiment; That himself had seen him Charge again five or six times, when a
great many Men were Killed; That he had given equal proof of his Valor, in I
do not know how many Battles; and had spent so much of his Blood, that the
honorable marks he bore in his Body, deserved at His Maiesty's Hands a pardon
for some escapes of his Tongue.

This Discourse had the desired effect: The King's Anger relented; but things
being then at another pass, than in the Reign of Cardinal Mazarin, in which
Favors were obtained by complaining, or pretending to be formidable, for by
such means, two, or three Persons got Marshals Staffs, and others were preser'd
to Posts of Honor: This time (I say) being of a different stamp from that,
insomuch, that the greatest Complaisance and Submission, were necessary means
for having Success; the King did not renew the offer either of Baratu-Fort, or
the Pension. On the contrary, he bestowed that Governor's place upon Mr.
Bac^evilliers, who had been long forgot, and whatever merit he might have, was
like to have continued so all his Life, if he had not luckily been the Marquis
of Montchevreuil's Sister's Son. Without this Circumstance, His Majesty had
never heard of him; for he had the misfortune to serve in the former War,
either in Catalonia, or Messina: And it is a great misfortune for an Officer of
any Ambition, to be so far out of his Master's sight. He continued a great
while Lieutenant Colonel of Horse. But, at last, his Uncle being loaded every
day with Royal Favors, and ^apprehending, that it would be an unhandsome thing
not to make his Nephew share in his good Fortune, entreated Madam Maintenon to
represent his Services to the King. That Lady performed his request very
willingly; and the King told her frankly, That if she had not spoken to him, he
might have continued a long time without knowing that Officer, that being the
first time that ever he heard of his Name. Thereupon His Majesty made him a
Brigadier, without staying till he had a Regiment for him. However the first
vacancy was his; and that he was scarce possessed of, when he was made a
Marshal de Camp, and soon after, a Lieutenant General; so that no Man was ever
observed to rise so fast. At last, His Majesty Crowned all his Favors with a
Present of the above mentioned Government, and took his Younger Brother into
his Household, where he is, at present, an Ensign of the Life-Guards.

Another Officer in the Army was yet more unfortunate than Rubantel; for after
being imprisoned in the Bastile, and losing his Regiment which was worth better
than ten thousand Crowns a Year, he had never obtained his liberty if the Peace
had not been made: This was a Son of the Duke of Tirconnel's, by a Lady that he
had promised marriage to, tho he never performed his Promise. His Name was
Talbot, which was likewise the Duke's Name, and is a Name very famous both in
England, and in France, from whence that House derived its Original. He was a
Brigadeer in the Army in Italy, and had a Regiment there. He came from that
Country to Court, about two or three Years ago, at the time when King James
pretended to Sail for England, upon which King James bid Talbot follow him; but
Talbot made Answer, That though he had an Irish Regiment, yet being in the
Service and Pay of his most Christian Majesty, he could not dispose of his
Person without His Majesty's leave; and that if he would be so kind as to speak
of it to the King, he would be glad to obey his Commands. I know not whether
Talbot spoke these words with such an Air as signified his unwillingness to go;
or whether that Prince took it ill, that one of his Subjects should say, He
could not obey him without his most Christian Majesty's leave. But, in fine,
Kine James discovered by his Countenance, that he had forgot, that Talbot was
the Son of a Man that had done him great Service; and to this Day, is, by all
that know him, esteemed the most faithful and affectionate to his Prince, of
any that we have seen for a long time. Talbot perceived this as well as the
rest: But whether it was that he did not trouble himself about it, or that Wine
which he loved too well, had sunk his Judgment; He told that very Day to the
Marquis de Larre, at a Drinkingmatch, what had passed between King James and
him, adding withal, very imprudently, whether through the influence of Wine,
or real Thought, That he could not imagine what that Prince mean'd to do in
England; and that he was respected or beloved by very few; every body almost
being persuaded that he was a thousand times fitter for a Convent, than for the
Throne. Next Day, the Marquis de Larre visited the Marquis de Barbesieux, with
whom he was in Favor, and gave him an account of what passed between him and
Talbot, thinking, perhaps, rather to do him Service, than to injure him. For
the purpose, he might have in his view to inform that Minister of his
inviolable Affection to the King's Service, upon the comparison with K.
James's. But the Marquis of Barbesieux having told the Story to a Lady that he
Courted, and she having told it to the Queen of England; This Princess
solicited the King to cause Talbot to be taken up. Accordingly he was taken up
at Versailles, and carried to the Bastile, believing that a Prince of K.
James's Devotion, would confine his resentment to a few days Imprisonment. But
as devout People are seldom guilty of granting Pardons, or at least, have no
great Name for it; so he was quickly made to understand, that K. James had a
mind to have him broke. The Duchess of Tirconnel, being a Lady of Honor to
the Queen of England, used her endeavors to prevent the Blow, that was about
to reduce that poor Gentleman to the State he was in when he came from his
Mother's Belly. For though he had served a long time, and had great Incomes, yet
he had been so careless a Husband, that he could scarce raise two thousand
Crown^ upon all he had. Marshal de Noailles, who was his Friend, and under whom
he had served in Catalonia, solicited the King to avert the misfortune: But
His Majesty replied, That it did not lie at his door; and that if the King and
Queen of England did not desire him to be broke, he was satisfied. But, at the
same time, he justly blamed him for drawing that Disgrace upon himself; and the
Marshal could not excuse it otherwise than upon the score of Wine, which often
sinks the Reason of the most sensible Men. Mr. de Vendome interceeded likewise
on his behalf: But 'twas all in vain: For K. James, and his Queen, made not
only his Regiment, but a Pension, that he had, to be taken from him. And thus
he had the mortification of seeing himself unplum'd by one stroke of his Tongue
of all the Fruit of his Services. And which is yet worse, though, at present, he
is at liberty, I do not know that he has yet obtained any thing, though I see him
every day going from Paris to Versailles, and from Versailles to St. Germains.
He has been a long time, without obtaining leave of K. James, and his Queen, to
come and beg their pardon; their Majesty's thinking it proper to show that
their Resentment continues still.

Among all this matter of Affliction, especially to Talbot and Rubantel, as
well as their Friends, there happened a new Scene at Paris, that may be
entertaining to the Public: The Wife of one that belonged to the Pay-Office, a
very Coquette Lady in her way, had one day a mind to ride in her Coach. Her
Coachman having combined with some of her Servants to play her a trick, got
upon his Coach-box, without dressing his Horses, or cleaning the Coach. The
Lady asked him what he mean'd by serving a Person of her Quality in that
fashion. Her Quality, after all, was not very great; but since Madam du
Fresnoi, the Wife of a common Citizen's Son, when speaking of her self, took
upon her to say, A Woman of my Quality; by the same reason, this good Woman
might call herself a Lady of Quality; for both her own, and her Husband's
Father, were something more than the others. However, the Coachman gave her no
Answer, knowing that nothing provokes a Woman more than not answering her,
whether she be in the right, or the wrong. She redoubled her reprimands to make
him speak; and finding that he was still mute, attacked him with threats and
hard words: At last the Coachman, very unconcernedly, answered her, That she
made a great deal of noise for a small matter; and if she would take his
advice, she should give over bawling, and make no more words of it. The Lady
enraged with such an insolent Answer, redoubled her threats and abusive
Language: But the Coachman having kept the best to the last, told her, That he
wondered that such a one as she should be so ill to please, and that she was
too well served for a W -- At that word she was out of all Patience, and called
up her Footmen, who had sheer'd off on purpose to have the more Diversion by
the Comedy. They ran up to her all in a heat to know her Pleasure. She asked
them to act for her in being revenged upon that insolent Fellow. The Footmen
pretending to know nothing of the matter; she gave them to know, that he had
the impudence to call her W -- and that the least they could do was to break
his Arms, or Legs: But she was mightily surpised, when, instead of being
provoked, as she expected, they looked down. Then she asked them what they
mean'd by it? and forced them to speak as if it had been against their Wills.
Their Answer, which was much more provaking than any thing she had yet heard,
was, That if she wanted only to have her Coachman beaten, she might go see for
other Executioners; that they would not beat or thrash any body without a just
Cause; and that they did not take speaking of the Truth to be such. She
replied, That it seemed they took her to be a W -- as well as the Coachman
did. And they Answered, very freely, That they knew her to be such, and were
ready to witness it when she pleased. This raised her Passion to that degree,
that she called upon the rest of her Servants to give her the succor that her
Footmen had refused. The first that appeared was Mistress Cook, who asked her
what put her in such a Passion; the Lady had no sooner told her the matter, but
she made answer, That the Coachman and Footmen were not much to blame; and
that they charged her with nothing that was not true. Then came in the
Chambermaid, who, not being in the Conspiracy with the rest, said, That 'twas
not worth her while to make so many words, and that she would go and call a
Commissary to put them all in Prison: But that word cost her very dear; for as
soon as they saw her making ready to go out, they fell upon her, and beat her
one after another. The Lady fled to her Chamber for fear they should give her
as much: And, at last, the Chambermaid got clear, and fled likewise to her
Chamber. Both of them bolted their doors, and continued there waiting for the
Master of the House, in order to complain of the usage they had received. The
Coachman perceiving that his Mistress was mewed up, took the Horses from the
Coach, and curry'd them: And, in a word, did all that was to be done, in order
to make it appear upon his Master's return, that his Mistress was in the wrong.
But both he, and his accomplices, had used another precaution, that was yet
better. They had complained four days a-go to the Commissary of the Ward, that
she would not pay them their Wages; and having, at the same time, given a
Summons in order to have her cast in Court, they only stayed in the House till
the Husband came; and before his Wife could speak with him, gave him to know,
that they would stay no longer with her, because they could not get a Farthing
out of her hands. The Husband would have kept them, but they did not care to
stay. After they were all gone, he was surpised with an account of the tricks
they had played with his Wife. Had he been wise, he would have advised her not
to speak of the matter to any body, and would have taken the same advice to
himself: But as every Man is not as wise as his Affairs require, so he was the
fool to go himself and complain of his Servants; and thus was the first that
divulged what he ought to have concealed: But the Complaint given in by the
Servants four days before, made People believe, that whatever he said, was by
way of Recrimination. Upon which, his Friends advised him to drop the thing,
and make no more noise of it. They had much ado to persuade him; for his Wife
threw in all the fire she could to dissuade him: But at last, his own Reason
convinced him, that that was his only way, unless he had a mind to make himself
to be pointed at as he walked along the Streets.

As this Lady was branded for a Coquette by her Servants; so I present you with
a story of another, that, indeed, had not that misfortune, but was no less such
in her Husband's Opinion. Mr. Tourville, before he was made a Marshal of
France, married the Daughter of a Farmer General; who was the Widow of the
Marquis of Poplinicre, the Nephew of the late Madam Colbert. 'Twas a lucky hit
for the Marshal to marry that Lady, especially at the time when it happened;
for he was only a younger Brother in Normandy, and that of a Family that was in
no great Circumstances: But Fortune stood by him, when every body thought he
was lost. We must know, that after the Marquis of Seignelay, his Protector, was
Dead, he was writ to from Court, that then was the time, or never, to show his
mettle; for he had never given proof of it all the time that he was employed as
a Marine. This Reproach served for a Spur that twitched him to the Quick,
insomuch, that when he received Orders to Fight the Enemies Fleet at any rate,
he did his Duty; and though he was unfortunate in the way of Success; yet he was
thereupon preferred to that degree, that if he had still been unmarried, he
could, perhaps, have desired no more of that Woman. But, whether it was that he
began to slight her, or that, he thought, he might keep Company with Misses,
without giving her any dissatisfaction; He had a sweet Eye upon one of his
Neighbors, that she was as jealous of, as of another. She told him her
Sentiments of the thing; and not only took the pains to undeceive him, but made
a noise that was very troublesome to the Lady, that she deemed her for her
Rival. I cannot be positive upon the truth of the matter; but it is said, that
this jealous Lady acquainted the Woman's Husband with the Marshal's intimacy
with her. It Is likewise Reported, that the Husband surprised them in a posture
that did not allow him to doubt of the information he had received. Whatever
was in it, the Woman was put into a Convent; and the Marshal, either out of the
chagrin occasioned by her confinement, or through the discontent his Lady had
given him upon other occasions, sent her out of Paris to one of his own
Territories. His Plea was, that she would not do something that he^ desired of
her; and the pretense was the more specious, that it related to his Interest.
But the Lady bore her Banishment from Town the more impatiently, that she was
eternally galled with jealousy, and returned to Paris without giving him
notice. She Lodged in his Apartment, designing to lie so close, that he should
know nothing of the matter, till her own Friends, and her first Husband's
Relations should have acquainted the King with the injustice done her. The
Marshal's Servants seeing her come into his House, gave notice of it to their
Master, who, without asking her the reason why she returned without his order,
complained of it to the King. At the same time, he desired His Majesty to grant
him a Warrant to put her into some Convent, pretending, by that means, to enjoy
all her Estate: But His Majesty being informed of several things, would not be
so hasty, and desired, in the first place, to know the occasion of their
Divorce. The Mareshal endeavored, by all means, to cover and perplex the
Story, and turned it upon the score of Interest; but the King made Answer, That
Commissioners ought to be appointed to inspect which of them was in the wrong.
This was all that his Lady desired; and thus she continued at Paris in spite
of him, and made it her business to thwart all his Intrigues.

In the mean time, his Misses Sister came to be married; and that being a
favorable opportunity of reconciling her to her Husband, the poor recluse's
Friends invited her to be present at the marriage. He was a little restive upon
the point: However, being uneasy in Living alone, and wanting only to be urged
to it, he pretended, that in marrying her, he had not received the same
advantages as they gave to his Sister-in-Law. If they pleased, they might have
given him the same answer as the Marshal Feuillade gave one day to the Brother
of Mr. Courchamp, Master of Requests, who is, at present, Master of the King's
Household, and Colonel of a Regiment of Foot. He had a mind to be an Ensign in
the Guards, and that Marshal offering to sell him a Commission at double the
worth, he represented to him, that it was not worth so much; upon which the
Marshal replied, That he owned it was true; but, withal, that he ought to
know, that that sort of Posts were sold according to the merit of those that
pretended to buy 'em; That there was one price for a Man of Quality, and
another for such as he, and in effect, That neither his Physiognomy, nor his
Air, would bring any honor to the Regiment. I do not insist upon the
Consideration of his Birth; for that Regiment has been filled, I do not know
how long, with Men of the same Degree; and I think the Marshal had no reason to
inflame the price of the Commission, because he was only a Tradesman's Son. But
let that be as it will (as I said before) the Recluse's Relation might have
alleged the same Reasons to her Husband: Nay, they had a better Title so to
do; for it is natural to give with a Girl in Marriage, in proportion to the
Circumstances of him that Marries her. In fine, he stood out boldly,
notwithstanding that he had a mind to take his Wife home again. He was not
present at the Marriage, which was accompanied with a sad Scene; for the
Bride's Mother, that was well but four Days before, Died the same day, that the
Nuptial Benediction was pronounced. The Bridegroom, who did not marry any great
Beauty, was not much troubled at that Circumstance, because he had no great
prospect of Pleasure in her Company. His Bride's Face promising but little
satisfaction, he willingly abstained from the Duties of a Husband, upon the
plea of the loss of her Mother. But he could not handsomely put it off longer
than the second Night, at which time he was obliged to break the Ice: And this
comforted the new married Lady, upon the loss of the first Night, especially
considering, that she feared her Deformity would have eternis'd her Affliction.

Another Lady was Married at the same time, that would have taken it very ill,
if her Husband had thus amused himself with crying and lamentation on the
Wedding-Night. 'Twas Madam Girardin, the Widow of Mr. Girardin, who was first a
Lieutenant of a Province, and after that, was sent Ambassador to
Constantinople. He had played his Game to good purpose; for upon the Division
of his Estate, his Widow had above a hundred thousand Crowns for her share,
besides a great quantity of Movables, that was worth half as much. She had
likewise a good Marriage of it, upon other scores, which made her bear a good
Figure, insomuch, that many Persons about Court had her in their Eye: But she
liked the Marquis of Canillac better than any other of her Suitors, though he had
nothing but his Sword to trust to. This Lady had two Brethren, one of them
President to the Parliament, and the other Master of Requests, and Intendant of
a Province. Fearing they would oppose her Marriage, if she discovered her
Design, she resolved to be Married without giving them any notice. For they
were both Lawyers, and forasmuch as that sort of Men are very sharp Sighted
where they have any Interest, she would not be obliged either to have recourse
to the King to stifle their Opposition, or to secure herself at Law. Thus was
the matter concluded without their knowledge; and it happened, that on the
Wedding Day, the Intendant having arrived at Paris but twenty four Hours
before, sent her word by his Footman, That he would come and Dine with her.
The Footman coming to the Gate, was surpised to find a Porter and Footmen,
with Liveries different from his; and being introduced by one of these Footmen
into my Ladies Chamber, he found her a Bed with a Man: However, not knowing
what the matter mean'd, and not daring to ask any of her Servants, he only
delivered his Master's Compliment. The Lady made answer, That truly she had
other things to mind, than the giving his Master a Dinner; and that she doubted
if she could be stirring, when he should come to Dinner. With the same Breath,
she bid him give her Brother to know, that she only put off the Complment to
another time; and that then she would acquaint him with the Reason, why she
would not give him a meeting that day. The Air with which she spoke these
words, gave the Footman to understand, that she liked the Trade she had lately
taken up. When he returned, and gave his Master an account of all he saw or
heard, the Intendant went immediately to impart the good News to the President.
The President having known by Experience, what small stress ought to be laid on
a Woman's Prudence, took the matter at first to be Criminal. He thought his
Sister had entertained a Gallant, and told his Brother, that he would ruin
her, and that they should think of expedients to prevent it. The Intendant
having a better Opinion of the Women, than his Brother, replied, That he was
too forward, and that they ought not to Condemn their Sister upon such slight
grounds; and that he believed she was Married, because his Footman said, her
Servants had changed their Livery. The President, who upon the hopes of having
a share in her Succession, had shown his Displeasure upon the apprehension of
her entertaining a Gallant; was yet more disgusted when he heard of a Husband:
And forasmuch as all his remaining Comfort consisted in disanulling the
Marriage, in case she had Married a Fortune-Hunter, He sent one of his Footmen
to her Gate, to know what Name she went by. But when his Footman returned, and
acquainted him, that her Name was Canillac, and that her Husband was an Officer
in the second Company of Musketeers; he then was sensible, that he had nothing
to hope for upon that score.

About the same time, Mr. Bignon de Blansi, Master of Requests, the Nephew of
Mr Pontchartrain, was likewise married to Madam Hebert Debuc, the Niece of
Madam Pompone, and the Daughter of Mr. Hebert Debuc, Master of Requests. Mr.
Blansi was Brother to the Intendant of Piccardy. His first Lady was
Mademoiselle Brunet, who died in Childbed when she was but twenty two Years of
Age, and left him no Issue. Some days after his second marriage, Mr.
Pontchartrain procured him a Commission for being a Master of Requests, that
might be worth two thousand Livres a Year. He had another Commission before
that brought him no Profit. Though after all, those who have such sort of Places,
continue still to desire them, because they are not only Posts of Honor, but
make way for others that are more profitable. Mr. Pontchartrain, who commonly
has the disposal of that sort of things, designed this Post for Mr. Harouis,
Son-in-Law to Mr. Richebourg, Madam Pontchartrain's Uncle, who, besides the
Honor of being her Kinsman, was thereby qualified, not only for this, but for
a more considerable Commission. Accordingly he ordered Mr. Depinet, one of his
Deputies that looks after such things, to make ready an Act, and carry it to
the Chancellor. But this Magistrate having a grudge against Pontchartrain,
instead of filling up the blank with Mr. Harouis his Name, according to Mr.
Pontchartrain's desire signfy'd to him by his Deputy, asked him how long a
Controller General had offered to give Laws to a Chancellor, and at the same
time, gave him to know, that he understood his own Business without being
taught it, and filled up the Blank with the Name of Arnothon, Master of
Requests. Depinot returning to Mr. Pontchartrain, gave him an account of the
Chancellor's Compliment. Mr. Pontchartrain was unwilling to make any noise,
though perhaps he had Reason enough, only after that he did nothing relating to
his Office, without speaking first to the King; so that it was not in the
Chancellor's Power to thwart him.

Much about the same time, there happened another marriage, which I would be
loath to insert here, if it had not given occasion to one word that was taken
notice of. Mr. de la Ferrier, the Son of that Berrier, whose memory is still
odious to all the World, though he has been a long time Dead: This Man married
his Daughter to the Son of Des Chiens, whose Birth and Places bore a near
resemblance to his Father, and all that he did. For though he had the Impudence
to say, that he was descended of a Noble Family, yet all the Country bears
witness, that his Father, and his Ancestors, derived their Extraction from the
scum of the People. However, Mr. de la Ferrier's Lady being Grandchild to the
late Mr. Novion, first President, his Alliance with that Family, of which his
Lady descended by the Mother-side, was so monstrous, that all the World cried
out, that the Blood of the Novions was disgraced, since, whereas it was
formerly mingled with that of Luxemburg, in the Person of the late Count de
Tremes, Father to the present Duke de Gevres, it was now bestowed upon Chiens
(Dogs.) But the matter lay here; these Chiens were furnished with Golden Teeth;
and the Father had got so considerably by the Places he had in this War, that
the Novions were nothing near so considerable as he. This Mr. de la Ferriere,
was not reckoned a Beast, either in Council, or in his own Domestic Affairs,
though there was a time, when he passed for a Bankrupt; and upon that false
Report, 'twas said, That the King would take all his Places from him, for fear
his Poverty should tempt him to be unjust in the discharge of his Offices. But
if we may credit what happened soon after the marriage of his Daughter, to whom
he gave nothing; all this pretended Poverty was only a faint, to impose upon
the Public; for his Brothers, with whom he was at law for their Portions,
presented a Request to the Judges, setting forth, That their Father had left an
Estate of two millions of money, which he was actually possessed of; and that
their Eldest Brother kep^ it up, without doing them Justice. This Petition made
his Creditors very uneasy. They alleged, That since his own Brethren had thus
informed against him, the Council before which they pleaded, and which he
endeavored to move to Compassion, by his pretended Poverty, ought not to have
any regard to his Allegations, for depriving them of their Right. In former
times, Cardinal Mazarin made use of much such another Argument to ruin Mr.
Fouquet; for Abbot Fouquet his Brother reviled him horridly; and whenever
anybody offered to plead for him, the Cardinal made Answer, That they did not
know Mr. Fouquet so well as his Brother; and that by consequence, his Testimony
was preferable to theirs. And, in effect, the Abbot, who was an odd sort of a
Man, being at once the greatest Braggadochio, and the greatest Coward in the
World: This Abbot, I say, had a great hand in ruining the Super-Intendant. He
presented Memorials against him; and it is well known what weight they were of,
when the question was put, Whether he should be Arrested or not. This Abbot was
such a Vaunting Fellow, that he pretended he would take the Prince, and the
Marshal of H^^quincourt, by the Beard, to make them repent of their taking up
Arms against the King. But on the same very day, that Barbesieres came from
^l^nders, on purpose to carry off the Father of Mr. Girardin mentioned above,
who was a famous Partisan, somebody came and told the Abbot, that the Prince
had sent out a Party to take him up, having heard the Stories he had spoke of
him; and thus put him in such a Fear, that he durst not venture to go out of
Paris, without a strong Guard.

Soon after all these Marriages, a Sentence of Banishment was granted against
Medemoiselle de Varennes, a Lady of Quality, in the Country of Maine, who was
more known by the Affection that great Prelate had for her, than by the
Reputation of her Ancestors. 'Twas said, that this Affection was the effect of
Amorous Embraces; and that her Friend before his Death, advised her to marry
some Person of Quality, that had nothing, upon Condition, that he should own
her Children to be his. He had made her so rich by his Bounty, that he thought
she was in a Condition to tempt every body. It Is true, there were a great many
poor Wretches, that would have been glad of such an adventure. But 'twas not
that sort of Men, that she had a mind to: Notwithstanding the scandalous terms,
she pretended still to have her choice, and received Visits from all the Court,
in a House of hers, that resembled an enchanted Palace. To carry on the Wheedle
the better, she entertained them very handsomely, and in Lent regaled them with
Meat, notwithstanding the King's Orders to the contrary. For His Majesty, to
put a stop to all manner of Libertinism, had ordered, that only those, who were
sickly, or otherwise incommoded, should have liberty to eat Meat with the
Church's Permission; and that they should not let any body share with them,
under the pain of incurring his Displeasure. But, though Madam Varennes was far
from that Condition, being in very good Health, yet she not only eat of it
herself, but invited all her Visiters to eat with her. The King got notice of
this, and sent her a Letter under the great Seal, to be gone. Her Friends
promised her a Grant of some time before she went into Exile: But instead of
making preparations for her Departure, she promised a thousand Pistols to Count
Gramont for procuring a Revocation of the Sentence. Count Gramont being a
Person that subsists only by the King's Bounty, and at such Wind-falls does not
use to be asleep: This Count, I say, did not pretend to deny the thing to the
King, that being the wrong way to compass his Design; but represented to His
Majesty, That the Lady being set all-alone at Table, where she fed upon Mear,
pursuant to a permission she had from the Curate, some people came in and
surpised her, and, in spite of her Teeth, sat down with her; that this was no
infraction upon the design of His Majesty's Order, and that all the World might
be catched in the same Trap, as well as she, without they kept their Gates shut
at Meal-times, as in a Convent. In fine, he pleaded her Cause with such
dexterity, that the King granted his Request, upon a promise, that the Lady
would be more cautious for the future. Then the Marquis of Vieuxburg began to
declare himself a Sui^^r to the fair Lady, though he could not well do it without
a breach of Faith to Mademoiselle de Bulli, a Lady of Quality, near Neuchatel
in Normandy, to whom he had given a Promise of Marriage. He was the Son of the
Chancellor's Lady; and having lost his Eldest Brother at the Siege of Namur,
carried on by the Enemies, succeeded to his Estate, which was not
inconsiderable. The good Name he had in that Province, together with this
Succession, and a little Honor, if he had had any, ought to have deterred him
from so scandalous an Alliance: But this Lady having enchanted him, he opened
his mind to her; and by the discovery of his Design, pleased her so well, that
she offered to give him all she had, provided he Married her. In effect, the
business was kept private for some time; and in the mean time, the Chancellor's
Lady happening to die, both of them were sensible that it was a favorable
accident for them, in reg^rd she would never have suffered her Son to be guilty
of that Folly, in her Lifetime. The Chancellor, who had been kept ignorant of
his Lady's illness for some days, and hindered from going to her Chamber, under
the pretense of some prejudice that might thereby accrue to either of their
Healths: This Magistrate, I say, gave his Lady a magnificent Funeral. In the
mean time, he went and spent some days with the President Fourci, and after
that returned to his own House, and recommenc'd the exercise of his Office,
which has this privilege beyond all others, That those who are invested with
it, never wear mourning, either for their Relations, or for the King himself.
Monsieur, and Mr. de Chartres, gave him a Visit to Solace him upon his Loss.
The next day the Pope's Nuncio came to his House, and every body thought he had
come upon the same Errand. But though the measures of Civility required that
Compliment, especially since he came to the Chancellor's own House; yet he made
him another, that quickly discovered the chief reason of his coming. However,
it was not disagreeable; for after having assured him of the Pope's Respect for
him, and his Family, He presented to him a Brief from His Holiness, permitting
the second Son of Madam Harlai, his Daughter, to possess all sorts of Abbeys,
even those mortgaged to Regulars, though he was then but nine Years of Age. The
reason that moved the Pope to this Dispensation, was set forth in the Brief. It
imported, that his Holiness was infinitely glad to hear that Mr. Harlai was
gone from France, upon a design of making a general Peace; and that His
Holiness thought himself obliged to testify this his Joy, by granting that
favor to his Son. But after all, the Holy Father had not taken up this desire
of giving Peace to Christendom, till the King was expelled Italy by the
Savoy-Treaty, under the pretense, that Italy would always be fettered, so long
as His Majesty was possessed of any thing on that side. Thus Popes, Kings, and
great Folks, talk as they will; though at the same time they are glad to
insinuate to others, that they design nothing but what will redound to the
advantage of those who are subject to them.

Count Marsan, the Youngest Brother of all the Princes of the House of
Lorraine, who married the Marchioness of Siegnelay, after the Duke of Luxemburg
broke off from her, got at that time a Pension of Twenty thousand Livers. This
was matter of surprisal to everybody, not only by reason of the small Service
he had ever done to the State, but because he had always a sorry Interest at
Court. For the purpose. When he married the Marchioness of Albret, Widow to the
Marquis of Albret, Marshal de Camp, who was killed when he went to see his
Mistress; at that time, the King turned that Lady out of the Queen's Retinue;
not that she had done any thing deserving that disgrace; but only, because she
had married a Man that the King did not like. The reason of the King's dislike,
was grounded on his having some intrigue with a Young Prince, that His Majesty
took care of, and his being charged with cajoling and wheedling a Young
Princess, that he was equally concerned for. But after all, he found ways and
means to atone for all that; and upon that score was obliged to his Lady, who
has Friends of Interest and Credit. At present, he enjoys above fifty thousand
Crowns a Year, though before his first marriage, he was not worth a Groat; and
just now he has bought one of the finest Houses in Paris. He had it from
President Tambonneau; and that Magistrate bore some hard words from the first
President, upon the account of some Difficulties relating to the execution of
the Bargain. That House had formerly a large Garden to it, part of which Mr.
Tombonneau cut off, and joined it to another House of his; and Count Marsan
alleged, That though that part was cut off by a particular clause, Calculated
for that purpose; yet at that time, it ought to be undone, because it returned
naturally to the purchase to which it had always belonged. They agreed to leave
the matter to the Arbitration of the first President. But whether this
Magistrate was partial, or thought it was justice to give it against
Tombanneau, He delivered his mind in such harsh terms, as insinuated, that he
had over-reached Count Marsan. 'Twas some time before Mr. Tambonneau would
agree to his Verdict; but at last the matter was accommodated; and at this day,
Count Marsan lives in that fine House. Mr. Pontchartrain had a mind for the
House; but being a Man of a different stamp from some Ministers, who do not
grudge to give any price for what they like, he could not come up to Mr.
Tombanneau's price. To be plain, when a Man throws away his money at such a
rate, it is a sign he comes easily by it; whereas good Husbandry speaks a fair
purchase.

The Princess of Harcourt, whose Husband is of the same Family with Count
Marsan, but not ^ear so Rich, lost at that time, a Lawsuit with Madam Nemours,
which she thought she had been sure of. 'Twas laid before the Council, and
related to the Register of Lions, which she justly alleged to have been the
property of her Grandfather, by the Mother's-side. This her Grandfather was
the famous Farmer of the Revenue, called Garnier, who, though he was Born to very
little, had got such a vast Estate, that he might have boasted of greater
matters than Sebastian Zamer did in former times; for whereas this Man entitled
himself, a Master of five hundred thousand Crowns, the other might have
pretended to sixteen millions. He was effectually possessed of eight millions
clear of the best money in the World, and the King owed him as much. But soon
after Mr. Fouquet was caught, the Court of Justice came upon him, and there he
was Taxed in proportion to what he had got, so that his whole Fortune was
melted in a moment. By good luck he had married a whole Regiment of Daughters
very handsomely; and having paid their Portions in ready money, Mr. Colbert,
who raked into the very Branches of Families, could find no plea to suck out
the Blood, that they endeavored to maintain their Honor with. The Princess of
Harcourt's Mother, who was married to Count Brancas, Gentleman of Honor to the
Queen's Mother, had thus escaped that Minister's scrutiny, because all her
Portion was money paid down. However, her Daughter was of the same Humor with
her Grandfather, so that it was not long of her, if she was not Rich. She lost
the abovementioned Suit only by one Vote, which she thought ought to have lest
opposed her. Having always been very careful in making interest with the
Ministers, she hoped that Mr. Pontchartrain, who was one of the Judges, would
favor her; But equity prevailing with honest Men, beyond all other
Considerations, he was one of those that cast her. Though after all, when he was
asked wherein Madam Nemours's Cause had the advantage of hers, He replied, That
he could not well tell; and that if he had thought the rest would have been of
his mind, he would have managed that Cause like the Oyster in Boileau's Satyrs,
in giving the two Shells to the two Princesses, and the fleshy part to the
King, because the property contested by them, belonged in effect only to His
Majesty. The Princess of Harcourt, who will never lose any thing for want of a
vigorous defense, does not yet give her Cause over for lost; and having
sometimes been lucky in Lawsuits, she hopes to have the same good Fortune in
this. But since her Fortune has been out of her Hands these twelve or fifteen
Years, it is not probable that 'twill ever return to her. She made a shift, by
the interest of one of her Friends, to persuade Mademoiselle de Guise, to give
her Husband the Dukedom of Guise, and Guise-house, which were worth at least
three millions. The procuring of this favor had cost the Prince of Harcourt
some Compliments and Addresses to his Benefactress: But his Humor being not so
pliable as his Lady's, he re-assum'd his Character, when he thought the
business was done. Madam Guise complained of this to the Friend that had acted
the part of a Mediator; and he being not able to persuade the Prince to
continue his Visits, she resumed her Gift. This Thunderstruck his Lady, who
upon this Affair had displayed her utmost prouess. However, she is to be
commended for managing so wisely the Affairs of her Family, which her Husband
neglects. He minds nothing but his Diversion, while she scrapes up money to pay
a Pension, that she is obliged to give him upon the consideration of his having
turned over all his Estate to her. But the Times we live in being so unhappy,
that little can be made of a Land-Estate, she would find it very hard to do
what she does, if she did not find ways of getting of something from time to
time. She neglects no opportunity, small or great, it never scapes her,
provided she has any prospect of success.

About that time, the Court was very hot upon the execution of a project, that
had been proposed by several Persons a long time before; I mean that of taking
Carthagena, where the Banks of several Nations were lodged, as well as part of
the Riches of Perou. In the beginning of the War, a Rochel-Man, called Petit,
was taken up, who had gone to Holland, and there abjured his Religion, upon the
persuasion of his Wife; and after her Death had returned to France. He was well
versed in Sea-Affairs; and having been employed by the Dutch, orders were given
to take him Dead or Alive. Mr. Vilette, a Lieutenant General at Sea, was
employed to execute the Orders; and, indeed, he once made up so close to him,
that he thought to have given a good account of him: But Petit being on Board
of a better Sailer, than any of the Lieutenant-General's Ships, he luckily got
off; tho some time after, he delivered himself into the Hands of the Governor
of Vallenciennes, who gave notice of the same to the Court. In regard, he
returned with a resolution to reassume his wonted Religion and Obedience, and
had spoke so to some People, who had acquainted the Ministers with it; they
could not handsomely indite him, but contented themselves with securing his
Person in the Bastille; that being thought necessary, for that after such an
escape as his, 'twas to be feared he might do the like again, if ever he fell
into the Hands of such a Woman as his first Wife was. His Imprisonment was a
great surprizal to him: However, having time enough in Prison to think of his
Concerns, he bethought himself, that he would never be set at Liberty, unless
he attoned for his Crime, by some great piece of Service. Having considered
again and again of the matter, and being well acquainted with the Coast where
Carthagena lies; he lit upon the same Thought as others had before him. He was
of Opinion, That 'twas not impossible for the King to make himself Master of
that place, and even of -- which is yet Richer, and, as it were, the Magazine
of all the Riches of Perou. Having hatch^d this Thought, his next business was
to give it vent; for which end, he asked to speak with Mr. Besmaux, Governor of
the Bastille. But whether the Governor thought the Man was troubled with
maggoty Fancies, or whether he had no mind to be himself an instrument of
losing his Prisoners, by whose maintenance he got a great deal, and for that
reason called them his Pigeons; Whatever was in it, he would not allow him
Paper to express his Thoughts upon, but only promised to speak of his Project
to a Mininister of State. Though after all, it is very likely he did not that; for
it is plain, that, if he had, Mr. Pontchartain, who had the management of
Marine. Affairs, was too good a Servant of the King's, to neglect such a
proposal as that. The Prisoner receiving no Answer, notwithstanding the
Governor's Promise to bring him one; cut off the Margins of a Book that he had,
and having made some Ink of Soot or Charcoal, wrote down his Project, together
with several other things, that then came into his Head. He had not well
finished his Scheme, when Marshal Tourville came to the Bastille to try some
Cannon of a new invention. The Cannon were fired into the Ditch, which the
Prisoner observing through the Grates of the Chamber, threw out his Paquet well
wraped up. It fell at the Marshal's Feet, who having time to read the
Superscription, viz. To Marshal Tourville, upon Affairs of great consequence
relating to the Sea. This Packet to be delivered to Mr. Pontchartrain. Having
read, I say, this Superscription, he refufed to deliver it to Mr. Besmaux, who
asked it of him. The Governor endeavored to persuade him to it; by setting
forth, That a Minister whose time was so precious, ought not to be disturbed
with idle Whims; that probably there was nothing in the Packet, but such
Vapors as the damps of a Prison are apt to excite; and that for his part, he
was teased every day with such things, but that he never minded them. Mr.
Tourville looking up to the Window where the Packet fell, asked him, who was
in that Chamber? Mr. Besmaux made Answer, That 'twas a Rochel Renegado, without
telling his Name: But the Marshal knowing that Petit was Prisoner in the
Castle, and taking that to be his Apartment, told the Governor, that since the
Packet came from so good a place, he was obliged to give it to Mr.
Pontchartrain. Accordingly he gave it to him; and that Minister having perused
it, found some things in it better explained than in the other Memorials that
had formerly been given in upon that Subject. Then he let the matter sleep for
a while, in order to digest things more maturely; and at last spoke of it in
private to some Sea-Officers, that he thought capable to resolve some Doubts he
had upon that Head. Some of them represented it as impossible; and others as a
very dangerous enterprise; only Mr. Pointis spoke of it as an easy thing,
because he wanted to be employed in the Expedition. One must be prepossessed
with an expectation of success in any Enterprise, in order to go through with
it. Accordingly, in several Conferences between that Minister, and Pointis, the
latter appeared still more and more forward, and removed several Difficulties,
that the other looked upon as very considerable: So great an itch had Pointis
to signalize himself in that Expedition. But Glory was not the only motive in
his view; he had another that weighed as much with him, though it was not
altogether so Honorable. He was in Love with President Ferrand's Daughter, and
neither of them having any Estate, in the ardour of his Passion to enjoy her,
he thought no Wall whatsoever would stand before him. Mr. Pontchartrain
perceiving that he was the Man he wanted, and that he could never find another
that would carry on the Enterprise with so much heat: Upon this consideration,
I say, he gave him a Promise of being employed upon that Design. Pointis
recounted the Affair to his Mistress, and among many other sweet words told
her, That she should have the Triumph of that Place; that for his part, all his
Ambition was, to lay at her Feet, all the Riches that the Expedition should
afford; and that he accounted himself but too happy, if by that means he could
procure her favor. While he was thus taken up in Courtship, Mr. Ponchartrain
went effectually about the business. There being a necessity of an infinite sum
of money, to answer the Charge that His Majesty was at upon other accounts: He
had a mind that this Expedition should cost the King nothing. With this view,
by the King's permission, he erected a Company, which advanced the money for
carrying on the Expedition, upon Condition of receiving the Profits that should
accrue by it; some put in a thousand Pistols, some more, some less; the Fleet
was got ready, and Mr. Pointis put to Sea, when no body knew where he was
going. The English thought he had a design upon their Possessions in Carolina,
and gave the necessary Orders to prevent it. The Dutch were apprehensive of a
design upon them. However, Mr. Pontis fell in upon Carthagena, all on a sudden,
when the Spaniards least expected it, and Landed there some Soldiers that he
had brought with him. At the same time, the Governor of St. Domingo, being
acquainted with the Design, brought some Buckaneers to assist at the Siege.
Pointis stood much in need of them, and without them he had never compassed his
end. But they were so dissatisfied upon the small share they had of the Booty,
that they first complained to him, and then threatened openly to send some body
to Court, to demand justice of him. He laughed, both at their Complaints and
Threats, fancying, that his success would procure him a hearing to their
prejudice. There was an immense quantity of Riches in that City, both in Bars
of Silver, Gold-dust, and precious Stones: And he did not neglect his own
Coffers, no more than some Captains of Ships, whose Avarice was more notorious
than his own: For on Board of one of them, there was found Effects, to the
value of eighty thousand Crowns; he having converted the money into Goods,
which he was afterward obliged to convert into money again. Others were
likewise convicted of having endeavored to enrich themselves upon the
Company's Charges, while it was only suspected. But since Malice and Calumny is
very forward, especially upon such things, for which every Man is believed to
have a good Appetite; 'twould not be just to be positive in the Accusation. In
that City, there was a Young Man, who was the Son of the Governor of Lima; and,
by his Folly, had a mind to furnish those who vented Romances, with Truths
instead of their ordinary Fables. He was seized with a Passion of Love for the
Princess of Conti, the King's Daughter, upon seeing her Picture, which fell
accidentally into his Hands, by an Engagement with the Buccaneers: He found it
in the Arms of one that was Killed, and presently took it into his own, as
being a Treasure that he esteemed more than the Pearls and Diamonds he had
found among the Spoil. Never were such Follies committed, as that young Fool
was guilty of, after the sight of that Picture; every day he kissed it a
thousand times, and he never engaged, without invoking it before hand, as the
only Deity that could assist him. (...) good Fortune he had, he imputed it all
to it, which enlarged his esteem of it more and more. But at last being
overpowered in an Eng^gement with a King, in the Neighborhood of his Father's
Government; the King, as barbarous as he was, loved the Picture as passionately
as he, As soon as he cast his Eyes upon it, he asked. What Picture it was, and
would have snatched it from him: Upon that, he threw himself at the King's
Feet, conjuring him to take his Life, before he robbed him of his Picture. The
Conqueror seeing him in so humble a Posture, took pity of him, and offered to
let him keep his Picture, provided he gave him to know the Original. The Young
Gentleman replied, That he could not satisfy him upon that point, because he
did not know himself whose it was: And with the same Breath, acquainted him how
it came into his Hands, and offered to get it Copied. The Prince was so much
taken with the Beauty of the Picture, that he caused several Copies to be drawn
from it: These he ordered to be hung up in the Temples of his false Gods, in
order to adore the Original, which he thought could not be so pretty, unless
she were Divine. The Young Gentleman having thus saved his Picture, was afraid
of losing it at Carthagena, when Mr. Pointis took it; Fancying, that all the
World were as great Fools as he, and the Prince that made an Idol of it. The
first Compliment he made to Mr. Pointis, was, That by the right of Conquest, he
was Master of all that he had; but as for that Picture, he would part with it
and his Life at the same time. Mr. Pointis was so much dazzl'd with the
prospect of the Riches that lay before him, that he had forgot every thing, and
even Madam Ferrand; and thus having other things in view than the Picture, he
gave him to know, that he might be easy, and what Pictures he had a mind for,
were those of the King of Spain, and other Princes, engraved upon Gold; and as
for the Pictures of Women, he would quit them for a trifle, 'provided they were
only valuable for their Beauty, or good Painting. This Promise put the Young
Gentleman in good Heart: And Mr. Pointis having cloyed himself with the Plunder
of the Town, had the curiosity to look upon the Thing that occasioned the
Spaniard's Sighs: for he gave deep Sighs every minute, which made people
believe, that he was a very p^^^^on^te Lov^r. He showed Mr. Pointis the
Picture, upon his making Oath, that he would not f^ll in Love with it. As soon
as Mr. Pointis saw it, he knew it to be the Princess of Conti's, and (...), he
knew the Lady, and that his Love was fixed upon a very deserving Object. The
Young Gentleman pressing him to tell who the Lady was, he could not deny his
Request. Upon this Discovery, it had been very unhandsome in such a Lover as
this, not to go to France. Accord^ngly he entreated Mr. Pointis, to let him
have a place in one of his Ships. Mr. Pointis having promised him that Favor,
did not make him stay long (...) he set Sail: but though the Sea-Air c^^ld the
Gentleman's Passion for his Mistress, the Admiral round himself in a greater
quandary than the Gentleman. An English Squadron, much stronger th^n his own,
having notice, that he was still (...) Carthagena, stood toward that place, in
order to dispossess him of the Riches he had p^llag^d. The Governor of St.
Domingo, who had (...) to his Government, and was not w^ll pleased with the
Usage that he and the Buc^^^eers h^^ met with, did nevertheless give him Advice
of their Design, because it concerned the King's ^nterest. Mr. Pointis made
such good use of the Intelligence, that he weighed Anchor and avoided the
English, and at last arrived at Breast, after having s^ap'd several Storms, and
other troublesome Accidents.

Before his arrival at Breast, several Accidents happened both at Sea and Land.
The most considerable Occurrence at Sea, was Mr. Nesmond's falling in with
three English Ships, homeward bound from India. They made a tolerable Defense,
but being unequally matched, i. e. three to six, they were taken. All the three
were richly Laden; and Mr. Nesmond having put Mr. Montchevreuil with one Been,
an Irish man, both of 'em Sea-Lien tenants, on board of one of these Ships;
these two plotted together to defraud the Owners of the Prize, while nobody
minded 'em. Accordingly they secured all they could; and shared some Diamonds,
and other valuable Goods, equally between 'em. But Mr. Montchevreuil's
Indiscretion, in spending at Breast much more than his Incomes could afford,
quickly discovered the Intrigue: His Father allowed him nothing; and all he had
was a Pension of one thousand Livers, and his Equipage. Upon this, Intendant
Begnon smelling the matter, gave notice of it to the Court. His Interest at
Court might have prevented his Arrest, if Mr. Begnon's Intelligence had not
been put out of all doubt, by his imprudence, in setting out his very Footmen
with the best Mus^ins he had taken in that Ship. Been, indeed, acted more
prudently; and it was not long of him that the thing took Air: But Mr.
Montchevreuil's imprudence carried it so far, that they were both taken up.
Been, who had not so much Interest as the other, could not get off,
notwithstanding the Wisdom of his Conduct. Begnon wrote him a thundering Note,
concluding in these few words, You are happy in having Mr. Montchevreuil for a
Partner in your Robbery; Assure your self, that if you were by your self, I
would have ca^s^d you to be Hanged in forty eight Hours. At the Mari^es
interceeded on his behalf, because he was a good Officer; but forasmuch as the
one could not be indicted without the other, they were both cleared after five
or six months Imprisonment. But after all, if all the Thieves had been Hanged,
Been had got more Company than Mr. Montchevreuil: For at the Sale of these
Prizes, which amounted in Gross to 2500000 Livres, a great many things were
transacted, that were not very fair. Those who had a mind to 'em, gave a large
Present to the persons that were empowered to adjudge 'em, to prevent their
being sold by Retail, pursuant to the desire of those who were interess'd in
the matter. But whatever the Present was, they lost nothing by it; for at Nants
they sold the Goods by Retail, at three Millions profit.

In the mean time, the Archbishop of Paris employed his utmost endeavors, to
make good the Character the King had procured him, by giving him that rich
Benefice. Though his Brother's Fortune might have done something for him, yet he
did not owe his Preferment to that, but only to his own Merit. While he was
Bishop of Chalons, a See that he had before his accession to that of Paris, he
always acted up to the Office of a Holy Prelate. To continue the same course of
Piety that he had always followed, he made Head against Vice: And accordingly
one of his first Edicts, after his accession to the last See, was levelled
against the Masquerades; an Abuse, that in earnest ought not to be suffered
among Christians. What a strange preparation is the Commission of a thousand
lewd and foolish Actions, for the Repentance that ought to be Preached up in
Lent! The Emperor extirpated this disorder at Vienna, under the sole pretext of
the War with the Turks. Nobody was there allowed to disguise themselves; and
even Schoolboys were not allowed to do it with impunity. However, the
Archbishop not using the same pretense to sink that disorder at Paris, but that
of the Love and Gratitude we owe to God, for shedding his Blood for us upon the
Cross, had not the same success as the Emperor had at Vienna. If he had had
recourse to the King, for the putting his Edict in execution, perhaps the fear
of displeasing that Monarch would have gone farther, than the fear of God. But
whether it was, that he did not speak of it to the King, or that the King had
some Reasons of State for not minding him; there was as many Masquerades that
Year, as if there had never been an Order against 'em. The Archbishop finding
he could not compass his design, bent his Thoughts upon another Disorder, that
wanted as much to be remedied; I mean the Debauchery of Women: that was got to
such a height, that no Language can reach. There was always two Convents at
Paris, for shutting up these Wretches; and two Societies have been since
Erected, for the same purpose, by the Care and Charity of some Virtuous Ladies.
In these Societies, they are far from being used so severely, as at the
Magdalonnettes, and Filles Repent^^, where the Whips are ^o far from freeing a
So^l from Vice, that, on the contrary, they make 'em regret, that they cannot
continue their past course of Life. We must not pretend to translate a Person
all on a sudden, from Vice to Virtue, especially by Correction; for that ought
to be effected by degrees, and rather by Persuasion, than by Force. This gentle
method was used in these two Societies; one of which is called St. Isidore, and
the other Bon Post^ur. The latter had this peculiar Custom, that they forced
none to come among 'em. All the Actions of that House, were answerable to its
Title. The Girls that repented of their Lewdness, or were afraid of falling
into it, came thither of their own accord, and were entertained there as long
as they pleased; and their Governantes either procured 'em some Place in a
Person of Quality's House, if they were fit for Service, or got 'em Husbands,
if they liked that better. When they desired to be gone, they were suffered to
go, though 'twas to be feared, they might return to their Vomit. This Society,
and this Custom is still kept up; and all pious Persons, of what Condition
soever, not only visit these lost Sheep, that are thus returned to their Flock,
but likewise Eat with 'em very often. This they take to be a more effectual
method, as indeed it is, to reclaim them, than that of letting Dogs loose upon
'em. And it is for this reason that the House is entitled Bon Pasteur, The good
Shepherd; for the Good Shepherd, who, properly speaking, is the Son of God, did
not scruple to eat with Publicans.

As for the Daughters of St. Isidore, they were not used so very gently, as
those of the Bon Pasteur; but kept a sort of a Medium between these and the
Magdalonnettes. The Archbishop, whose Province it is to take Cognizance of all
that passes in that sort of Houses, knowing that these lived under a Director,
whose Doctrine he suspected, would have taken them from him. But they stood by
him with some warmth; and the more they showed their zeal to keep him, the more
the Archbishop pressed to put another in his place. At last, they told him
freely, That if he put in another, they would not receive him, and that they
would rather disperse than comply with it. Now they had liberty to disperse,
for they were not settled there, either by the King's Letter, or an Order from
the Court of Justice. Accordingly, perceiving that the Archbishop was
immovable, and fully resolved to subject them to his Obedience, they actually
dispersed; for which the Archbishop was blamed by a great many, especially by
those who were not acquainted with the reason, that had obliged him to do as he
did.

At that time, Mr. Verthamont de Villemont dyed, who was the only Man that
perhaps made the King depart from his wonted Moderation. He was Master of
Requests; and making use of the Authority he had among the Gown-men, both by
his Place, and by the numerousness of his Relations and Friends, did what he
could to Ruin a Gentleman of the Name of Servon, that had been his Neighbor
in the Country. Servon being Related to Mr. Perefixe, Archbishop of Paris, had
recourse to him, who engaged to protect him, after he found that Magistrate so
proud of his Interest, that he openly contemned both his Friend and him.
Verthamont finding that the Archbishop had declared against him, and that he
had embarked in that Cause for the sake of some Interest of his own, formed a
design against his Life, and alleged, that he had a Love int^^gue upon that
side. On the other hand, the Archbishop formed a design against his Life. Thus
th^^ raised between 'em the greatest Suit that had ^^en seen for a long time;
and the Cause being ^^ought before the Council, the King himself a^^^^d at the
Decision; which Mr. Villemont, who knew his Integrity and Justice, was not
pleased with. The Archbishop being sensible that his Honor was very much
touched by the Accusation preferred against him by that Magistrate; and that
'twas not enough for him to maintain, that it was an Imposture, as it was, but
to prove it to be such; upon this view I say, he desired him to condescend to
the Circumstances of the Fact, in order to his Conviction. Accordingly
Verthamont advanced, That on such a Day, at such an Hour, in such a Year, and
at such a Place, he had an interview with a certain Lady, whom it was well
known he had formerly visited with some sort of Familiarity. Now, Mr. Perefixe
was at that time at Rhodes, of which he was Bishop before his Accession to the Sea of Paris; and for fear Verthamont should retract and throw his mistake upon
the weakness of his Memory; he pretended at first to make but weak Defenses, in
order to make the other maintain his Forgery with more Impudence. This
Verthamont did not fail to do; for fancying that the whole Court was on his
side, the Answers being so frivolous, he insisted on the Charge, because the
Archbishop had summoned him to declare, whether he adhered to his Accusation,
or not. He likewise condescended to a great many particulars of matter of Fact,
which seemed probable. The Archbishop finding him engaged so far, that he could
not afterward retract, desired to be allowed to prove himself Alibi. This was
the best method he could take ^o justify his Innocence, and retort the Calumny
upon his Adversary. The Court could not refuse to hear his Proof; so, he
proved, not only by Witnesses, but likewise by an Order he made, as Bishop that
day, which was Published throughout his Diocese; he proved, I say, that he was
above one hundred and fifty Leagues off from the place of the alleged
Interview. Verthamont was strangely surprised, when he saw himself thus
Convicted. However, as all Litigious Men have some back Door or other, he
alleged, That, indeed, he was out as to the Year; but as to the Fact it self,
and the Day, he was certainly in the right: But after what was past, that
Reason would not bear: So that he was not only ordered to make reparation of
the Prelat's Honor; but he, and his Posterity, were declared incapable for
ever of enjoying any Magistracy. The Sentence contained likewise other
Punishments against him, which 'twere too tedious to insert here. However,
fancying the King would be so good as to dispense with part of 'em, he had the
boldness to appear at the King's Levee some days after. The King was incensed
when he saw him, and commanded him, in har^h words, to depart his Chamber.
Verthamont obeyed, without staying for a second Order; and was even obliged to
retire to the Country, for the King would not allow him so much as to continue
at Paris.

The Plenipotentiaries continued still at Reswick, and it being uncertain
whether the Peace would be concluded or not, new Edicts were issued forth. One
of 'em obliged the great Cities and Towns of the Provinces, to take Lanthorns,
like those at Paris; and to buy themselves off by a Tax to be laid upon the
twentieth Penny. By that Edict the King promised, in consideration of that Tax,
to be at the charge of the Lights for ever. In fine, 'twas visible, that this
was only a new invention for raising of Money, which was much wanted at that
time. Mr. Caumartin, Intendant to the Finances, was ordered to carry the Edict
to the first President, in order to have it conveyed to the Attorney General,
who read it with the coldest Humor of any Man in the World. Mr. Caumartin
expected, that when he had read it, he would give him his Sentiments of the
matter, which he meant to Communicate to the Minister of State. But the
Magistrate continuing silent for some time, he turned the Edict over, and put
it several times into the Hands of the Magistrate, who still returned it: At
last, being tired with shuffling it to and again, he broke silence, and said,
It was a fine Edict, and that he and his Friends ought to be convinced that it
was such. At least, said he, for my particular satisfaction, I expected you
would have done me the honor to tell me, in whose Head all these Lanthorns
were first projected. Upon this Expression Mr. Caumartin could not refrain from
Laughing, and imparted the occasion of Laughter to his Friends. After all, the
Case was laid before the Parliament, and no one had the same curiosity as this
Magistrate had.

The Conferences at Reswick did not divert the King from sending puissant
Armies into the Field. By virtue of the Peace of Savoy, he was Superior in
force to his Enemies; and part of his Troops that had served in Italy, he had
transported to Catalonia. In this Province he was still Master of the Cities of
Roses and Gironne, with some other Places of importance; and had a free access
to Bar^^lona, which is the Metrapolitan of that Country, and, in a manner, the
Barrier of the Spanish Monarchy. This City, which is Rich, Great, well Peopled,
and the ordinary Residence of the Nobility of that Country, is situated on the
Mediterranean, and has a very considerable port upon that side. The opposition
that the House of Austria had hitherto made to the Peace, moved the King to
Besiege it: He thought, that if he could take it, he could at least, bring the
Spanish Branch to reasonable terms, considering, that after that, even Madrid
itself was not secure. His Majesty wrote his Thoughts of this matter to Mr.
Vendome, who commanded the Troops in that Country. This General sent him word,
that the Troops he had there were not sufficient for so great an Enterprise;
and that it could not be compassed with less than fifty Thousand Men. Now at
that time he had s^arce ^wenty five Thousand. But His Majesty having ten
Thousand more ready upon a Call, comm^nded him to make preparations for the
Design, and promised to send 'em to him when he wanted 'em. After such positive
Orders, Mr. Vendome had nothing else to do, but to concert all measures for
satisfying the King. The Spaniards having already taken the Ala^m at the loss
of their other Places in that Province, and perceiving that the King meant to
possess himself of that Place, sent their best Troops thither. The Queen of
Spain being the Empreses's Sister, desired the Emperor to send some Regiments
under the pretense of preserving that Province. But that was not her main
Design: She had a greater eye upon the interest of Archduke Charles, her
Nephew; for her Husband having no Issue, and being not very healthy, she had a
mind to secure to him the Crown that Philip IV. had bequeathed him by his Will.
Pursuant to this design, she had brought some Germans into the Council, in
order to stifle the Artifices, that France, and even some Spanish Grandees
might set on foot, either for the interest of that Crown, or for their own; for
there were some of 'em that laid claim to the Blood of the Ancient Kings of
C^stile, and others to that of the Kings of Arragon. These German Counselors
acted in concert with her; and the Emperor sent 'em Instructions, to the end
that nothing might be concerted contrary to his Interest, or that of the
Archduke, his Son. In the mean time, His Imperial Majesty sent the Troops that
were desired; and it being much his Interest not to lose Barcelona, he
entreated the English and Dutch to send a Fleet into the Mediterranean. He was
very sensible what was likely to happen, because the King made new preparations
in Provence, and seemed to have nothing so much in view as the Conquest of that
Place. However, his Entreaty did not come so very seasonably; whether it was,
that the English and Dutch had occasion to employ their Ships elsewhere, or,
which is very probable, that they thought the taking of that Place would so
humble the House of Austria, that they would not oppose the Peace any longer;
for they did not much trouble their Heads upon the matter.

While preparations for War were made, not only in that Country, but in all the
other seats of War; a new War broke out in the Church, which might have caused
great disorders, if it had not been quickly stifled; indeed it might have been
sooner stifled, if the Archbishop of Paris, and the Bishop of Meaux had not
been very complaisant to a certain Gentleman that I shall call by his Name by
and by, by which means it took deeper Root than it might have done. To
understand this matter thoroughly, 'twill not be improper to carry our account
of things a little higher. In the Popedom of Innocent XI. a Priest called
Molinos, started up at Rome, who taught very uncommon Doctrines, and did not
want followers. Among many erroneous Doctrines, this was the greatest, That
when the Soul came once to a certain point of Sanctity, it was not capable of
sinning, and then it had no part or concern in the Actions of the Body. It Is a
standing Maxim, that we ought not to censure a Man's intentions, especially
when his Morals are unculpable as to outward appearance; and for that reason I
shall be very cautious of saying, that this new Sectary, under the pretense of
so great Purity, concealed a great many Disorders that his Enemies have falsely
charged upon him. Perhaps he meant, that the Soul cannot control some
Infirmities that we are subject to from our Mother's Womb: And provided these
are detested by her, she is not accountable for 'em before God. Were it so,
nothing could be objected against his Doctrine, for such is the Doctrine of the
Church; and what St. Paul teaches us, who was continually tempted
notwithstanding his being one of the greatest Saints in Paradise. However,
since a great many uncouth Consequences might be drawn from his way of
explaining himself, both upon this Article, and many others, the whole Church
rose up against him. Rome, in whose view the thing happened, Arrested him; and
his Case being brought before the Inquisition, he was there Condemned by such
Commissioners as were appointed. He submitted himself to their Censure, and
some Years after died in Prison: Upon which 'twas generally thought, that this
new Heresy, known by the name of Quietism, was so far from passing the Alps,
that it died outright with him. But the Case was quite otherwise: For not only
Italy was stuffed with his Errors, but even France itself was tainted with
them. One Madam Guy^a, the Widow of Mr. Montargis, who, after the g^tting of a
great Estate upon the Canal of Bria^e, left her with two Children: This Lady, I
say, minded nothing less than the true Education of her Children: Not that she
wanted either Wit or Judgment; nay, on the contrary, she had a greater share of
both than what is natural to Wo^en, or what herself ought to have desired: For
she meddled with what did not become her, and shoving her No^e into Books,
pretended to explain not only the Fathers but even the Scripture it self. In
fine, having heard of Molinos and his Herefie, she could not be easy till she
had ^ Copy of his Books, and canvass'd 'em all over. Malicious People will tell
you, that she approved of 'em, to cover some Enormities that were charged upon
her. In the mean time, she fell in with a Barnabite, a Sav^yard by Nation, who
resided in a Convent, belonging to that order at Montargis. She made him her
Confessor in ordinary and her Confident; and having poured her Venom into his
Bosom, compiled a great many Books, either with his help, or without it, so as
to make the same Figure in France, that Molinos had done at Rome. Mean while,
she ought to have been apprehensive of his ^ate; for though the Inquisition has
not the same ^ooting in all Countries, yet she was not ignorant that the
venting of a new Doctrine was a disallowable Action. She dispersed her Books
among the Convents, and several other places; and the Abbot of Fenelon, the
Gentleman whose Name I promised not to forget, finding them of a piece with his
Sentiments, approved 'em secretly. This he durst not do publicly, by reason
that he was made Sub-praeceptor to the Children of the Royal Family; and that
the discovery of this his Approbation, would not only cut off his arrival at a
Bishopric, but dispossess him of the Post he was then in. However, Madam
Guyon's Writings being published, began to make a noise in the World; and in
regard that the advances contained in 'em, encouraged all the periods of a
dissolute Life, or at least, made way for very odd consequences; upon this
Consideration, I say, the Bishop of Meaux, as well as the Bishop of Paris, who
was then only Bishop of Chalons, undertook to make her sensible of her Error.
They had Conferences upon this Head with the Abbot of Fenelon, whom they deemed
to be tainted with the same Doctrine. He, on the other hand justified her
Assertions; and maintained, that her Thoughts were Just and Orthodox, though the
Meaning and Explication that they forced upon her, was Heretical. He likewise
spoke up for her Morals, and the Conduct of her Life, which he pretended to be
particularly acquainted with, though both the one and the other were much
suspected.

The warmth he showed in justifying her, confirmed the two Prelates in the
Thought, That the Doctrine he vindicated, was as much his own, as hers. They
told him as much, and he on the other hand did not deny it; but had the
submission to assure 'em, That he would willingly change his Mind, if he were
convinced of the Error. To this purpose, an Assembly was held at Issi; but
before they met, Madam Guyon had given in to the Bishop of Meaux, a Copy of all
her Writings, in order to be examined at his leisure. The Bishop examined it
with all possible Care; and likewise was at the pains of inspecting the Conduct
of her Life for some time, by which means he discovered that she inflamed the
Evil, by pretending to Authorize her Doctrine by Miracles, and a Gift of
Prophecy, bestowed upon her by God. She recounted Stories to this effect,
pretending to confirm 'em by credible Witnesses; and in a word, never did
Woman, or Man, carry Fanaticism so far as she did. In fine, there was cause
enough for putting her up in Bedlam, if it had not been for those who supported
her. All the Abbot of Fenelon's Friends were hers; the Duke of Beauvillers,
Governor to the Princes of the Royal Family, was suspected to be an Abettor of
her Errors, as well as the Duke of Chevreuse, and their whole Families. The
thing that confirmed the general suspicion of the Duke de Beauvillers beyond
the rest, was the putting his eight Daughters into a Convent at Montargis.
'Twas concluded from thence, that Montargis being the place where this Heresy
was first hatched in France, that Convent being a Convent of Benedictines, was
likewise tainted. The whole Family of Charost was suspected in like manner of
falling in with this Heresy. But that which restrained scrupulous and nice
Consciences from Condemning it, at a time when they were very sensible of its
pernicious Consequences, was, That neither the Court, nor France itself, could
boast of Persons of such Christian Lives, and Regular Morals, as all the
Favorers of the new Doctrine were of. Their Piety was not of so late a date,
as the Heresy of Mo^in^s, that Madam Guyon Revived: From their first
appearance at Court, they were all eminent for Virtue; and 'twas in
consideration of that, that the King chose to put the Children of France under
the Government of the Duke of Beauvillers. He had been thirty Years a Courtier;
and during that space of time, had never counter acted the Measures of Virtue,
which shined in all his Actions; and in a word, no Man could be in greater
esteem at Court, than himself. So that, when the Public saw him charged with
the Abetting of this new Doctrine, they looked upon the Charge as Invidious, as
well as Zealous. They put this construction upon the matter, that the Post he
was in, created him private Enemies, who wanted to succeed him, and stood at
nothing to compass their End.

Whatever was in it, the Abbot of Fenelon, who always showed a disposition to
obey what Decision should be made at Issi, joined with Madam G^yon in singling
out a third Person, who would cast the Balance upon the side he declared for,
if the two Bishops who were to meet should be of a contrary Sentiment. The
Bishop of Meaux pretends, in a Book he has lately published, That all this was
carried on, without the King's knowing any thing of the matter. This I am
willing to believe, because he said it. And I likewise believe, that the reason
in his view, was, to prevent the King's having an ill opinion of the Abbot of
Fenelon; His Majesty being an Enemy to all new Opinions, not only out of Piety,
but out of Policy; since nothing is more apt to disturb the Repose of a State,
than Innovations in Religious Matters. The third Person I mentioned but now,
was Mr. Tronson, Doctor of the Sorbonne, Superior of the Seminary of S.
Sulpitius, a Man of sound Principles, and one whose Life and Conversation were
blameless. Before the Assemblies met, the Abbot of Fenelon had time to Compile
a Vindication of Madam Guyon's Books; but notwithstanding all his Precaution,
they were Condemned with one general Voice. Madam Guyon had promised to submit
to the Judgment of these three Doctors, as well as the Abbot of Fenelon. And
both of 'em seeming to submit, these Judges thought the Matter was laid asleep,
tho at the same time, the Fire was only smoother'd under the Ashes. The Abbot
of Fenelon, had a mind to be a Bishop, before he kindled it again. And in
effect, he was no sooner Installed Archbishop of Cambray, but he returned to
his Vomit, notwithstanding that he had invited the two Prelates that Contemned
his Doctrine, to assist at the Ceremony of his Consecration. However, he went
on with a great deal of Precaution, pretending that the Sentence pronounced
against him, was only owing to a misunderstanding of the true Sense of the
Books under Examination. He gave high Encomiums of the Virtue of that Lady,
which at that time began to be more warmly attacked than before, for 'twas
alleged, She had only revived Molinos's Doctrine for a Cloak to the disorderly
things she was charged with. Madam Guyon, for her part was so far from a true
Submission to the Censure of those Judges, that she began again to Write a
Vindication of her Doctrine. The Archbishop of Cambray, who pretended all along
to keep in with the two Prelates that had Condemned him, as if the Allegations
he had made on the behalf of the Lady, and her Principles, were such as they
would have joined with, if they had been fully acquainted with her Person and
Doctrines. This Prelate, I say, made a counterfeit Censure of the liberty that
the Lady took in setting Pen to Paper again. At last, the King was informed of
the Matter, but so, that nothing was said against the Bishop of Cambray; either
because they had a mind to try if they could gain him otherwise, or because
they feared his Plot was so well contrived, that he would come off clear,
notwithstanding all the Testimony they could bring against him. Madam Guyon was
Imprisoned at Vincennes, by the King's Order. As the Mind of Man is always
curious and fond of Novelties, so her Books were sought for every where,
insomuch that there was not half enough for those that wanted 'em. This Lady
had a Daughter that was married to the Count de Vaux, the Eldest Son of the
late Mr. Fouquet, Superintendant of the Finances. He was Brother to the
Duchess of Charost; and being troubled at the Imprisonment of his
Mother-in-Law, as, indeed, he ought to have been, He left no Stone unturned to
procure her release. The Abbot of Fenelon did the same thing under hand. 'Twas
represented to the King, that she herself would condemn her own Advances, if
she thought they imported what was alleged against her, and that she was so far
from meaning any such thing, that she thought herself obliged to take up her
Pen again to undeceive the World; but since His Majesty was displeased with her
Writing, she would take care not to transgress his Orders for the future. In
fine, her Resolution to submit to the Doctrine of the Church, was so dexterously
represented to the King, that he condescended to set her at liberty, upon
condition, that she should retire to a Convent, just by Paris, where her
Conduct might be more narrowly inspected: Thither she went, and behaved herself
for some time so well, that 'twas really believed she was weaned from her
Errors. In the mean time, this thing having made a great noise, the Bishop of
Meaux resolved to publish a Book to undeceive those that might favor the New
Doctrine. He communicated his Design not only to the Bishop of Chalons, who was
then made Archbishop of Paris; but likewise to the Bishop of Cambray. He gave
the latter to know, that he hoped he would affix his Approbation to the Book,
which he desired both out of respect to him, and for enforcing and recommending
it to the World. He represented farther, That there was a general Report, that
he had favored that Lady; and that by this means he would show to the World,
that though he once thought well of her, yet he did not subscribe to her Errors.
The Bishoy of Meaux alleges, That he promised his Approbation, and that after
this interview, they parted good Friends. This he avers openly in a Book of his
that is but just Published. However, the Archbishop of Cambray went some days
after, to visit the Archbishop of Paris, and acquainted him, that he had a mind
to write upon that Subject himself, but would not put his Book to the Press,
before he knew his Sentiments of it. The Archbishop of Paris endeavored to
dissuade him from pursuing his Design, and remonstrated to him, That the least
partiality to that Lady's Tenets, would infallibly ruin him. The other
replied, That he might easily imagine he had no mind to Print any ill thing,
since he offered to show it first to him. But this Answer did not please the
Archbishop of Paris. He continued his utmost endeavor to take him off from his
Resolution; but at last finding he could not prevail, he desired, that at
least, he should not Print his Book till the Bishop of Meaux had Published his.
The Archbishop of Cambray promised not to do it; and the Archbishop of Paris
thinking he would keep his word, acquainted the Bishop of Meaux with what he
had said. In the mean time he expected a sight of the Manuscript; and, indeed,
the Bishop of Cambary sent it to him, but it was writ in such an abstracted
manner, that the first time he read it, he could understand little or nothing
of it. In that Manuscript he set forth, That if the Doctrine of the Quietists
consisted in the belief of such and such things, he was ready to Condemn it;
but if it maintained such and such things, he was ready to vindicate it. Thus
was his Book divided into several Chapters, some containing a description of
the Quietism, That all Doctors ought to reject; and others of the Quietism,
That, as he alleged, all the World ought to approve of. The Archbishop of
Paris, who had not much time to peruse it, being much taken up in the exercise
of his Episcopal Office, thought he might keep the Manuscript as long as he
would, especially considering, that the Archbishop of Cambray had promised not
to put it to the Press till the Bishop of Meaux's Book was Published. But he
would needs have it again, and the Archbishop of Paris gave it him, after he
had shown him two or three Chapters that he thought proper to be licked over
again. But, after all, this Book was Published before the Bishop of Meaux's;
and the Author having thus broke his word to the Archbishop of Paris, fell out
both with him and the other Prelate. The Bishop of Chartres joined with them in
representing to the King the pernicious Consequences that would ensue upon the
toleration of that New Doctrine. His Majesty having spoke of it to the
Archbishop of Cambray, that Prelate pretended to maintain, that he had said
nothing in his Book, but what was conformable to the Tradition of the Church;
and that he was willing to refer the matter to Rome, and submit to their
decision. The King not being qualified to judge of these things himself, was
obliged to strike Sail to such a plausible submission: But the other three
Prelates being still at his Ear, remonstrated to him, That 'twas not proper for
the Royal Offspring to be under the Conduct of a Man that was so notoriously
suspected of Heresy. This gave His Majesty such an Alarm, that he ordered the
Archbishop of Cambray to retire to his Archbishopric. In the mean time, the
Cause was transferred to Rome, as being the only Tribunal capable to determine
a Question of that Nature. Each of the Parties endeavored to make Friends in
that place. Mr. Bossuet sent his Nephew thither, who, by the Interest he had
beyond others, might be capable to put his Orders in Execution. The Archbishop
of Cambray sent likewise a Person that he confided in, though his greatest hopes
depended upon Cardinal Bouillon, who was his particular Friend. He ordered him
to prolong the Affair as much as possible, that he might have time to set
things in a clear light, and to give His Holiness to understand, that the
opposition he met with proceeded more from a party concern, than from a
Religious Zeal. In the mean while, Madam Guyon's Principles were found in the
Royal Abbey of St. Lewis at St. Cir, and a discovery was made, that some Nuns
were so influenced by 'em, that they were downright Quietists. Madam Maintenon
was mightily troubled at this, she being the Person to whom the Nobility of
France owes the Erecting of that Religious House, in which they have the
opportunity of being rid of their Daughters for a time, and sometimes for ever:
And what troubled her yet more, a Nun that was her particular Favorite, was
one of the poisoned number. However, the King transplanted 'em to other
Convents, to prevent their infecting of the rest. This Sect which had been
extinct at Rome from the Condemnation of Molinos, began to revive there, when
the Abettors understood, that it still had footing beyond the Alps, and even
that an Archbishop had openly declared himself a Protector of it. Such was the
conformity of their Sentiments with his, that they cried up whatever he
advanced; and though they did not know him, and indeed had scarce ever heard of
him, yet the whole City was presently filled with several Writings, in which
they not only applauded his Doctrine, but made an infinite number of
Panegyricks upon his Person, as if they had been intimately acquainted with
him. The Archbishop of Cambray being acquainted with all that passed at Rome by
an Express he had sent thither, did not nevertheless confide so much in them,
as to abstain from Writing himself: For he sent 'em several Papers by way of
Letters, in which he explained the Objections made against his Book, in order
to rectify the consequences that might be drawn from thence. In the mean time,
nothing was said to Madam Guyon, nor to the Archbishop's Friends that were
about the Children of France. Among these was the Abbot of Beaumont his Nephew,
to whom he had procured the place of being Sub-praeceptor to the young Princes,
and who had always acted up to the Duty of his Post. In regard it is natural for
a Nephew to adhere to his Uncle, and that the obligation he had received from
his Uncle, suggested a Presumption, that he would not easily depart from his
Interest, the King was solicited to disgrace him. 'Twas represented to His
Majesty, That the Young Princes were not safe under his Conduct, no more than
under his Uncle's; and that though he had not publicly taken up with his Errors,
yet 'twas to be feared he might suck in their Contagion. The King thought it an
unjust thing, upon a simple suspicion, to turn a Man out of his Post, that
could not be convicted of any Crime. He was resolved to see farther into the
matter before he would condescend to any such thing. Thus was he continued in
his place, and his Enemies were forced to wait for a more favorable
opportunity to ruin him.

While the Bishops were thus making War one with another, two Ecclesiastic
Orders were reconciled, that had not always lived in a good understanding; I
mean the Jesuits and the Priests of the Oratory, who upon several occasions
have demonstrated to the World, that they are not always of the same Opinion.
The Doctor of St. Martha, a Person of great Merit, distinguishing Piety, and
profound Learning, was turned out from being General of the Priests of the
Oratory, by the intrigues of the Jesuits, supported by the late (...) de
Chanvallon, Archbishop of Paris. To pry into what was done in that Society, the
Jesuits, as well as the Archbishop, had got a false Brother there, who gave 'em
notice of every thing, so that nobody could imagine how the discovery came;
for he was so disguised, that he was taken for the greatest Zealot of all the
Brethren. An Archbishopric was promised him in recompense for his Service, and
the Good Fathers were as good as their word in due time, that is, when they
found another of their Society, that promised to perform what he did. The
conferring of a Bishopric upon this Traitor, raised a suspicion in that
Society; but since it might be attributed to something else than the true
Cause, that was not enough for a true Conviction. At that time the Traitor of
St. Martha was not yet deposed; he continuing his steady Course, quickly
observed that there were Traitors among them, though he did not determine whether
the Bishop or another. However, that Bishop being removed from thence, the
simpler sort of People looked upon that as a vindication of him, though the more
sensible part of Mankind did not excuse him the more for that. They fancied
what was true, that he had given his Place to another, who would be equally
zealous upon the prospect of the like Recompense. They were in the right of it;
for they did nothing but what the Archbishop and the Jesuits knew: However they
did not trouble themselves, being sensible that they did nothing but what was
to be done. In the mean time, the Doctor of St. Martha had occasion to have
some business with the Archbishop; and one day when he had his Audience, that
Prelate put him into his Closet, till he had finished a Conference with a
person upon a business of Consequence. As soon as the Doctor entered the
Closet, he spied upon the Table, among other Papers, one that he knew to be the
Hand of one of his Priests; and having the curiosity to know what it was, found
it to be an account he gave the Archbishop of a thing that had been privately
concerted among them. This Paper he put in his Pocket, thinking the Archbishop
would not perceive that 'twas he that took it, and carried it home, after
finishing the Affair he came upon. Immediately upon his return he consulted
with those of his Society, that he knew would be faithful in keeping the
secret, whether or not he should show this Paper to him that wrote it. Some
were against the showing of it, because that would give the Archbishop to know,
that 'twas he that took it; but others thought this no inconveniency; nay, on
the con^ary, they thought they were obliged to show that they knew both the
Traitor and the Treachery. The Father joined with the last, and accordingly
took aside the writer of the Paper that was then in his Pocket, and checked him
for what he had done. The writer offered to deny the Fact, fancying that he
spoke only by suspicion. Then the Father of St. Martha advised him in a
Christian manner, not to add a Lie to his former Fault, and withal acquainted
him, that he knew all the particulars, for which reason 'twas in vain for him
to offer to disguise any thing. The treacherous Brother was of the same Humor
with those, who, when once they have advanced a thing, could rather see it cut
in pieces, than lop any thing of it: For in pursuance of their Temper, he
insisted still upon the Negative. But the General not being able longer to bear
his impudent Lying, produced the writing out of his Pocket, and proved the
Charge against him by his own hand Writing. The Traitor was mightily surpised
at the appearance of the Paper; having then nothing more to say, all his
reserve was to cry out upon the Archbishop for ruining him entirely, by giving
his Paper to the General. The Archbishop made Oath that it did not come that
way; and well he might, since it was discovered as above. However, the
Archbishop smelling from thence, that the Father had snatched up that Paper
when he was in the Closet, advised the false Brother not to be concerned, for
that he would procure the Royal Protection for him, in case his Society offered
to affront him. In effect, the Society of which he was a Member designed to
expel him; but the Archbishop prohibited them in the King's Name, to think of
it; so that he continued among these Priests, and does to this day. In the mean
time the Archbishop could not forget the Trick that the Father of St. Martha
had played him. That joined with other things, gave the Archbishop an
opportunity of representing him to the King as a Jansenist, and employing the
Royal Authority to depose him. Father de la Tour, the present General of that
Order, was elected in his room, and deserved that Post upon several accounts,
especially by reason of his singular Piety, and distinguishing Zeal. The
Jesuits opposed his Election under hand, alleging, That he was as much a
Jansenist as the Father of St. Martha. Several things were offered toward his
justification; but that very thing that was designed for his further Ruin,
prevented his exclusion. He was Confessor to one Madam de Fond Pertuis, that
was a zealous Devotee to Mr. Arnaud, insomuch that she went to Flanders several
times during the last War. This new General having advice of this, prohibited
her to return to Flanders again, unless she chose another Confessor. But she
did not stand to go thither once more, in spite of his order to the contrary.
However he did not offer to enquire further into her Conduct; but the thing
being heard of at Court; the King saw plainly that he was not so much a
Jansenist as he was represented ^to be, in regard he censured that Lady's
adhering to one that was reckoned the head of that Sect. Thus was his exclusion
prevented; and the Jesuits finding what a good Opinion the King had of him,
invited him to P^^^ch a^ a solemn Festival in the Church of St. Louis. He
returned their Complement by desiring them to single out one of their Society
to Preach before the Priests of the Oratory, upon the day of another solemn
Festival. Thus was the Reconciliation brought about, that I spoke of but now.
But, after all, I doubt if the Jesuits were cordial in the matter; for this
General had for some time endeavored to stifle their Practice. A great many
Ladies of Quality that used to confess to Father Bourdaloux, or some of their
Society, desired that he might be their Director. Among others the Duchess of
Aumont deserted them, and put in with him: And this being a Practice that
seldom passes with impunity among Directors, would have eternized the Quarrel
between the two Companies, if the Jesuits, who have fully as much Policy as
Learning, had not thought it proper to take no farther notice of it. At this
day Father de la Tour Preaches in their Church; but as he is not equal to many
of 'em, either in Gracefulness or Eloquence, so they did not stand to give him
the precedence as to the Direction of Consciences, because he, for his part,
was obliged to stoop to them in the way of Preaching. Madam Harlai, the
Plenipotentiary's Lady, had become one of his Penitents, ever after she had the
happiness to be convinced, that it was impossible to work her Salvation in this
World, if she lived as most Women now a days do: But being as fond of Gaming as
ever her Husband could be, particularly of Lansquenet, which is as bewitching
as Bassette, insomuch, that when Women are once seized with a Passion for it,
they will rather sell their Smock than abstain from it: This Lady, I say, being
such a passionate Lover of that Game, that 'twas to be feared she might relapse
into her old vomit, by frequenting public Company every day; This Director
gave her four of his other Penitents to have an eye upon her. These Spies
relieved one another under the pretense of keeping her Company; and she was the
less sensible of the Design, because they were all four much of her Age and
Condition. One, indeed was of a higher Birth than she, as being the Widow of a
Son of the Blue-Ribbon, one of whose Ancestors had been a Marshal of France.
For, notwithstanding that the Lawyers have a great value for their Character,
especially when their Magistracy gives as great a distinction as the Family of
Harlai is possessed of; yet it is certain, that there is a great deal of
difference between the Gown and the Sword, when the latter is attended with
distinguishing Circumstances. This Lady had been the Marchioness of St. Valeri.
As for her own Family she was a Bullion, that is to say, the Daughter of the
Marquis of Mon Lovet; a Marquis indeed of a late standing, but of a golden
Nobility; for he was the Son of Mr. de Bullion, Superintendant of the Finances,
who left three Children, among which the descendants of the Eldest were only
capable to keep his Riches; as for the other two, their Posterity has no
resemblance of the Superintendant that was once in their Family; they are as
poor as Devils, and the third of these Children commenced his misery in their
Life: time, by making an unlucky Marriage. He fell in Love with his Mother's
Woman, and Married her, upon whch his Mother disinherited him. After he had
quenched his Passion with Enjoyment, he quickly became sensible of his Fault;
but 'twas then too late to think of a Remedy. However, being very much troubled
for the loss of such a fine Succession, he left Lions, where he was wont to
live, and came to Paris; having first instructed his Wife in what she was to do
toward the backing of his Design. The Orders he gave her, were, to go into the
Country, and spread a Report in the City, that she was at the Point of Death:
Now, it being customary in all places to enlarge Reports as they spread, the
whole City of Lions was presently filled with the noise, not only of the Lady's
sham Illness, but even of her Death. Her Husband, who had been hitherto
frustrated in all his attempts toward the regaining of his Mother's Favor,
knowing how cases stood at Lions, went into deep mourning, and so repaired to
St. Eustache, where his Mother commonly went. He cast himself, as 'twere,
accidentally in her way; and she seeing him in such a Garb, had the curiosity
to inform herself under hand, of the Reason of it; for she would not speak to
him herself. Her followers being persuaded that his Wife was Dead, told her,
what they heard of the matter; upon which she gave her Son's Relations and
Friends to know, That forasmuch as the occasion of the difference between her
and him was gone, she would not keep Anger longer. She invited him to come and
see her; and the Deed by which he was disinherited being tore, he found ways
and means to retain her Friendship, insomuch, that she not only pardoned his
Marriage, but likewise his abusing of her Credulity, in making her believe that
his Wife was Dead.

Madam Harlai's three other Keepers were the Attorney General's Lady, Madam
Harouis, and Madam Chateaurenard. This last was the handsomest of all the four,
but had not been always so devout as they, for she was mightily taken up in the
way of the World: But the disgrace of her Husband's Family, with some other
melancholy Circumstances that are not uncommon in the way of Life, obliged her
to pursue a course that might screen her from all disquiet; so that she became
so very pious, that her Piety was a pattern for those who had grown old in the
pursuit of it, before ever she thought of such a course of Life. Her Husband
was the Son of the late Mr. Dacquin, the King's first Physician, who not being
satisfied with the Estate he had, occasioned his own Banishment from the Court,
by importuning the King with unseasonable Requests: Nay, he was so bold, as to
represent to His Majesty, that his Services were at least equal to any that
could be done of what nature soever; and in effect, that since his Life was to
him the most precious and dear thing in the World, 'twas an obvious
consideration, that the person who preserved it by his Prescriptions, was not
be despised. Before he ventured upon such Discourses, that is, while he
observed the measures of Respect, due to His Majesty; both he and his Family
had a thousand liberal Gifts conferred upon 'em. His Majesty had made his
Eldest Son Secretary of his own Closet, and an honorary Counselor of the
Parliament, a favor that is not promiscuously granted; and besides all this,
he was Intendant of the Generality of Moulins. When this Honor was conferred
upon him, he was scarce twenty five Years old. But immediately upon his
Father's beginning to talk so high, he was included in his Father's Disgrace,
and recalled. The Name of Chateaurenard which he bore, was the Title of an
Estate he bought from Mr. Amat, the Son of a famous Farmer of the Revenues.
This Amat, who scarce understood his Interest so well as his Father, discovered
upon his first imbarking in the World, that Gaming was his only delight; and
upon that score, several Sharpers Courted him in hopes to have part of the
Riches left him by his Father. Among others, an Ensign of the Lifeguard had
^pretty good success; for he won of him a large sum in ready Money, and another
upon tick. But that sort of Commerce being the King's aversion, and the Ensign
being better versed in shuffling the Cards, than in unsheathing his Sword for
the King's Service; Upon these considerations, he was broke when His Majesty
purged the Companies of their scandalous Members. The abovementioned Estate
belonged formerly to a very good Family of that Name. It had once a Castle upon
it that served to overawe the Burgundians, when they were under the Dukes of
Burgundy, who were the greatest Enemies that ever the Kings of France had;
notwithstanding that they had the honor to spring from their Blood. The Heir
of that Family having done something in opposition to the King's Interest; his
Estate was forfeited and reunited to the Royal Demesnes. The Family of
Chatillon Coligni, whose Possessions were adjacent to that Estate, bought it of
the King as lying conveniently for them, and kept it a great many Years, till
William Prince of Orange Married Louise de Coligni, the Daughter of Admiral de
Coligni, who bears so great a Figure in our History; by which means it passed
into the House of Nassau, and there continued till the Princes of Orange, the
present King of England's Mother, sold it as her Son's Guardian to Mr. Amat
Farmer of the Revenues. At this day the Arms of the Princes of Orange are
placed in the most eminent part of the City, if it be allowable to call a Place
a City, that is only a Hole, and that one of the most wretched Holes in the
Universe. But let it be as it will, the Inhabitants of that Hole or Town, call
it which you will, thinking to ingratiate themselves at Court in the beginning
of the last War, by setting forth their hatred of King William, entreated the
Marquis of Louvois by a Letter, to allow 'em to take down these Arms. But such
a Request deserving no Answer, that Minister gave 'em none; and thus were the
Arms preserved from their mistaken Zeal; so that they stand to this day where
they were placed an Age ago.

At that time the Bishop of Dax Died; and his Death robbed the public of his
History of the King, which he was carrying on, upon the precedent of Mr.
Perefixe's History of Henry IV. He thought it became a Bishop to undertake that
sort of performance. But after all, if he had employed his time in finishing
the History of the Church begun by Mr. Godeau; that Province, as I take it, had
been more suitable to his Character. However, he searched every corner for the
finding of Memoirs to answer his Design. And not long before his Death, I saw
him come to one of my Friends, that had belonged to Cardinal Mazarin, to know
of him, whether the late King of England was present at the Negotiation of
Peace, carried on by that Minister, with Don Louis de Haro, in 1659. Upon his
departure, my Friend acquainted me with the occasion of his Visit; which was to
me a mighty surprisal, for that all the World knows, that that Prince would
have been there, but that his Eminence would not allow of it. The Reason he
went upon, was, That he feared the disobliging of Richard the Son of Cromwell,
who had been declared Protector of England after his Father's Death. So that
that Prince who had advanced within six Leagues of the place where the
Conferences were held, was obliged to return. My Lord Bath, whom he had sent to
know if his Presence would be acceptable, received this Answer, That 'twas not
proper for him to appear there; and that the abovementioned Minister would
still take the same care of his Interest. But had the Prince been so simple as
to trust him, and take no other measures, he had been in a fair way of never
mounting his Throne. The Bishop I mentioned but now, had resigned his
Bishopric a great while ago, perhaps in order to have the more leisure to
pursue his History: It Is probable he thought to outdo Racine, or Boileau; but
I question if he should have succeeded: If his Talent lay that way, I must say
that it was a hidden one; for he was never found to be capable of doing much.

Had the Marquis of Rouville, who was eighty Years old, died as he did, he had
not sustained so great a loss, because he had not any History upon the Stocks;
but instead of Dying, the old Gentleman acted the part of a very Lively Man,
and one that had no mind to die so soon. He commenced a suit against his
Relations, who mean'd to interdict him, under the pretense that he was very
old; and having always been an ill Husband, there was no hopes of his growing
better in his old days. Had the late Prince been still alive, and sat as his
Judge, he had not only given it for his Adversaries, but ordered him to be
Imprisoned; for he used to say, that if there had been two ^^^^^^es in France,
he would not scruple to leave it for his Lifetime. His meaning was, That he
was the most troublesome Man in the World: which was also the Opinion of a good
many People, who, in imitation of this Prince, did not satisfy themselves with
Trifles. He chose rather the Condition of one of his own Men in a (...) Corner,
at Chantilly, than to be obliged to hear such an idle Fellow speak; nor did he
stand to say, that he was far less uneasy with his Pullets, and the other
Creatures that he kept in his Managry, and visited twice a day, than he would
be with Men of his Character. Yet it was a strange manner of Occupation for a
Prince, so famous for having gained so many Battles, and whose very first
Essays in War had equaled the Actions of those that grew old in the Trade. The
Enterprise of Barcelona was still in hand, as well as the design to have the
Prince of Conti chosen King of Poland; and the Court was exceeding diligent to
bring both the Affairs to a happy Issue. The one was, indeed, more easier than
the other, though both appeared very hard; at least, there was some reason to
judge the latter more easy than the former, because all they had to do, was,
to spare no money to make it succeed; they were only to gain the Votes of those
who are always for the highest Bidder; for as that is the Harvest of the Poles,
who reap nothing when they have a King upon the Throne; so it is long since
they owned their resemblance of the Swiss, in regard nothing is to be done with
them without money. The Prince of Conti had sent thither already two hundred
thousand Crowns of his own, and the King for his part, who would have reaped a
great advantage, by obtaining that Crown for the Prince, sent fourtimes as
much. Abbot Polignac, the King's Ambassador at that Court, distributed the
money amongst those he had engaged in his Party, and taking that Election to
depend entirely upon Cardinal Radzionwski, Archbishop of Gnesne, who by virtue
of this last Dignity, was Prince and Regent of the Kingdom, during the vacancy
of the Throne, ^lavish'd his money upon him, while he thought it sufficient to
feed others with fine Promises. But the Generals of the Army of the Crown, and
the Lithua^ian Troops, who were equally sharp set with the Cardinal, did not
find their Account in that sort of management; neither were the Palatines
satisfied, forasmuch as they thought their Swords deserved to be considered no
less than the Cardinal's Mitre. Abbot Polignac had disguised his Project for a
long time, and made the Queen Dowager of Poland, believe, that the King, his
Master, had only put up the Prince of C^nti by way of Provision, in case there
were no other in whom he could confide. Besides that, the Prince of Conti was
very-indifferent upon the matter; and if he consented to it, 'twas rather to
please the King, than to gratify his Inclination. So far he said well; and
that Prince who was passionately fond of France, was afraid of nothing more,
than to hear that he was elected King of Poland. But as for His Majesty, he was
of another mind, for he desired nothing more earnestly than to see the Crown
upon that Prince's Head, by reason of the advantage he expected from thence.
The Queen Dowager being, like most people, easily persuaded to believe what she
wished gave credit to the insinuations of Abbot Polignac. She took a great deal
of pains to justify to him her Conduct, in what she had done for several Years
against the King's Interest; and gave him to know, that His Majesty had for^'d
her to it by his ill usage; and that whenever His Majesty pleased to alter his
measur^s with reference to her, she would really show, that she d^^^r'd nothing
more than the restoring of the good understanding that had been betwixt the two
Crowns in the beginning of the Reign of the King her late Husband. She
continued to repre^^rt, That i^ His Majesty would vouchsafe his P^^^ction to
Prince James her Son, whom she mean^d to prefer to the Throne, as soon as he
a^^^vd at that Dignity, he should do every thing in (...) with His Majesty's
pleasure; and that His Majesty ought not to fear that the Alliance he had
concluded with a suspected Family, would oblige him to counteract his Interest;
that he knew well, that Princes have but little regard for their Wive's
Relations, at a time when either their Glory or Grandeur are in view; and that
her Son would continue in an inseparable Union with his Crown, insomuch that he
would put the Service of His Majesty upon the same balance with his own.

These words were very acceptable to the Abbot of Polignac, who knew, that a
Reconciliation between two Parties is the more sincere, when both sides are
eager in justifying their past Conduct. Nay, he pretended to have some sense of
the justness of her Complaints against the King, in order to insinuate himself
more effectually into her Breast. In fine, he agreed with her to transfer all
the Votes for the Prince of Conti to her Son; and upon that consideration she
promised to use her utmost efforts in taking off Sapieha, great General of
Lith^ania, from the House of Austria, the Interest of which he seemed to
espouse very warmly. Sapieha was extreme powerful in that Duchy, and was
rather Master than General of it, possessing vast Territories, and great
Charges in it, which was the reason that every one trembled under him. The
Abbot of Polignac had no other design in it, but to weaken the party of the
House of Austria, flattering himself with the Thoughts, that Prince James his
Party would never be able to make Head against his own; for he was very far
from thinking to keep his word to the Queen, and all he said to h^^, was only
to the end he might the more easily deceive her. Nevertheless she was so
credulous, that to assure him the better of the Confidence she had in him, she
sent him her Picture, which he seemed to have desired very earnestly. He set it
up in the most conspicuous place of his Chamber, to make her the better believe
how much he esteemed it. However, that Princess acted nothing but in concert
with him. She endeavored to take off Sapieha from the House of Austria.
Sapieha did not deceive her in the least. He told her freely, That he was so
engaged in the Interest of that Family, that there was but one thing that could
oblige him to quit it, and that was, to have the Crown set upon his own Head,
and that it was in her power to contribute to it, if she pleased: That she
should only join her Interest, with that he could make for himself; which if
she pleased to consent to, he would infallibly set her upon the Throne with
him; for that he being a Widdower and she a Widow, nothing could hinder them
from Marrying. The Queen Dowager, however earnest she was to Reign, did not at
all relish that Proposal. She knew Sapieha's Spirit, who though he would have
kept his Promise to her, yet would hardly have allowed her the very shadow of
the Kingly Power, while he himself would manage the whole without Control. She
had had already two Husbands, over whom she had always a great ascendant, and
now she did not pretend to degenerate in the least from what she had always
been, though she was passed the time of inspiring any new Flames.

The House of Austria, in imitation of that of France, caused the Ministers
which they had at that Court, to act so secretly, that it was impossible, even
for the most clear sighted, to pry into their Conduct. There was hardly any one
who did not believe that their design was to advance Prince James to the
Throne. The honor* he had in being Brother-in-Law to the Emperor and the King
of Spain, confirmed them in their Thoughts. However, that House had quite a
different inclination. They mistrusted the Queen of Poland, whose Actions they
were no strangers to, and knowing that she had sent Money into France, they
looked upon her as a Woman that had been always inclined that way. They knew
that the French have always a secret inclination for their Country, which never
dies but with their last Breath. Besides, they knew that Princess had a certain
ascendant over her Son, that would assure her of the Reins of the Government,
if ever they set the Crown upon his Head. However, all these Reasons were more
than sufficient to oblige the Emperor and the King of Spain to prefer their own
Interests, to that of their Brother-in-Law, who was a Prince upon whom they
could not rely very much; for he was far short of the qualities of the King his
Father. They cast their Eyes upon a Person very worthy of that Crown. The Duke
of Saxony, a young Prince, who had distinguished himself to a great degree in
the Wars the Emperor had against the Infidels, and whom he had set at the Head
of his Army, seemed to both of them to be the Man. His Imperial Majesty
labored to remove a difficulty that opposed their design. The Duke was of the
Lutheran Religion, and ever in some measure considered as the head of all that
Party, because it was one of his Ancestors that afforded a Retreat to Luther,
and who, after having embraced his Doctrine, undertook also his protection
against the Emperor, who pretended to have him punished, because he dared to
Preach a New Religion. It is truly astonishing, why his Imperial Majesty and
the King of Spain, would not rather endeavor to choose the Duke of Bavaria, who
was Son-in-Law to the one, and Nephew to the other, he being also a Catholic,
which was a necessary Quality for the King of Poland: Besides, he was much
Richer than the Duke of Saxony, and that is no mean quality to be considered in
a design of that Nature: But whether that Elector was altogether indifferen^^
or whether the two Princes judged it necessary to continue him in the
Government of Flanders, they fixed entirely upon the other Duke. The Emperor
proposed the matter to him, and told him, that it should only be long of his
Religion, if the Affair did not succeed* The Duke found the thing of too great
a Consequence to determine suddenly. However charming the proposition was; he
considered the Condition they annexed to it was too weighty for him. He
demanded some time to give his Answer; and the Emperor judged, that because he
listened already, all would have a favorable Issue if he pressed him never so
little. He began to infinuate to him, that both the first Calvinists and
Lutherans had always believed, that one might as well be saved in the Catholic
Religion, as in Theirs; and that the Crown they proposed to him, was certainly
well worth all the trouble they asked of him; and at the same time made him
converse with a number of Doctors, that pushed the Affair a great deal further,
and alleged a great many Reasons to prove, that the Catholic Religion was the
only true Religion, and that which had been always professed in the Church.

The Bright luster of the Crown of Poland, made the Duke relish their admirable
Reasons; and some Ministers who conferred before him with these Doctors (though
neither the one nor the other knew to what purpo^e all this was doing) agreed,
that according to the Explication the Catholics make now adays of their Faith,
it was void of all manner of Venom; so that the Duke was more than half
persuaded to go all the length they desired of him. The Catholic Doctors
hearing the Ministers speak after that manner, That the Prince might harbor no
further scruple in his mind, alleged, that nonehad ever explained their Faith
after any other manner than what they do at present, excepting some sort of
People that were glad to make others believe some different Thing; that one
might only read the Council of Trent to know the truth of it; and that all
those of their Religion had no other Doctrine, than such as was taught there.
The Duke was glad that they prepared for him the way he desired; being informed
by the Emperor, that his Intrigues in Poland were so strongly laid, that his
Enemies would find it hard to overturn them. There was nothing that diswaded
him so much from making a profession of that Religion, as the fear that his
hopes would prove abortive. Accordingly, being a Man of precaution, he promised
to the Emperor to perform all they desired of him, upon the proviso of the
certainty of his Election: Now, this assurance that he demanded, was a very
difficult Point, because it depended upon the Votes of a great many People that
were capable of falsifying their words. The very Bishop of Cujavia, though he
headed the Interest of the House of Austria, showed no great resolution in
determining who he should Vote for, notwithstanding he had already taken of his
Money. He designed to make use of that Election as a means to make himself a
Cardinal; and was sensible; that whatsoever side was preferred, he would meet
with invincible Obstacsle to his pretensions. The Bishop of Passaw waited only
to see the Emperor's Success, in order to make a Proposal for the succession to
that Crown. He being Brother to the Empress, the Bishop of Cujavia was
convinced that he would be too hard for him; and that upon that score the same
thing would be said to him, that upon the like occasion was formerly said to
the Coadjutor of Paris. Cardinal Mazarin had formerly promised to invest him
with the Purple, upon the proviso of some things that were mutually concerted;
but he forfeited this promise, the Cardinal desired the Prince of Conti to
procure the nomination of another. The Bishop of Cujavia fearing, and that very
justly, that the same thing might happen to him, would gladly have gone over to
the French side, if he had not been jealous of the Abbot of Polignac, whom he
took to be of such a Temper, as not to give up the pretentions he equally made
to the Cardinal's Cap. In this quandary he caused some to feel his Pulse, to
try if he would quit his Pretentions; but the Abbot being as fond of the
preferment as he, thought his request very indiscreet, and neglected the King's
Interest in carrying on his own. In effect, had he resigned his Pretentions to
this Prelate, he had, by that means, joined the Prelate's Interest to his own,
and had certainly procured the Election of the Prince of Conti. But he fancied,
that by the Primat's Assistance, and by the help of some Money he still
expected from France, he would compass his design without him.

The Bishop perceiving how confident he was of his good Success, since he
despised his Offers, which any other would have valued at a far higher rate
than what he demanded of him, endeavored to cast in some difference betwixt
Him and the Queen of Poland. He caused inform that Princess, that she would be
extremely imposed upon, if she relied upon his Promises, and advised her to
have some better security of him, than his word, unless she had a mind to leave
room for a future Repentance. The Queen, who was naturally suspicious, resolved
to make her advantage of this advice; and that she might have the more
confidence in Polignac's Expressions, she desired that he might procu^e for her
the King's Letter, by which she might be assured of what his Majesty was
pleased to ^^quaint her by his Ambassador. The Abbot put her in hopes of it,
designing to elude her, whenever she urged him too close to make good his
Promise. In the mean time he wrote to France, that Affairs went fairly for the
Prince of Conti: But if they designed to make the success not only probable,
but infallible, they should not ^ail to send him a considerable sum of Money.
The Court of France was never in greater necessity than at that time; having
resolved to attack Barcelona, they were equipping a strong Fleet in Provence,
that put them to a vast Expense: Besides, they were considerably exhausted to
procure a Peace from their Enemies, that at that time was so necessary to them;
all their Provinces were ruined by the War; and though other States were hardly
in better Circumstances, yet they were afraid, that the Subjects would scarce
be any longer capable of bearing so heavy a Charge.

They had been a long time resolved (as is already mentioned) upon the design
of Barcelona, in hopes that the Spaniards, who alone with the Emperor opposed
the Peace, would change their Sentiments, when they saw themselves attacked
even in the very Bowels. For though that place, be upon the Frontiers of France,
yet there being only two or three places of strength betwixt it and Madrid, it
was not doubted, but that Conquest would Alarm them much more than the loss of
four better places in Flanders. But after all, though these Reasons pleaded for
carrying on the attack without any delay, it was nevertheless put off for some
time upon important Considerations. The very Inhabitants of Marseilles opposed
it is Bombardment, in regard they had a great many effects in it, which would
have been lost, if it had been reduced to Ashes. They made a considerable
Present to the Court, to procure a due regard to their Interest: But at last,
all the Considerations that retarded the Seige, ^ being taken away, it was
discoursed on more warmly than ever.

This Enterprise could not be carried on without a great deal of Charge, as I
intimated before; but the Court that is seldom sensible of the public
miseries, and had a Minister that found the Mystery, to raise as much Money as
they pleased without overcharging the People, thought that this ought not to
hinder them from bringing their Enemies to a Compliance. In effect, the
Provinces were rather miserable, because they wanted Hands to labor the
Ground, than that they were overcharged by exorbitant Imposts: So that His
Majesty, who was still full of Money, notwithstanding all these immense
Expenses, thought fit to satisfy the Abbot of Polignac, in regard that he
assured them, there was nothing else wanting to make all have a prosperous
Success: So that he sent him not only the sum he desired, but four hundred
thousand Livers over and above; that if he came to fail in his Negotiation, he
should not blame an unseasonable Parcimony. The Queen of Poland seeing him
receive so large remittances, and distribute them according to the Cardinal's
Advice; found him very remote from her Interest, and began to be extreme
jealous of his Conduct. She had reason to suspect, that he only thought to
amuse her; and as the esteem they had of the Prince of Conti, in that Kingdom,
was far superior to that they had for Prince James her Son, she began to press
the Abbot upon the assurances of his Promise. He shifted it, by telling her
sometimes, that the King being now ready to begin the Campaign, had no time to
think of any thing else; at other times, that the King expected that if he
brought over to the party of Prince James, the Voices he had gained for the
Prince of Conti, she would be pleased to repay him the Money he had sent into
that Country, for making the Party.

The Queen's Council could hardly blame so just an offer, but distrusting that
it was only a pretense of the Ambassador's to delay Affairs, advised the Queen
to yield to him in that Article; for if he meant to be ingenuous, the Prince
her Son could never fail of the Crown. The Queen believed her Council; and she
herself communicated it to the Abbot; but that Ambassador being now at a loss
what to Answer, thought fit to propose to her something concerning his own
particular Interest. He told her, that during the life of the King her Husband,
he had the promise of the Court, that if he got the Prince of Conti to be
chosen King, he should allow him to name whom he pleased for the Cardinal
Dignity; that he expected she would be pleased to stipulate the same thing with
her Son, that all his pains might not be fruitless; That there were some
Prelates in her Son's Interest, who had the same pretentions, in case he were
chosen King, and that he desired they might resign in his favor: That Her
Majesty ought not to take it ill, that he should require this of her; for
perhaps in his Lifetime he should not have so favorable an opportunity to
arrive to that honorable Dignity.

As soon as the Queen's Council heard him talk after that manner, they were the
more confirmed in their Sentiments of him: However, to cut off all
opportunities to make use of that difficulty, they used their Interest with the
Prelates that were of Prince James his Party, to resign what the Abbot desired;
which they did in consideration of the promises the Queen had made to them; and
that Princess acquainting the Ambassador with it, he pretended all went well;
and that all that remain^d (...) ^e done now, was, to reimburse the sums he
(...) advanced, o^ which he had the Accounts readvly by him: Now He had not
proposed that as to be done presently; all he desired before, was, That when
Prince James should be chosen, the Queen and He should be obliged to make that
Restitution. So all that were in the Interest of the Queen, finding that he had
only altered his Conduct, the better to amuse her, judged it expedient, that
Her Majesty should not only break off all measures with him, but do it also
very openly. Their Reason was, That as France had it is Enemies as well as
Partisans, the secret Union which they suspected she entertained with him,
hindered those who had openly declared themselves against France, to embrace her
Interest. The Queen believed them, and after once sounding the Abbot of
Polignac touching his last Resolution, she made him sensible, That she was no
more of an humor to be amused. She wrote a Letter also to the Marchioness of
Bethunes, to be delivered to his most Christian Majesty. In it she complains of
the Abbot's disengenuity; and how uselesly he lavished the King's Money; for
however powerful he believed his Interest, it was no ways capable to equal that
of the House of Austria, except they joined it with hers. This Marchioness was
Sister to the Queen, and both of them were Daughters to the Marquis of Arquien,
who was Captain of the Duke of Orlean's hundred Swiss, and afterward Cardinal,
by the Nomination of the late King of Poland. The late Princess Mary of
Gonsague, had carried that Queen with her into Poland, when she herself went
thither in the same quality, being Married to Ladislaus, who then possessed
that Crown. She had taken her for one of her Maids of Honor; and the Prince
Lubomirsky falling in Love with her, as well as Sobiesky, who was afterward
her Husband, the Queen declared herself in favor of the first, because he was
by far the greater Prince of the two. In the mean time Lubomirsky dying a
little after, and the Affairs of that Country proving unfavourable for Casimir,
Ladislaus his Brother, who was chosen King after Ladislaus, and had moreover
Married his Widow, Queen Mary, knowing that Sobiesky continued always his
Affection for Princess Lubomirsky, promised to procure her for him in Marriage,
if he would declare himself for the King her Husband: Which he did, and as he
had already gained a great Reputation in that Kingdom, his declaring himself
was of vast advantage to Casimir. However, after a great many different
Accidents that are foreign to my Subject, Casimir dying without Issue as well
as King Ladislaus his Brother, and a French Prince making interest for the
Crown, as well as the present Duke of Lorain, his Father; the Bishop of
Marseilles, who was Ambassador for France in that Country, seeing it go cross
to the Interest of the Person whom his Master proposed, changed his Conduct
very dexterously, and told the Diet, That it was none of their business to
Court their Neighbors, for what they might easily find among themselves,
provided they were satisfied with it; That John Sobiesky was a person very
worthy of their Crown, who would govern them with all the prudence and
satisfaction that it was possible for any other Prince to do. Sobiesky had beat
the Turks in many Rencounters; and even very lately had rescued the Republic
from imminent Danger by a glorious Victory: So that his fresh Services pleading
more in his favor than it was possible for the Ambassador of France to do, He
was chosen King, notwithstanding a former Decree of the Republic, by which
they excluded their own Subjects from the Crown.

By these means the Queen of Poland, of an ordinary French Girl, became Queen.
However, though her Birth ought to have obliged her to all the Respect imaginable
for the Crown of France, under whose Government she had drawn her first Breath,
yet she very soon forgot it, because His most Christian Majesty would not
comply with all her desires. The Marquis of Vitry, Ambassador of France, at
that Court, in the King her Husband's time, passed his time there very
uneasily; and he missed been assassinated very narrowly, because she suspected
him to be the cause of all the Displeasure she received from the Court of
France. The King, who made use of the Prince her Husband, as a check over the
Emperor and Empire, was obliged to conceal his Resentment of that Princess her
Conduct. Matters were better adjusted by the moderation and prudence of His
most Christian Majesty, and by the secret Reflections that Princess might have
had of her injustice to a Prince worthy to govern the Universe. But as it is
impossible always to dissemble ones Sentiments, she soon made the breach
between Her and His Majesty wider than ever: For being by the Divine Goodness
raised to so high a Dignity, it vexed her extremely, that her Father had no
mark of Distinction in his Court: She therefore entreated the King to create
him Duke and Peet. The Marquis of Arquien, was a person abandoned to his
Pleasures, and became so far a slave to them, that though he was advanced to a
great Age, yet (...) Wise, but plunged into Debaucheries that (...) extremely
upon the honor of his Daughter and gained no Reputation to himself, either as
Father-in-Law to a great King, or as a Man of Quality. He avowedly kept his
Miss, whom he allowed to go by his Name; for she was known by no other, than by
that of Louison D' Arquien; and that coming often to His Maiesty's Ear, he
thought it not very convenient to grant the Queen the Dignity she demanded for
her Father

That Repulse was resented with all the Malice Woman is capable of; she obliged
the King, her Husband, to discontinue all secret Intelligence with His Majesty;
and as the Emperor, at that time, was engaged in a Bloody War against the
Turks, she incessantly importuned him, until he had concluded an Offensive and
Defensive League with His Imperial Majesty. The Almighty brought all that to
pass for the relief of Vienna, which the Turks had Besieged; and beyond all
peradventure, had also been taken, had not His Polish Majesty come to Relieve
it. However, so lively and impatient a Princess, could not but show her
resentment much more to the Abbot of Polignac, because the present Affair was
of far greater consequence, than any thing that had passed formerly; and the
World saw, by the violence of her Resentment, that she would continue it all
her Life. She sent to him to have her Picture again; and because he refused to
restore it, thinking still to amuse her, she immediately sent the same Person,
that had formerly spoke to him, to let him know, That if he would not restore
it in a friendly manner, she would oblige him to do it by force. The
Ambassador, who was sensible how she had treated the Marquis of Vitry, would
not run the risque of a second refusal He returned her Picture; and seeing the
Queen had broke off all measures with him, he observed none with her, but what
her Sex and Dignity obliged him to. In the mean time, he distributed some small
Money he had received, among the Commanders of the Army of the Crown, and of
that of Lithuania. They thought it convenient to refuse it; but as all he gave
them was not capable to satisfy their hungry Appetites, so they were not the
more obliged by it, to comply with his Design.

An Officer of the Army of the Crown, who was the Elector of Brandenburg's
Subject, having heard even those who received the Money, vent their Railleries,
resolved to come and acquaint His Majesty of it at Versailles, believing the
King would certainly reward him liberally; so quitting his Charge, and leaving
that Country expressly, he passed through all Germany, and arriving in Holland,
came to the Marshal Bo^ffler's Army, upon the Frontiers of the Spanish
Flanders. The Officer of the main Guard having stopped him, was informed by
him, who he was, whence he came, and in some measure, of the nature of his
Business; and sent him to the Marshal, to acquaint him of what he was not
willing to declare there. This Stranger did not know one Word of French; but as
he spoke Latin to perfection, he made the General easily understand, That he
came from Poland, and that he had Affairs of moment, relating to that Country;
and this is all he would tell him, as if the Marshal had not been worthy of his
Secret. The General seeing a Person of an ill mein, that pleaded nothing in his
favor, but rather gave him an ill opinion of him, was like to cause him to be
taken up; but considering he would do better to send him under a sure Guard to
Court, he put him into the hands of an Officer, whom he ordered to take two or
three Troopers for his Escorte.

The Officer went along with him to Versailles, where this Man was reputed a
Spy, as soon as he offered to speak: For after what the Abbot of Polignac had
Wrote to them, they were fully persuaded, that the Affairs of the Prince of
Conty went as well as they could wish in that Country; they would not believe a
tittle of what he alleged, it being quite contrary to Polignac's Relation. He
told the Secretary of State, to whom the Marshal had sent him, That they were
highly mistaken, if they believed, that the Poles would ever choose that Prince
for their King. They asked him the reason; but he not being able to produce any
other than that I mentioned but now, it was reckoned so bad a one, that he was
immediately sent to Prison. They were resolved to draw up an Indictment against
him; but Mons. D'Argenson, who was employed to Try him, being a Man full of
Justice and Equity, had no sooner examined him, but he found it plain, that all
his Crime consisted in having thought to make his Fortune, by bringing this
News. He reported the same thing to the Court; and the Process against this
pretended Criminal, consisting only of an Interrogatory or two, it was dropped,
till they saw how the Election of Poland would go.

The Duke of Saxony thought it convenient, in the mean time, to make a faint
show of the Catholic Religion, without having the least inclination to it. He
saw that it was absolutely necessary for obtaining the Crown of Poland: so
having brought over to his Interest a Bishop of his own Family, that was of
that Religion; this Prelate, at the Emperor's solicitation, gave him a
Certificate, That he had privately Abjured Lutheranism. This they showed
secretly to the Palatines that were in the Austrian Party, who seemed to have
no other view in Corresponding with it, than to advance Prince James's
Election: At least, the World believed so, and France was of that opinion, so
that they did not dream that ever that Elector had thought in the least of the
Crown. The Queen of Poland was imposed upon, as well as others; the Palatines
delayed Affairs on purpose, that they might be more courted, and have the
opportunity of filling their Purses. The Elector was obliged to borrow Money
from all hands, to forward his Interest. The Elector of Brandenburg lent him
considerable Sums upon a Mortgage of the Baillages that lay convenient for him.
He likewise raised immense Sums in his own Dominions, upon the pretense that
being in the Emperor's Service, he wanted the assistance of his own People,
because it was not possible for the Emperor to pay the Subsidies they had
agreed upon. Moreover, instead of making his Correspondence with the Duke of
Erandenburg to appear, he feigned he was at variance with him, upon the account
of the Domains that both of them had upon the Confines of Poland; and
accordingly, both of them marched thither their Troops, as if they designed
immediately to come to a Rupture. France that had too many Enemies to deal
with, to be indifferent in desiring to get rid of at least some part of 'em,
was caught as well in this Snare, as in the former. They were willing to
believe, that this would not fail to make a powerful diversion in their favor;
and as it was impossible for some part of the German Princes to be mere
Spectators in the Differences of these two Princes, so they expected a
considerable ease upon each side.

The march of these Troops was very cunningly contrived, and disproved with a
witness, what had been published a while ago, to the disadvantage of the House
of Austria. Some would have it, that for many Years together that Family had
been always Tricked by France; and that by observing only their ordinary
Course, as if there had been none else more ready and sure to forward their
Designs, they had so degenerated from the Wisdom and Greatness of Charles V.
that all Europe had forgot them; but as they managed this Intrigue, that was
contrived at Vienna, they were overjoyed to know that France had lost its
Pretensions to the Title.

While these considerable Affairs were transacting in Poland, some other
Matters passed in France of less consequence for the State, but in which some
particular Persons found themselves more interress'd. Paris, that had furnished
the Scene for that Lady, who had met with so ill usage from her own Domestics,
afforded also the following, which is extraordinary enough to plead for some
place in these Annals. It appeared to me so uncommon, that I doubted for a long
time, whether I should insert it. I was sensible, that among so many certain
Things as I here present you with, I ought not to run the risque of Writing any
that I have reason to suspect: In fine, this Matter has been confirmed to me by
so many Hands, that if I be deceived, it must be, because they took pleasure to
impose upon me. I received six different Letters from Paris, that contained the
same thing; so that, after all the Precautions I used, I suppose, that however
extraordinary the Matter appears, it may be credited, after the enquiry I have
made in it. In effect, if we should doubt of all the surprising Things Paris
affords, we must necessarily doubt of all that happens there; for every Day
produces such Accidents, as one would hardly believe without infallible
Testimony.

A Girl was forced to profess, by the uncontrolable Will of Parents, who by
this means meant to take her off from the Inclinations she had for a Person,
they would not have her Marry; notwithstanding she was shut up, she always
continued a Respect for him, that troubled her extremely, in the exercises of
her new Profession. Her Lover, for his part, could never forget her; but having
seen her put on the Habit, he ought to have laid aside all hopes of ever
enjoying her. Yet being always tormented with his Passion, which was so much
the more violent, that while the Young Nun continued in the way of the World,
she gave him all the demonstrations of her Esteem that he could reasonably
desire; he robbed his Father (a Rich Merchant) of Twenty thousand Livres in
Gold, Clothed himself in a Girl's Habit, and went to the Convent where she
was, after having hid himself for a whole Month in the City, pretending to be
Sick. His first Compliment to the Convent was, That he was resolved to become a
Nun. He told 'em, he was come from the Country, and was the Daughter of Parents
that had made a considerable Estate by Trafficking; and having showed his
Treasure to these Nuns, it secured him more in their esteem, than any
Profession whatsoever.

So extreme desirous were they to have it, that they easily dispensed with
inquiring any farther after the place of her Nativity, or what Faults this
disguised Girl might be liable to in her Youth. They were satisfied, for that
she promised them the whole, provided they would Maintain her while she Lived.
However, she told them, that they might not think she was ill natured, That if
she meant to let them have the whole Sum, it was, because she had no Relations
in France; That her Father and Mother, who had come thither, were originally
English. And thus having told them a thousand pretty Stories, at length she
concluded, That she was a poor Orphan, and would be very glad to lay out her
Money to the best advantage; or at least, to secure herself from the Miseries
of Necessity.

This Relation of the pretended Orphan appeared so ingenuous to the Hungry
Nuns, that they resolved to receive her into their Cloister, without troubling
themselves with any farther inquiry into her Circumstances, than what their
Eyes could afford them into the goodness of her Coin. However, there arose a
little difficulty betwixt the Parties; for the Nuns desired to have the Money
presently delivered up to them, or at least, when she assumed the Habit; but
she, for her part, pretended only to do it when she Professed; though she meant
never to do it; for she designed her Money for some other use than what the Nuns
had ever thought of: And to that purpose told them, That she could not be
satisfied, whether their Rules and manner of Life would suit with her Temper,
and till she was fully assured of that, they ought to demand no other
Conditions of her, but that of paying handsomely for her Board, which she would
never scruple to do; that in the mean time, she would put out her Money to
Interest, which would fall to them in course, whenever she had assumed the
Profession; but that she intended to secure herself before she was stripped of
her Money. She demanded nothing but what was just; and besides, threatened to
find out some other place, if they refused any longer to accept of her
Conditions. Being afraid to slip the opportunity, they agreed with her upon her
own Terms. So, this pretended young Gentlewoman, having put on the White Vail,
in a few days, bestowed so Liberally upon her Habit, as if Money had cost her
nothing. All the Nuns were wonderfully edified by her generosity, only her
Mistress, in the midst of all their Joy for so rich a Prize, continued still in
her wonted indisposition, as if she had been altogether mortified. The
resemblance she found between herself and her Spark, opened her Wounds afresh,
that were still too tender, not to be sensible of any thing that touched them.

The Scene being thus over, The Novice began soon to accost the Lady that
obliged him to dissemble his Sex. But being unwilling to entertain her in the
Torment she was in, she told her all of a sudden, what Love had forced her to
do; she added moreover, That she was fully resolved to Starve herself, if she
would show her no Compassion; That she was certainly informed, she had assumed
the Profession against her Inclination; and if she had yet any sense of the
passion she had for her, while with her Parents, she had no reason to doubt,
but the recent Testimony she now gave her, would engage her to enter into all
the measures she would advise her; That she had fallen upon this Invention, not
to rob her of her Honor, but to restore her to to the tranquillity she had
lost, and to recover her own also; That she could enjoy no more after she had
entered into the Convent; That she wanted not Money to carry them through, in
exp^ctation of a better Fortune; and though the Sum was not of great importance,
yet she kn^w how to manage it to that advantage, as would secure them from the
Injuries of Necessity; That she was fully resolved to Marry her, if she
pleas^d; That it was certain her Vows were of no force, since she was compelled
to them, and so it depended entirely upon herself, to be freed from her present
Captivity, since it was not possible for her to be happy without her; That
neither of them ought to regard the meanness of the Present she offered her
now, in comparison of what both of them could have reasonably expected, if Love
had not embroiled them with their Parents; That she would endeavor to be at
ease without them, and oftentimes there was more satisfaction in a middle
ordinary F^rtune, than in a sumptuous one; That great R^ches are always
attended with great Cares, and provided that a Husband and Wife, who love one
another tenderly, be out of the reach of Necessity, they may be indifferent for
other Superfluities.

The Nun found this way of reasoning very pertinent* it ^eing altogether
conformable to her own Sense and Inclination. She agreed with her Lover in all
things. They passed three Months in this Intrigue^ doing nothing but what
became the strictest Honor, the there might have been some encroachments upon
Decercy. The Novice feigned herself Sick alle^ging, (after they had asked her a
great many times, What she ailed) That her Sickness proceeded only from the
Austerity of the Convent, which she could never be able to go through. The
Discreet Mothers were a little vexed to hear her speak after that rate,
forseeing that the twenty thousand Livers they had relied upon, would slip out
of their Fingers; but there being no remedy, they were fain to restore to her
her temporal Habit, and give her her Pass. She presently took up her Money, and
gave it to the Bankers for Bills of Exchange upon Italy, where she was resolved
to pass her time, as soon as she made sure of her Mistress. Having mutually
adjusted all things; the Night before they put their Plot in Execution, the Nun
uninter'd a Sister that had been just Buried, carried her to her Bed, and
having set Fire to it, made her escape into the Garden of the Convent, where
her Spark had fastened a Ladder of Cords to a certain place of the Wall they had
condescended upon. He waited for her at the other side with a Coach, and
receiving her into it, while the whole Convent was in an uproar about the Fire,
carried her to a Lodging he had entirely at his command.

The poor Nuns had much to do to quench the Fire that frighted them extremely,
for fear of having their whole Convent destroyed by it. However, having
mastered it at length, though with a considerable loss, they all of them run
immediately to the Chamber where the Fire first began, and being extremely
troubled that she did not appear, they doubted not in the least but she had
perished in the Flames. They were soon confirmed in the certainty of their
belief, when they found the remnants of a dead Body in the ruins of that
Chamber, thinking really the rest had been consumed by the Fire. Nothing was
heard but Grief and Lamentation upon all hands; some rehearsing the praises of
the dead Nun, whom they thought they could never lament sufficiently. Others
who were as much interess'd as compassionate, grieved more for the loss of the
House, than of the Dead; and while they amused themselves with these or such
like Reflections, not one of them dreamed of what had happened; but the most
probable thing they said, was, That her Parents when acquainted with her
unhappy Disaster, must needs Censure themselves, in regard they had forced her
to assume the Profession against her Inclination.

In the mean time, the two Lovers escaped into Italy, pursuant to their design:
There they were Married, having met with a Priest to their Mind; or one perhaps
so tender of their Interest, as to ease a poor Girl of her Vows, without giving
her the trouble of applying herself to any other Authority, than his own. The
young Husband applied himself to Traffic, in which he was so fortunate, as in
twenty Years time, to make a considerable Estate. In that time, Providence
blessed him with a numerous Off spring; but at length he died in the five and
fortieth Year of his Age. The Lady, who was much about the same Age,
notwithstanding the tender Love and Prosperity of her Husband, being still
frighted with a check of Conscience, resolved upon a Journey to Rome, to obtain
the Holy-Father's Absolution for what she had done. The Pope refused it
absolutely, without she promised faithfully to return to the Convent. She was
extremely unwilling to comply, in regard of the tender Affection she had for
her Children. In fine, preferring the tranquillity of her Conscience to every
thing, she conquered all obstacles that would have hindered her, and promised
His Holiness to obey his Command: She had a favorable Passage by Sea into
France, together with her whole Family, which she carried along with her to
Rome, to move His Holiness to a Compassion for them. When she arrived at
Marseilles, she took the way to Paris, concealing from the World, both Herself,
and her Affairs. She lodged some time Incognito in the Suburbs of St. Germans,
to dispose of her Family, before she would withdraw into the Cloister. And though
she had put her Affairs in order, she would by no means go thither, before she
was assured of a civil Usage. She was not ignorant of the terrible Penalty they
were liable to, that leaped over the Walls of the Convent, as she had done.
That she should not be exposed to it, she offered underhand, Twenty thousand
Livres for her Pardon. This Sum charmed all the Nuns Eyes, which they looked
upon as a Present sent them from Heaven. They were mightily surprised at her
Resurrection, and acquainted her Friends with it, who doubted a long time,
whether they ought to rejoice at it, or show her some Mark of their
displeasure, for wandering about the World, with a Person, upon whose account
she had been forced to turn Nun. As it was never seen, that all the World was
of the same Opinion, so some continued their Indignation against her, and would
never see her; others did not mind the matter so much: But all of 'em agreed to
have her stripped of the Money she brought from Italy, pretending it was not in
her power to dispose of it to her Children. She secured it in a Person's Hands
whom she had reason to confide in, to have it divided amongst her Children,
whenever they should either Marry, or establish themselves some other way in
the World. However, they were not the only Persons who gaped after it; her
deceased Husband's Friends began also to bestir themselves upon the news of
what had passed. Both Parties commenced their Process against the Children,
pretending to have them declared Bastards. So much for this extraordinary
Scene, which, in effect, appeared in such a manner to me, that I should never
have had the confidence to have mentioned it here, without having taken all
imaginable Precautions with reference to it. It is not very hard to conjecture
what Decision Justice will make in it. However, it will hardly be soon
determined. The Judges are seldom very prompt in deciding Causes, when the
Parties are in Circumstances to dispense with Money. They believe it would
derogate too much from their laudable Custom, to dispatch readily Affairs that
afford Gleanings.

The Court being about that time at Marli, the Count of Chamilly was named
amongst others to go thither. In a discourse of the War, some young Gentlemen
there took a share in the Conversation: And the King asked the Count of
Grammont, softly, how he liked the young Gentlemen's way of reasoning.
Grammont, who has a pleasant freedom in all his Expressions, being glad to make
use of this opportunity to serve the Count of Chamilly, who had been neglected
for a considerable time, answered His Majesty, That he ought not to be
surpised at these young Men's way of reasoning; for if any were at the pains
to ask them, if ever the Grave was Besieged, they would say nothing of what had
passed there, nor who had defended the Place. The King perceived his Design,
which was to upbraid His Majesty, that after so glorious an Action, Chamilly
had not been rewarded as others had, who had not his merit to plead for them.
But it is no surprising matter now adays, to see Actions of Renown shot in
their Carier. Courage and Conduct does not entitle a Man to a plentiful
Fortune, he must also be learned in the Art of Truckling to the Ministers. The
Marquis of Louvois was extraordinary upon this account; and however highly he
valued the Good and Advantage of the State, which none could deny to him; yet
to serve the King faithfully was no sufficient Character to recommend one,
unless he were his Creature: Without that nothing would do; it was his constant
Maxim, that it was impossible to be His Majesty's Friend, without being the
Ministers. I shall neither justify nor condemn him; there is a great deal to
be said on both sides. His Majesty, who without dispute, is the most sincere
and prudent Prince in the Universe, took this occasion to do Chamilly all the
justice that could be expected. So that those who were entirely Strangers to
the Siege of the Grave, as the Count of Grammont pretended, might easily be
informed of all that passed there.

In the mean time, the Spaniards being alarmed at the Preparations the King was
making in Provence, acquainted the English and Dutch afresh of i^, to the end
they might send their Fleet into the Mediterranean, to make Head against the
King's. These two Powers, being full as weary of the War as His Most Christian
Majesty, for that no advantage could accrue to them by continuing of it, amused
them from time to time with fair Promises, without troubling themselves to
perform them. They thought it convenient to allow France to act its utmost
Efforts upon that side, that the House of Austria might become the more
tractable, and oppose no more a Tranquillity, of which all Europe stood in need.
The Pope made use of his Interest in vain, to draw over that House to it, so
great was their confidence, that France would at last be oppressed by so many
Enemies as were United against it. The Duke of Savoy's falling off, gained
nothing upon their obstinacy, though it eased France very sensibly. The Pope
could never offer his Mediation to decide the Quarrel, most of the Parties
interessed, being of another Religion. In fine, the Swedish King accomplished
what His Holiness could never bring to pass. He made the Parties agree to
accept of him, as Mediator of their Differences. The Castle of Ryswick was
named for the Place of their Congress, though the Emperor opposed it upon several
accounts. They endeavored to accommodate Matters in an amicable way, which was
exceeding hard to do, considering the Exorbitant Demands of the House of
Austria. These insisted always upon the Restitution of all they had lost since
the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and had no regard to the two later Treaties of
Aix-la Chapel, and Nimiguen; alleging, They had only been obliged to make
them, by a superior Force, to avoid the utter Desolation of their States. The
Duke of Lorrain, for his part, demanded the Restitution of his Domains, without
any regard to the Conditions that were agreed upon by the Treaty of Nimiguen;
which seemed so insupportable to his Father, that he chose rather never to
enter into the Treaty, than accept of them upon these Terms. A great many other
Princes came also to thwart it, who demanded Reparation of the King for a great
many Places and Villages, that they alleged, he had divested them of;
insomuch, that His most Christian Majesty might have been compared to the Bird
in the Fable, from which all the other Birds (his Enemies) meant to pluck a
Feather.

It had been very hard to redress all these Confusions, if the common Misery
had not obliged the English and Hollanders to remove the Difficulty; it had
like to have proved a Gordian-Knot, where the Sword is more necessary than Art.
But as these two Powers, to speak properly, were the very Life of the Alliance,
that had no motion, but from this Spring; they asked the French
Plenipotentiaries at Ryswick, if they meant to stand to the Preliminaries that
were stipulated with Monsieur Calliers; otherwise, it were to no purpose to
Meet; but if they intended faithfully to perform what was agreed upon, they
would soon remove all other obstacles. These Preliminaries were of no less
consequence, than the Restitution of two entire Provinces, and of one Place of
equal importance to all the rest. These two Powers doubted, that Calliers had
made these advances of his own Head, that he might with the greater facility,
discover their Pretensions; but his Colleagues having assured them it was the
King's sincere Intention, they went on with the Treaty, in such a manner, as
the World might perceive, they meant to bring it to a happy Conclusion.

In the mean time, the Court of France increased in the number of Subjects, by
the Conquests it made during the course of the War, tho it had to do with so
many Enemies, as one would have thought were sufficient to bring it to
Desolation. Nothing but Coaches was to be seen at Versailles; some of them with
the Ornaments peculiar to the Electors of the Empire; and that was become so
fashionable, that even the French themselves had them set upon theirs. However,
the better sort of Men despised it, seeing no apparent reason, why they were so
ready to imitate the Cus^oms of the Empire; for if His Majesty had firmly
pretended to it, he was so far from it now, that there was not the least
appearance of his arriving to it. However, there were some of these Gentlemen
who had a just Title to carry them; particularly the Count of Egmont, who
Married Mademoiselle De Conac, the Archbishop of Aix's Niece, His Majesty
conferred the Honors of the Louvre upon her: And these were justly due to her,
because her Husband was Lineally Descended of the Dukes of Ghelderland, which
created to her a great deal of envy amongst the other Ladies of Quality;
insomuch, that the Marshall d'Estree's Lady could not dissemble her Resentment
of it. One day at Dinner with Mons. Pontchartrain, she said, without regarding
if any there would resent her discourse, She admired, that the Count of Egmont
would condescend to Marry such a Girl as Mademoiselle Conac. The Chevalier
d'Obtere, Governor of Couelloure, overheard her, and being Uncle to the young
Gentlewoman, could not avoid being concerned at it. He told the Gentleman who
sat next him, How unbecoming it was for Morin the Jew's Daughter, to talk after
that manner, of a Person of his Niece's Quality: that he owned the Honor the
Alliance had done both to her and all her Friends: but great as it was, it
failed of that the Morins had by the Blood of the Estrees; that the difference
was not so great between the Egmonts and the Conacs, as betwixt the Etrees and
the Burgesses of the City of Tours. All the Company expected, that the
Chevalier would not fail to resent it after that manner; and knowing that the
Lady was ignorant of the Chevalier's Interest in Mademoiselle, they continued
the Conversation upon the same subject with her, that she might avoid a second
oversight. Then she became sensible of her fault, and of the private reproof
they gave her; but whether she had done it, because she knew him not, or
through imprudence, she never made him any acknowledgement of it.

Lent followed soon after, and a certain Monk, named Seraphin, Guardian of the
Capucins at Meudon, was chosen to Preach before the King that Season; he
behaved himself with such freedom, that it was generally believed he would be
forbid the Pulpit; but His Majesty was so intent upon his Devotion, as some
allege, out of a principle of Christianity, in favor of the Peace, that he
overlooked a great many things, which at any other time he would have
maintained with the point of his Sword: I say, His Majesty, who honors all Men
of Probity, was so far from being offended at it, that he owned, nothing
pleased him more than his Sermons, and desired him to continue them after the
same manner, nor did the King ever neglect any of them; but perceiving that the
Duke of Rochefoucaut never came to them, he asked him the reason. The Duke
replied, That he had no Seat in the Church. His Majesty conferred the Bishop of
Orlean's, his first Almoner's Seat upon him, the Bishop being then at his
Cathedral, two days journey from Paris, whence returning very soon, he desired
to have his Seat again; the Duke refused it, pretending he never had it but out
of Decency; and now His Majesty conferring it upon him, he meant to shut him
out of it. This difference made no less noise than Monsieur Boleau's Lutrin.
Both parties were backed by their Friends in their pretensions, and if they
durst to have fought for it, they were sufficiently animated against each other
to have done it; but resting satisfied to show, that they were both Men of
Spirit, they turned their Indignation to solicit His Majesty, that he would
be pleased to decide the cause in favor of the respective Party.

The King gave it for the Duke, which vexed the Prelate to that degree, that,
out of spite, he returned to his Diocese. He carried the Abbot of Coaslin along
with him, as if, by that, he meant to engage him in his Resentment. This Abbot
had the survivorship of the Prelate's Charge, as first Almoner, and the
expectation of the first Bishopric should fall: Besides, his Uncle had no
reason to complain of the favors of the Court. After the Death of Monsieur
Chanvallon, Archbishop of Paris, the King had awarded him his nomination for a
Cardinal's Cap, which he had formerly gratified the Archbishop with. So that
neither of them could be excused from imprudence, that showed so much Passion,
for so small a cause.

About the same time, his Brother, the Duke of Coaslin had another kind of
Vexation that seemed to be better grounded than theirs: His Coach was Arrested
for Debt, which the Advocate, Master of Requests, and Register of the Points of
Honor, before the Mareschals of France, alleged was unduly done, because of
his Dignity. Some years ago, he made a great deal of noise about it, in favor
of the Duke of Ventadour, who suffered the same Affront; but as he was far
inferior in Wit and Reputation to Monsieur Pomponne, his Brother-in-law, after
he had been crushed in the Defense he undertook in Ventadour's Affair, he never
dared to appear in defense of Coaslin. He was even ready to lay down his Charge
before the Mareschals of France, which made him the more wary of engaging into
new Troubles, for fear of ending as he had begun.

Though this was some Mortification for the Duke, to be oblig^^ to Walk home
a-foot, yet about the same time, a more pressing Vexation afflicted the
Duchess or Svlly; for the Princess of Furstemberg caused to seize both her Bed
and Furniture, for her Rent: though she had run only three Years in Arrear, there
being thirteen Years Rent due at the Death of the Duke her Husband, of which
the Duchess had cleared ten, since she was a Widow: But there being a
misunderstanding between them, and the Princess alleging, that the Duchess
had spoke with more freedom than decency of her, when her Husband had been
Wounded at Hunting, she laid hold of this opportunity, to make her repent of
her imprudence. These two Affairs were represented to the King, to kn^w if his
Majesty would exempt the Duke^ (...), or reduce the^ ^o their immovables. But
His Majesty's Answer gave them small encouragement; he replied, That every one
was concerned to pay their Debts; and tho he did not approve of some
procceedings, yet it was sufficient that they were screen'd by Justice.

The Duchess of Lude's interest had better success for the Duchess of
Vernevil, her Mother. The King conferred a Pension of Twelve thousand Livres
upon her, which she had almost refused, reputing it too mean for a Person of
her Rank. For as she had the honor to be the Widow of the King's Uncle, she
thought it her due to be treated as a Princess of the Blood, though the advantage
he boasted of, came^^ the Left Hand. His Majesty seldom gave them less than
Twenty thousand Livres, and she thought it was none of her business to accept
of so little, considering what others received, who could not come in
competiton with her. In effect, the Count of Brancas enjoyed Fourteen thousand
Livres for his Life; and after his Death, His Majesty continued it to the
Princess of Harcourt, his eldest Daughter. A great many others had also larger
Pensions than here is, which vexed her to that degree, that she told her
Daughter, She meant to resign it again freely to the King. The Duchess of
Lude, not thinking it convenient for her to resent after this manner the
First Fruits of her favor, dissuaded her from it; for it is His Majesty's
Prerogative to give, and not to receive Laws.

About that time, the only Son of the Marquis of Gordes, presented a Petition
to the King, that vexed the Marquis of Rhodes much more than his Gout, which
afflicted him for many Years. The Marquis of Rhodes had married the other
Sister: He was no such Gamester as his Father; but had a much lighter Head:
For, had he been only a Gamester, the Bishop had pardoned him, for in that he
had been of his own Kidney; but the Prelate thinking him somewhat maddish,
causes him to be shut up in a Convent. This poor Gentleman believed that the
Bishop had imposed upon His Majesty in the Affair, and thought he could easily
persuade the King of the contrary, had he the honor to see him; but as Fools
do not think they are so, or rather believe they are the wisest of Men, if you
credit their Oath: The King did not think it convenient to trust him: He was
afraid to be deceived, as he had been lately by a Num-scul, who had escaped out
of the Bastille, where his Friends had shut him up upon the same account. He
was a Cadet of the House of Usez, but so little reformed by his Imprisonment,
that immediately upon his escape he committed the height of Folly in marrying
very miserably. He chose a Woman that was neither Rich, Young, nor Handsome,
and for an additional comfort, the Widow of a Common Fellow, that became a
Gentleman only at his Death; for they did him the favor to cut his Throat in
consideration of his Wife, who was more honestly descended; for had they
treated him according to his merit, they were afraid she might lie under the
imputation of the Wife of a Man that was Hanged. But his Folly did not stop
there, for he carried her along with him to Versails and St. Cloud, where he
had revived the Angels that had died a long time before. But as People have
sometimes more pleasure in Fools than in Wise Men, every one disturbed his
Brain the more, in making him believe they delighted in his Folly.

Much about that time, there happened a quarrel betwixt two Persons of Quality
at St. Cloud, who treated one another after the rate of true Billingsgate.
Their Sex excused them from the use of the Sword, to decide it, but being
equally provided with the A^ms of the Sex, they fairly disputed for the
Victory. The one was Princess of Montaban, and the other Madam of Grancei. At
last, both having spent their Spirits in the Controversy, without the least
respect to one another reputation, Madam of Grancie appealed to Monsieur --
who was present, to decide their Difference. The Princess accepted freely of
the motion, and having called him that minute, entreated him to judge the
Affair impartially. He gave thim an attentive hearing, but after both of them
had taken the pains to set forth their Cause, he made answer, That he
discharged the Process. They asked him in a grumbling way, what he meant? But
the answer he made them, shocked them more than all that went before. He
replied, That he had no other Sentence to give to such people as them, and all
they offered was as light as Wind. They could never get him to give another
Reason, which made them resolve upon a mutual Accommodation, without giving any
body any further trouble upon the matter.

This gave great joy to the Judge, who finding them afterward in a good
understanding with one another, accosted them in this manner, I told you (said
he) That the Sentence I pronounced, was the only one that could be given
amongst such People as you: Women of your Quality quarrel and agree again with
equal facility; and unless a Lover be in the case, there is no fear of an
Accommodation. Had the Duke of Orleans, who loves Novelty, been chosen Judge of
their Difference, he had possibly decided it rather in favor of the one than
the other. Though he had formerly some inclinations for Madan Grancie, he thought
now, that her Face wrinkled with Age, was not to be put in competition with the
Charms of the Princess of Montauban. This Lady made him Laugh when he had no
mind to it; she inherited from her Ancestors, a Genius for Comedy, for she was
Daughter to the Count of Nogent, and Sister to the Chevalier of Nogent, who is
still alive, and whose only Trade, since he left the War, was to make the
Marquis of Louvois laugh. This Minister had him along with him in his own
Colash, in all his Journies; nor was he the only person who loved to divert
himself with Childish Expressions; for Monsieur Colbert at his leisure Hours,
had also People to entertain him with ridiculous Stories. It Is pity but Madam
D'Anoy, and Madam de Moral, had thought at that time of diverting him with
their Fairies; they had been often very acceptable. Thus you see great Men have
their weak side as well as others; and there is nothing that convinces us more
of the frailty of humane Nature.

The pleasure the Duke of Orleans found in the Princess of Montauban's
Conversation, made him resolve to carry her along with him to Marly. All are
not free to go thither, and it must be by Stratagem that leave is obtained to
go; for after the King is earnestly solicited, he reckons it a particular
Favor to grant it, as in effect it is, to go where the Prince goes, and to
appear before him in a place where there is no confusion to be seen, though it
prevails in other places where the Court comes. The Duke's expectation was
frustrated, for His Majesty refused his Request. However, the Duke not being
much discouraged at the first Repulse, insisted in his demand, hoping to obtain
it at last by his importunity. At last seeing His Majesty inexorable, he
entreated him at least to impart his Reason. No doubt though the King, who always
goes upon good grounds, had a very plausible Reason, but suspecting it might
prove disobliging to the Princess, he desired, in a smiling way, to be excused
from a thing he had resolved not to tell. The Duke, who is always very pressing
in what he undertakes, observing that the King had only ^old him so in a
smiling way, importuned His Majesty more than ever to know his Reason. His
Majesty to be freed from his importunity, at last made him answer, That because
he was so very earnest, he would tell him freely; That he was always well
pleased to see handsome Women, and the Princess of Montauban being none of the
number, he would not accustom his Eyes to look upon her. In effect, she was
very far from being Handsome. Her Face was marked with scars from her Infancy;
she was Hunch'd Backed, but found the secret to conceal it in some measure, by
the help of Steel Bodies; besides, being somewhat advanced in Years, she was
the more insupportable. However, being still as Handsome in the Duke's Opinion,
as a great many other Women whom His Majesty Honored with the same Favor, he
still pleaded on her behalf. He asked His Majesty if she was not as Handsome as
such and such Ladies whom he always carried along with him to the Castle of
Marly. The King fell a Laughin^g when he saw his Brother take it so patiently,
and left him to continue his Discourse which tended only to persuade him, that
the Ladies which he mentioned, had no better Title to such marks of distinction
than she, for whom he was pleading; for he made him no other answer than what
he told him at first.

Madam de Montauban resolving to go to Versailles at any rate; and seeing all
the Duke's Endeavors prove Fruitless, thought of a more plausible pretext. She
applied herself to the Princess of Harcourt, who had the secret of obtaining a
great many things, when others met with a refusal. Five hundred Crowns brought
her Project to bear; and by these means she had the Honor to go to Marly, an
Honor she had aspired to of a long time, and which was like to have cost her
her Wits, if she had not obtained it. The King was well enough pleased with the
grant he had made; he found her very pleasant and good Humored; and this Lady,
who never knew what t^ was to fast Fridays or Saturdays, found it no difficulty
to comply with what others did there. In effect, finding herself in a place
where the King never allowed any one to eat Flesh, She out of Love to His
Majesty, or out of Fear to displease him, did, what neither the Love nor Fear
of God were ever capable to oblige her to do. But every person there knowing
her ordinary practice in that Affair, she thought it convenient to vindicate
herself to those who were highly offended at the difference she made betwixt a
mortal Man and God. But all she said had rather more Gallantry in it than real
Apology. She could say nothing, but that the Food there, had a taste very
different from the Food of the rest of Mankind; that the Beams of the Sun of
France created another kind of warmth than the ordinary Sun, insomuch, that
there was a certain happiness under his influence, that was not to be found any
where else.

But this sort of Discourse produced a quite different effect from what she
expected; for those who blamed her before, condemned her much more now. They
thought it had been much more proper for her (as no doubt it was) to have
avoided all manner of Apology, than to make use of that she made: For as they
maintained very well, it was an adding of impiety to the scandal, to attribute
more power to a Man than to God; but she suffered them to go on, being sure to
have the wanton Youths on her side; for it is at Court as at other places, they
divert themselves often with ridiculous Trifles; and (...) ^^^est and most
P^ous are not always the most respected. This appeared too evidently not long
after in a difference she had with her Husband. He came to Court alone, while
her entry was accompanied with a numerous Train of all sorts of people, showing
by that means the respect they had for her. Hence she took occasion to insult
over him, as if his Solitude had given him an aversion to innocent Mirth. But
he replied so smartly home, that she would gladly have dispensed with the
severe Compliment she obliged him to return. They found what he said was
somewhat extraordinary, especially of one descended of a Family that never had
the Reputation of being over Witty; for he was the Son of the Duke of
Montbason, whom they had shut up in a Convent for his giddy Brain, at least,
that was all the Reason they gave for divesting him of his Estate, though in good
earnest they would be obliged to build more Bedlams than one, if they meant to
shut up all that are many degrees greater Number sculls than he.

Debauchery was still in vogue amongst the Women, and consequently amongst the
Men; ho' the King omitted nothing that could be done to oblige all People to a
just observance of their Duty. The Italian Comedians, who had a dexterity of
Acting every thing happily, took thence an occasion of introducing so many
indecencies upon their Stages, that 'twas complained of to His Majesty. This
displeased him the more, that they published an Advertisement of representing
very soon a person of Quality. Therefore His Majesty expelled them out of the
Kingdom; and for a long time he was indifferent as to the Play; and if at any
time he ordered them to act before him, it was rather to amuse the young
People, or through policy, than for any pleasure he himself took in it. In
effect, it is convenient to keep the (...) in Action, and some people allow
even of a lesser evil to obviate a greater. Though I hardly believe that the
Gentlemen of Port Royal would be of that Opinion, were they consulted in it;
and amongst all the Casuists, we shall never find any reasonable pretense, that
can warrant us to commit any evil. However, His Majesty had no sooner formed
this Resolution, than he sent Monsieur D'Argenson to shut up their Theater.
Accordingly he went immediately before they could have the least intelligence
of the Storm that threatened them, and called a great many Commissaries to
attend him; not that he feared any Rebellion; but in regard the King commanded
him to go about it with the greatest solemnity: For the Scandal they had given
being public, the King would have their Punishment to be the same. Besides, he
commanded to seal up all their Seats. He knew they had kept their Manuscripts
in them, and therefore would make sure of all they had given Advertisements of.
They were extremely surprised at this manner of Usage, and the more, in that
they had never dreamed of it. They went all in a Body to Versailles, to
prostitute themselves at His Majesty's Feet; they represented to him, how they
were called, before they came to France, which was matter of fact; for Cardinal
Mazarin, who himself was the greatest Comedian in the Universe, and, perhaps,
was afraid to forget a part he had Acted all his days, desired from time to
time, to see some new Scenes to put him in mind of his Trade. Upon this score
they alleged, That having left their Country upon that invitation, it was an
injustice done to them at that time, to turn 'em out of the Nation. But the
King foreseeing what they aimed at, prevented them, saying, he doubted not but
it was to please Cardinal Mazarin they undertook that Journey; and if they
pleased to own the truth, they had no reason to repent of their Trouble: They
came into France a Foot, and were in a condition to go out of it in a Coach.
This Reply gave them to understand, that His Majesty was Displeased; therefore
they thought to make their Application to some good Patron, to appease him; but
whether it was, that every one was more ready to abandon them, than protect
them, because they had spared no body upon their Theater; or that the Courtiers
were sensible the King had no inclination to show them any favor; not one
person was found to plead for them: They were therefore obliged to look out for
some other Trade for their future subsistence, and their Theater continues shut
up till this day.

In the mean time the King's Army in Flanders, laid Seige to Ath, a place His
Majesty had given up to the Spaniards, by the Treaty of Nimiguen. The Count de
Rheux commanded within the Town with a good Garrison, amongst whom were a great
many French Deserters, who looking upon themselves lost if they came to be
known, desired to have the charge of the principal attacks. In all appearance
they would choose rather to be cut to pieces than to surrender. But the Count
of Rheux considering they might also deliver up the Post, in expectation of a
Pardon, was so far from trusting or uniting them in one Body, as they desired,
that he dispersed them amongst the different Regiments to avoid the present
Consequences he feared. There were three Marshals of France in that Army,
namely, the Marshal of Vlileroy, the Marshal of Boufflers, and the Marshal of
Catinat; but this last being beyond dispute, the greatest of the three, it was
to him the King gave the Direction of the Siege. Villeroy and Boufflers made
head against the Enemies Army, which was jointly commanded by King William and
the Duke of Bavaria. But if these two Princes made any motion, it was not to
run any risque; for they were sensible all their attempts would prove in vain.
The Treaty of Reswick was going on a pace, and knowing very well that the King
would be obliged to give up that Place by the Peace, they did not think it
convenient to Sacrifice one Man for its relief. If they had no mind to venture
a Battle, they might easily lay Siege to Dinant, while Marshal de Catinat was
busied at Ath. But then Brussels that was Bumbarded the Year before, was left
exposed for Villeroy and Boufflers to Besiege; so that they could not
conveniently quit their Post. Besides, they knew that Ath was one of the places
the Plenipotentaries of France offered to give up to the Allies. It had been
therefore very needless for them to throw away the lives of Men upon that
design, since they were sure of having it without stroke of Sword.

These reasons obliged them to keep their Stations; or if they moved at any
time, it was only to find a Camp where their Troops could be supplied more
conveniently with all necessaries. By that means Marshal de Catinat found
little difficulty in his Enterprise. The Count de Reux, for his part, was
prepossessed as well as King William and the Duke of Bavaria with a design of
husbanding his Men, it being his Interest as well as the King's. Insomuch that
there was hardly any shooting from the Town; nor was there ever a Siege where
the Besieged made less noise. The French were extremely astonished at it; and
the Governor having surrendered, said in a merry mode, to the Hostages, who were
sent to make the Capitulation, that it must be owned the French are very bad
Husbands, considering how poor they were said to be, for that they had lavished
many thousand weight of Powder before that Place, and yet he was ready to hold,
if they pleased, five hundred Pistoles to a Penny, that in less than four
Months time the Spaniards would enter the place, without being at the expense
of one grain of Powder. These Hostages were not ignorant of his meaning, and
could hardly avoid condemning their own Folly. They owned they were very much
to blame, to throw away so many Lives upon a place without the least
expectation of any Advantage. Not that they had lost any Person of Consequence,
nor, indeed, so many Common Soldiers as was at first alleged; but what they
spoke was with regard to the insignificancy of that Conquest; for as few as
they were, it was still a greater loss than necessary, since their Blood ought
to have been valued.

The Duke of Vendome, for his part, Besieged Barcelona, both by Sea and Land;
though he had acquainted His Majesty, that he was in no Circumstances to do it,
yet being commanded by a supreme Order, he was obliged to undertake it against
his Inclination. It was never known that any place was invested; after such a
manner; for he had not Troops enough to make the Circumvallation. So that the
Besieged had always opportunity to keep a Communication with the Vice Roy of
Catalonia, who took the Field in order to relieve them. The Duke of Vendome; to
supply his want of Men, took out of the King's Ships that were before the Town,
all who were able to carry Arms. This added somewhat to his Force, but not
sufficiently to complete his Circumvallation: So that all the World believed he
had engaged in an Enterprise, which would cerrainly cost him his Honor. In
effect, besides that the Besieged could depart and enter the Town at liberty,
they were so numerous, that one would have thought it was rather an Army than a
Ga^rison. They had eleven Thousand Men in the place; and the Queen of Spain
being in hopes of preserving it for her Nephew, recommended it in particulor to
the Prince of Armstadt, who, next to the Governor, had the principal Command.
He promised Her Majesty confidently to behave himself so, as she should have no
reason to be dissatisfied; and to make good his Promise, there passed very few
days without making some Sallies, which extremely retarded the advancing of the
Works. They disputed every Inch of Ground with 'em; and the World was ready to
believe, That as the Arms of France had gained some Reputation at the taking of
Ath, their Glory was like to be obscured by a far different Event before this
place; and for an additional misfortune, the News from Poland gave them reason
to suspect that the Abbot of Polignac had acted too precipitantly in declaring
the Prince of Conti King; for all the advices particular Persons received from
that Country, were so unfavourable, that now they despaired of success.

However, their News from all hands made no mention of the Duke of Saxony, and
the Emperor concealed his Design as to that Affair, so closely, that it was
impossible to penetrate into it. It was generally believed, That Prince James
was the only Rival the Prince of Conti had to fear; and this was the common
Opinion in Po^and; for not one dreamed of the Duke of Saxony but such as were
in the Plot. Nevertheless Prince James was universally hated by great and
small, in regard of the King his Father, who, ever since he had mounted the
Throne, behaved himself toward his Subjects, rather as a particular interessed
Person, than as a true Sovereign; for he had made open Sale of all the Favors
with which the Kings his Predecessors had always used to gratify their
Subjects: So that though these People were for many Ages, accustomed to choose
no-King in a strange Family, when their own Royal Family afforded one; yet they
had forgotten that Custom so far in regard of him, that they would rather have
seen the meanest of themselves upon the Throne, than have chosen any of his
Issue. They were extremely afraid that they, following his Example when
advanced to the Royal Dignity, would squeeze their Subjects to the very Marrow,
as he had always done.

This general Aversion raised the hopes of the Abbot of Polignac, though he saw
that a great many of the Palatines would not declare for the Prince. This he
attributed to their Avarice, and thought it was only out of a design of
obliging him to give more Money. They were glad to find him of that Opinion;
for while he continued ignorant of their Conduct, their Affair was like to have
the better success. In fine, This, and the Affair of Barcelona, were the two
things that were most in view at France, when the Duke of Vendome wrote to His
Majesty, if he did not send him some Succors, he had reason to fear, that his
Honor would certainly suffer in the Enterprise in which he was engaged. He
gave the King a particular account of what had passed before the Place, that
His Majesty might be the more sensible of his straits: So that the King having
no more Reason to doubt of his Necessity, caused all the Troops he could draw
out of Languedoc and Provence to march th^^her. This fresh Re-inforcement
wrought won^^^, though even then, they nere not in a Con^^^^ to draw the Line of
Circumvallation. The (...) lost no time to attack the Outworks which (...)
battered for a long time with a great many (...) The Soldiers behaved
themselves with an (...) Bravery; and having made theselves Masters of the
Covert Way, they afterward attacked the Bastion, which was taken and re-taken
twice. A Colonel of the Irish, named Dillon, who Commanded one of these
attacks, had passed his time there very indifferently, if he had not been well
beloved by the Regiment. One of his Soldiers who had deserted into the Town,
came within four paces of him, and having distinguished him from the others,
Dillon, said he, Mind that it is in my power to Kill thee; but I will not; for thou
never have done me any harm: However, because thou have by thee an Officer who
is a common Hangman of the Soldiers, I Will at least hinder him from doing any
more mischief. This said, he Shot him through the Belly dead upon the Spot.
This Bastion having been thus disputed by both Parties, it fell, at last, into
the hands of the Duke of Vendome, who raised a Battery upon it; from which he
thundered in such a manner into the Town, that he judged, in all appearance, the
Enemies would be obliged to surrender it in a short time. He acquainted the
King with these News, and wrote to him, That he hoped in five or six days to
send Chameraut to His Majesty, with an account of the Place's being surrendered.
Every one was glad to hear this News, with which His Majesty was overjoyed.
This Express was very acceptable; and while they were impatient for the arrival
of the other, who was to complete His Majesty's satisfaction, they admired
mightily that good Fortune, that made him Master of a Place where there was not
only a numerous Garrison, but where it was also impossible for his own Army to
shut up all the Passages. However, from day to day they waited Chameraut's
arrival; and expected him with the first Post. At last there arrived one, who
they believed, came from that Country, because his ^haise was extremely Dirty.
But no Dirt comes thence; for it is always dry there, in regard, it^ seldom, or
never Rains in that Country; but the Roads leading from thence being very deep,
and it having Rained so much lately, there was a sudden Report in Paris, that
an Express was arrived with the News of Barcelona's being taken. However, it
was a pleasant sort of Courier that came in that Chaise, namely a lusty
Sturgeon, which they had caught in Normandy, and sent to the Dauphin; yet it
was needless to tell the World so; none was like to believe it, being so
prepossessed with Chemeraut's arrival. This obliged a Court Lord to Answer
these Faithless People who spoke to him after that manner, That it was true the
Courier was arrived; but had rencountred with a Misfortune upon the Road, so
that none could learn the particulars of the Towns being taken, from him; That
having met with Assassins, the Postillion brought him dead in the Chaise, and
that no doubt they had carried off his Packet; for having searched him, they
had found none about him. This Discourse gave occasion to another piece of News
fully as true as the former: For the Report flying about very suddenly, all
Paris believed the next day, that Chemeraut had been Killed. However, the Man
was in excellent good health, and so far from having any desire to die, that he
took all possible care of his Person. He was as Fat and Gross as four other
Men, nor did he become so by feeding upon the Air, for he generally eat as much
as other twelve Men.

After all, these News proved only false Alarms. Before the Town was taken, the
Viceroy was resolved to hazard a Battle with the Duke, and, for that purpose,
summoned together all those whom they call Miquelets in that Country; and
having joined them with his regular Troops, he approached to the Duke of
Vendome. It had been in vain for him to cut off their Provisions by Land, they
being supplied from the Sea. He had a more noble Design than to amuse himself
so meanly, he meant to decide the Affair all at once by a Battle; and to that
purpose having called a Council of War, he resolved, with his General Officers,
to march the next day in the Evening, directly toward the Duke. He acquainted
the Governor of Barcelona with his Resolution, to the end, that at the same
time, he might make a vigorous Sally upon the Enemies, and so attack them upon
all sides. In less than half an hour after, the Duke knew all the measures they
had concerted against him, and being thus put upon his Guard, he marched to
meet him the Night before he was to execute his Design. But the Viceroy had
already divided his Army in two parts, in order to attack him with the greater
advantage. This was made known to the Duke, who fell upon him with
extraordinary fury; notwithstanding the Laurels the Viceroy had promised to
himself, he was still in Bed when they came to acquaint him, that his Guards
lost ground; they made no resistance at all, but betook them to their heels;
and the Duke had certainly taken the Viceroy (as was expected) in Bed, if they
had not awaked him of a sudden. The Noise he heard about his Tent, having
surpised his Attendants as well as himself, made them believe that all was
lost: He excused his Valet de Chamber from his Duty at that time; and fearing
he had no time to Dress, he made the best of his way Naked as he was, thinking
the greatest thing he could do, was to save himself. The part of his Army that
was with him, followed his Example, except a very few that put themselves upon
the Defense. The Duke made a great many Prisoners; the Viceroy's small Trunk
fell also into his hands, with twenty Tousand Pistols in Specie; and the
Soldiers made a considerable Booty. All he wanted now to complete his Victory,
was, to know, that the other Detachment he had sent against him, had met with
the same Fate, and in a very little time he had that satisfaction. He knew that
Mons. D'Usson, whom he had entrusted with that Expedition, had behaved himself
gallantly; and returned to join him with all the Glory he could desire.

The Governor of Barcelona was as much surprised as the Prince D'Armstad, when
he heard these Tidings. The Duke did not keep him long in the Dark, he sent to
acquaint him with it, that he might not continue any longer to make a fruitless
Defense. But having still eight Thousand Men in Garrison, he thought it
Dishonorable to surrender to a Prince, who had not Soldiers enough to invest
the Place entirely, and therefore kept out some few days longer, rather to
fulfill the Duty of a brave Commander, (of which he had been always emulous)
than out of any hops of hindering the Town from being taken.

In effect, in a very few days he caused a Parley to be beat, pretending to give
up the Town only, and retire with his Men into the Castle, which (being
situated upon a Hill) he could hold out for a considerable time. But he delayed
so long in surrendering, that the Duke refused to accept any other Composition,
than to have the Castle given up as well as the Town. The Governor thought this
condition very severe; but as those who are Conquered, are commonly obliged to
receive Laws from the Conqueror, so he was fain to accept of it. It was then
that Chemeraut appeared at Court of a different size from a Sturgeon. He
brought these good Tidings to the King, which pleased His Majesty extremely,
who began to fear some reverse of Fortune might have happened to the Duke of
Vendome, since he had sent his last Express. Chemeraut had twenty Thousand
Livers for his pains, and a Commission to act as Marshal de Camp. His Majesty
being now freed from all his Fears, had more reason to be assured of the Peace;
for besides that, the Conference at Ryswick went on apace, there were some
other Conferences upon the same Subject, betwixt the Marshal of Boufflers and
the Earl of Portland. After the loss of Ath, King William, who knows how to
make his advantage of every thing, judging this Earl, in every degree, as
dexterous as the Marshal, thought it convenient to employ him upon that Head;
by this means he meant to remove more speedily, a great many difficulties that
could not be so easily terminated in a longer time. At Ryswick, in regard of
the Formalities, the Plenipotentaries were obliged to observe measures with one
another. Portland sent a Trumpeter, as of his own accord, to the Marshal, to
ask a private interview with him, without making any mention of his Affair. The
Marshal thought it convenient, with the Advice of the other two French
Marshals, to consent to it; and having agreed, that they should meet by
themselves, and their Guards should be of an equal number; The Earl proposed to
him to remove some Differences there, that would require too long time at
Ryswick. The Marshal being unwilling to undertake any thing without express
Order from His Majesty, sent an Express to know his Will. The great desire the
King had to make Peace, made him approve of what the Earl proposed, without
considering, perhaps, what advantage he might have over the Marshal, in a
superior Genius; and the inconvenience of putting him upon a level with a
Marshal of France, an Honor His Majesty ought not to look upon as indifferent.
It Is true, as the King of France had advanced Boufflers from a Cadet of
Picardy, to the Dignity of a Duke, Marshal of France, Governor of the most
considerable Province of his Kingdom; And, in fine, of a Knight of his Order:
So King William had raised the other from an ordinary Gentleman of Guelderland,
to an Earl and Peer of England, and Knight of the Order of the Garter. But
still there was this difference, that the one Commanded an Army, and the other
never did: Besides, there was that also to be said, That His most Christian
Majesty had never owned King William, and so the French esteemed only the Earl
as the Favorite of a Prince, whom they had never recognized as King.

King William was glad that His most Christian Majesty overlooked all those
considerations; not that he wanted to obtain a recognisance from him, as well
as from other Crowned Heads; but because he knew well that the English were as
passionately desirous of a Peace as the French. Their Commerce was then at a
stand; and, which is very surprising, the most Christian King had been a gainer
by what was reckoned his probable Ruin. After he had lost I do not know how
many Ships at la Hogue, and was rendered incapable of appearing at Sea; He had
found his Account in the way of Piracy, and had taken so many Prizes both from
the English and Dutch, that both of 'em were quite cast down. It Is
inconceivable what an infinite number these Prizes are said to amount to; and
though I have heard an account of it from one of the greatest Traders in England,
who ought to know that Affair as well as any body, yet I shall be cautious of
repeating it, for fear I should be charged with Credulity. In effect, the thing
is so surprising, that it astonishes one: But, after all, if we consider that
these two Nations subsist only by their Commerce, and that the Sea was
continually covered with their Vessels, so that the French had an opportunity
of attacking 'em every minute with an advantage, especially when they were
without Convoys; upon this consideration, I say, we may easily conceive how
they came to sustain so great a loss. But let it be as it will, K. William
being sensible of the necessity of a Peace, in order to be free from such
Inconveniences, ordered my Lord Portland to remove all the difficulties that
might oppose it.

In the mean time K. James had but a sorry Game to play. Pursuant to the King's
Promise of never making a Peace till he were restored, He had all along hoped,
that His Majesty would effect his Restoration sooner or later. And this his
expectation was screwed higher by the King's open Declaration to all Europe,
that he would make his Promise good. Besides, that this unhappy Prince was
turned out of his Dominions, only, because he would not declare against the
King. He had been frequently Solicited to oppose the King's Interest before
the Prince of Orange came into his Place; and had he done that, no Potentate
whatsoever would ever have consented to his being disquieted. Nay, to speak the
Truth, 'twas a thing of too dangerous Consequence for the Potentates
themselves; but that Prince having discovered his firm Resolution to stand by
the secret Alliance he had made with the King, all other Princes combined
against him, because he would not join with them in reducing a Power that
seemed to threaten their Repose. This, the most Ch^istian King was very
sensible of, and did not fail to acknowledge it. He did for him all that he
could do, and offered both him and his Qeen a Retreat and Entertainment. Though
he was engaged in a War with the greatest part of Europe, yet he gave him fifty
thousand Louis d'Ors a Year. It Is true, this was but a small allowance for the
King of England, upon the comparison with what he had when he possessed his
Dominions; but 'twas a great deal for a Prince to give, that was at the same
time obliged to maintain four or five hundred thousand Men, to make head
against the numerous Enemies that his Grandeur had raised against him; and upon
that score, doubtless K. James was obliged to him. But after all, 'twas not
long of the King that he did not make good his Promise. The unfortunate Prince
had been always guilty of the same Fault, that his Brother committed when he
occasioned the loss of the Battle of Dunbar. He caressed the Scots in such a
manner, that he himself opposed his own Restoration. His chief Minister was a
Scotchman, and there having always been a great jealousy between the English
and Scots, the preference he gave to the latter at his Court, alienated the
Hearts of the former. This was the occasion, that a great many Enterprises
formed on his behalf, never took; and forasmuch as that Prince had much more
Devotion than Brains, as the French could not but lament his Fate, so they
could not avoid saying, That though he had sunk himself by his bad Conduct, yet
'twas not reasonable they should suffer themselves to be sucked in along with
him. In fine, the King being much more obliged to his own Kingdom than to any
other, could not avoid the giving him to know, That many things he did were
directly opposite to his Interest. Nay, all his true Friends had told him the
same thing upon several occasions, insomuch, that to satisfy the one and the
other, he pretended to disgrace My Lord Melfort, Brother to the Chancellor of
Scotland. This Minister was hated, not only at his Master's Court, but even by
the French, who had attended K. James in Ireland. These alleged, That if it
had not been for him, Things had. gone otherwise in that Country than they did
Nay, some of 'em did not stand to charge him openly with keeping a
Correspondence with the Enemies; affirming, that if it had not been so, he had
never made such opposition as he did, against all that Mr. Roses, the most
Christian King's Lieutenant General, proffered to attempt in that Country. And,
in earnest, if the digression were excusable, I could easily make it out, that
that Minister wanted either Conduct or Fidelity. God forbid, that I should
affirm with others, that he entertained a Corespondence with K. William. But to
overlook all these things, and return to my Subject, all these Circumstances
obliged His most Christian Majesty to join with K. William in removing the
Obstacles that might retard the Peace. The first Conference between Marshal
Boufflers and my Lord Portland, was seconded quickly by several others. They
adjusted several things that the Plenipotentaries at Ryswick would not have
agreed upon in a Years time. However, at one of their Interviews, where several
Officers were present on both sides, My Lord Portland hearing a discharge of
Cannon and Muskets in the French Army, asked the Marshal what the meaning of
it was: The Marshal made answer, That 'twas occasioned by the News the King had
sent of the Prince of Conti's Election to the Crown of Poland. This was matter
of Fact; for Abbot P^^ignac had dispatched a Courier to the Court to acquaint
the King, that the Prince was proclaimed King of Poland by the Cardinal Primate
and some Palatines that sided with him. But this Intelligence included another
part, namely, That the Elector of Saxony was likewise proclaimed King, by the
Bishop of Cujavia, and all the Partisans of the House of Austria. This ought,
at least probably, to have prevented our making so much haste; and upon that
score, my Lord Portland fell a Laughing; and told the Marshal, That, indeed,
this spoke the French to be quicker than all other Nations; That they had
formerly shown the same disposition upon many Occasions; and that in this
Affair, they still continued to have the start of their Allies; but in the mean
time, the Allies having time enough to testify their Joy, upon the advantages
that accru'd to 'em, had resolved to stay till Night, or next Morning, before
they gave a solemn proof of the Joy they were filled with, upon the News, That
the Duke of Saxony, and not the Prince of Conty, had mounted that Throne.

The Marshal thought he Banter'd him, in proposing a Protestant for a Dignity,
that could not be enjoyed but by a Roman Catholic. Had my Lord made mention of
Prince James, it had made another sort of impression upon him. In fine, my Lord
Portland having a mind that he should not flatter himself any longer, upon the
imaginary Success of the French Party, gave him a naked account of the Matter.
Upon this discovery, the Army that was Celebrating the Glory of the Prince of
Conty, with a full admiration of his Valou^, were then mightily surpised.
However, they were unwilling to believe it; for that Nation can never be
persuaded of any thing that tends to their disadvantage; whether it be, That
this is a common Humor among other Nations, or, That they in particular are
presumptuous upon their own Merit. But what inflamed their suspicion, the
Court, who knew the bottom of Things, more than any body else, was very silent
upon the Matter, after the Solemnity was over. Their design in the Solemnity,
was only to persuade the People, That their Interest went well in Poland; and
so to comfort 'em, in some measure, for the loss of the Money they had sent
thither. The People were the more willing to show their Congratulation, That
all of 'em had not only a Respect, but a Love for the Prince of Conty; nay,
they even adored him; so true it is, That a good Reputation is able to produce
mavelous Effects in the Minds of the People.

I cannot tell what the Prince's own Thoughts were, or whether he believed the
Report, of the reality of his Election. He made no discovery of his Mind. Those
who were accustomed to weigh Things before they c^^dit 'em, took the liberty to
speak (...) Mind. Some were of opinion, That supposi^ (...) case had been as
favorable, as it was represented, yet they could not make it bear, without
Blows. They were likewise sensible, That the War they were obliged to undertake
upon that account, would be very disadvantageous to 'em. They knew very well,
that the Duke of Saxony was a powerful Prince, and that his Confederate Princes
had their Troops conveniently Posted; that they could easily conduct 'em to
Poland, without any danger; whereas, the Troops to be sent from France, would
be obliged to imbark in some Seaport of the French ^landers, and land in the
Neighborhood of certain Potentates, whose Affection to the Prince of Conty,
the King had some reason to doubt.

The Prince of Conty, perceiving he would be obliged to unsheath his Sword, if
he meant to make good his Election, durst not display the Affliction he was
under, upon the view of leaving a Mistress, that he loved as passionately as a
Crown. His only aim, was to please the King, who pressed him to accept of that
Crown, as well for his own Interest, as out of the Love he bore him. However,
such a degree of indifference was very odd, in a Prince of his Courage, and a
Nephew of the Prince of Conde. One would have thought, that he would have
exerted his utmost efforts, to mount the Throne, since his Uncle, upon a design
of that nature, had not only raised a Civil War in his Country, but put himself
at the Head of the Capital Enemies of his King and Country. Some days passed
without any noise, only the King saluted the Prince and Princess, as King and
Queen of Poland. In like manner, all the Grandees paid 'em the Respect
suitable to that Dignity; and in order to give a color for his not departing
to receive the Crown, 'twas given out, That Ambassadors were expected from
Poland, to fetch him. The more credulous sort of People satisfied themselves
with this News; but the more sensible part of Mankind, were more distrustful
than ever, of the validity of the Election. They owned, indeed, That to wait
the Arrival of Ambassadors, was a Thing of more Glory, than to depart before
their Arrival; but, at the same time, they alleged, (and that very justly)
That 'twas not expedient, when a Crown is not disputed, and that the Crown
being promised to him, he was so far from being tied to that (...), that he
ought to set out with the utmost (...), and appear at the Head of his Party;
le^t, for want of his Presence, many should be corrupted, and drawn over to his
Enemy

Fr^nce had not forgot, That the occasion of the War they were then engaged in,
(which in a manner threatened their very Throne) was their unseasonable
Difference with the Pope; and upon that view, were sensible, That though His
Holiness had not so much Interest in this Affair, as in the former; yet they
ought not to neglect him. In order to secure his Favor, They represented, with
the utmost application, their suspicion of the Elector of Saxony's Conversion.
Indeed, that was a very nice Point; and all Men, though never so partial, were
sensible, That his declaring for the Roman Religion, had more of Ambition in
it, than Devotion. However, the Pope being unwilling that a Protestant Prince
should Sit upon that Throne, was so much against the Elector, that one would
have thought he could never be for him. Besides, the Cardinal-Primate sent a
Courier, to assure him, That the Interest of the Catholic Religion was
entirely ruined, if he suffered the Elector to be preferred to the Prince of
Conty. This Message, he was prompted to, as well by his Interest, as by his
Zeal for the Roman Religion; for the Bishop of Cujavia had incroach'd upon the
Privileges of the Archbishop of Gnesne, which justly claims the sole Right of
Proclaiming the Elected King.

In the mean time, there happened a Quarrel between Husband and Wife, in one of
the principal Families retaining to the Court. 'Twas neither occasioned by
Jealousy, nor the disproportion of Tempers, as such Differences commonly are;
but by a very odd Adventure, when the one approved of a Thing, that the other
did not. We must know, that a Noble Venetian, not a Member of the Senate, but
one of the Nobles of the Terrafirma, being Married to a Lady that he loved very
tenderly, had so much Complaisance, as to satisfy her Curiosity, by carrying
her to see France. But though the Beauty of France draws so many Strangers to
visit it, yet her design was only to have it said, that she resembled the Queen
of Sheba, in coming so far to see the Glory of Solomon. She had heard a
thousand great Things of the King and His Reign; and being fond of seeing with
her Eyes, whether the Reports were true, or enlarged beyond the due extent, she
came on purpose along with her Husband to Versailles; in order to make the
discovery. Such an Adventure as this, was only wanting to complete the History
of the King; and those who are employed in Writing it, will take care not to
forget it. However, the Husband and his Wife appearing of a sudden at Court,
Mr. Bontems, Governor of the Castle, had a mind to know who they were, pursuant
to the King's Orders, injoyning him to take notice of all the unknown Faces
that appeared there. Accordingly, he caused to ask 'em, Who they were? and what
brought 'em there? He was the more particular in his Questions, in that he
heard their Equipage was a true Bohemian Equipage; and had served to amuse not
only Men of Sense, but even the very Children. When the Question was asked 'em,
they were surpised, for that such Conduct was inconsistent with the Liberty
that Reigns in their Country. But being informed, that all unknown Faces were
treated the same way, the Noble Venetian would needs go in Person, to acquaint
Mr. Bontems with the occasion of their Voyage. Mr. Bontems was surpised to
hear of his Complaisance, and having spoke of it to the King, was ordered to
bring 'em both to see him Dine. To recompense the charge they were at, they
were placed in the most convenient Place, for having a full view of the King. I
cannot tell what their Thoughts were, or whether they said what the Queen of
Sheba said of Solomon; but all the Courtiers being acquainted with their
Errand, none of 'em used 'em so, as one not long ago was by John Bart, one of
the famousest Pirates that the King had during the last War; if it be lawful to
give that Title to a Man that obeyed the King's Orders. Pray God forbid, that
in using that expression, I should mean to reflect upon the Methods used by
that Prince, for disturbing the Repose of his Enemies. I am too sensible of the
Respect we ought to have for Supreme Powers, to indulge my self in that
liberty. And I am likewise sensible, That he having so many Enemies upon him,
showed in that; as in all other things, the depth of his judgment.

To return to my subject, John Bart having the curiosity (as well as these
Foreigners) to see the King Dine, there came a Person dignified with a Blue
Ribbon, that finding he had a good Place, took it from him, without being
over-awed by his Mein, which speaks him more a simple Tarpallion, than a
Commander of a Squadron. John Bart had heard, that some Compliment was due to a
Blue Ribbon; however, he took him by the Coat, upon which the Badges of his
Knighthood were fixed, and told him, with a loud Voice, Mr. Blue Ribbon, pray
give me my Place; you see the King when you will; but for me who does not see
him but at the four Festivals of the Year, it is but reasonable that I should
not tamely suffer my self to be robbed of an advantage that I enjoy so seldom.
The King hearing that, fell a Laughing; and told the Gentleman with the blue
Ribbon, That Bart was in the right; and that 'twas His Pleasure, that he should
give Bart his Place, and rather stand behind him, than affront him in that
manner. Upon that, John Bart being better known on Board, than at Court, the
Blue-Ribbon Spark turned about to view him; and apprehending his Mein to be
much different from his Reputation, whispered to a Duke that was just by him,
That if the Noble Venetian, and his Lady, had received as little satisfaction
from the sight of the King, as he had from that of John Bart, they would be
sure to grudge their Money. But that could not be; for though the King is very
much altered from what he was, yet he still preserves his good Mein; insomuch,
that it is still visible, that he has been a very graceful Man.

In fine, they were far from meeting with what John Bart did; for every body
knew they came too far, not to have the opportunity of seeing the King. But
they had no sooner received satisfaction in that point, than they returned to
Italy. It Is said, they staid only three days at Paris; and that, rather to rest
themselves, than to see the Curiosities of the Place. This Scene being Acted in
the Face of the whole Court, and being the common subject of Discourse; the
Person of Quality, I pointed to above, happening to Talk of it to his Lady, a
Quarrel ensued, after this manner: The Lady told her Husband, That if she were
to wish for any thing in this World, it should be this, That she might have as
Complaisant a Husband, as that Venetian Lady; he having undertaken a Journey of
almost 1000 Leagues, on purpose to please her; and by that means shown the
greatest instances of a pliant Temper, that any Man can ever show. Her Husband
replied, That his Conduct did not speak so much a flexible Temper, as Folly;
and that, for his part, if he had a Wife, that would desire such a thing of
him, he would look on her as the greatest and most extravagant Fool, not only
in Paris, but even in Bedlam. Each of 'em maintained their Sentiments with
great warmth; and the Lady told him, That it seemed he was not in the humor to
satisfy her, in case she desired to see the Emperor, or the King of Spain. The
Gentleman made answer, That if ever that Maggot took her, he would not content
himself with shutting her up in Bedlam, but would stifle her with his own
Hands, as a Mad-woman. Perhaps he only said so, to signify the aversion he had
for these two Princes, who were the King's Enemies: But the Lady putting a
Literal meaning upon the reply, they came to high Words, and quarreled outright,

This was the Product of the Complaisance that a Noble Venetian showed to his
Lady: But in the mean while, there happened an Accident at Court, that was yet
more surprising, and that one Day, will perplex the Historians, though they are
not very fond of sounding the truth of it. There Is a little Town in Provence,
called Salon, that formerly gave Birth to Nostradamus, a Man very well known at
this Day, by his Centuries; some of which have come to pass in so convincing a
manner, that what was formerly obscure, is now as clear as Sunshine. Among
these Articles, I reckon what relates to the Death of Charles I. King of
England, and that of Mr. de Cinqumares, provided still, that these were not
foisted after-hand into his Works. But let that be as it will, this Town which
produced a sort of a Prophet in the preceding Age, has furnished us with one in
this; or at least, such a Character is given of a certain Gentleman, that
appeared then at Court, of whom this is the History. About that time, the
pretended Ghost of that famous Astrologer abovementioned, appeared to a Man of
this City. I know not whether it was by Night or by Day; but this I know, That
the Apparition put the Man in a great fear; and above all things, advised him,
not to mention to any body, what he spoke to him; nay, he did not except his
Wife; and the Man made a sign with his Head, importing, that he would obey him;
for he was at that time Speechless, and fear had so much influence upon him,
that he could not open his Mouth. Thereupon the Apparition advised him to go to
the Intendant of Provence, and give him to know from him, That he should give
him Letters, to introduce him to the King: It represented further, That it
would not tell him presently what he was to say before the King, but that he
would appear again to him, when he should come near to Versailles, and there
teach him his Lesson.

Upon that, the Apparition disappeared, and left him for Dead, so much was the
Man frightened by his Wonders, as well as by his dismal Aspect. After some time,
the Man came to himself; but so, as that 'twas plain he had something
extraordinary in his Head. His Wife asked him what it was; but the Prohibition,
laid upon him by the Apparition, kept him from discovering any thing for some
time. At last, his Wife having used a thousand Wheedles, to make him reveal his
Mind; he opened his Mouth I know not how often, in order to recount the
Adventure, and shut it as often again; by reason that the Apparition had backed
the Prohibition with such Threats, as scared him. He told his Wife, That he
should dye, if ever he broke Silence upon the Matter; and the fear that this
should come to pass, stiffed his Words, when he was most tempted to speak.

His Wife's Curiosity was inflamed by his reserv'dness; she pressed him more
than ever to reveal the Secret. The Husband replied, That his Life depended
upon it, and that he could not do it. But that Word screwed up her Curiosity to
the last degree. In fine, she would not let him be easy, till he made the
discovery; and the poor Man being foolishly fond of her, had no sooner
acquainted her with the Apparition, and the discourse that passed, than he fell
down quite Dead upon the spot. Upon this, the Woman was as much astonished as
he was, when the Ghost appeared to him. But after second Thoughts, she
construed the discourses he uttered before his Death, to be only the effect of
a Brain disturbed by a Mortal Sickness, and told nothing of the Matter; or if
she did, 'twas with such an Air, as if she had taken his Discovery, for the
Ravings of a distemper^d Brain.

This Accident made no great Noise in Salon, or the adjacent places; which
certainly it would, if it had been fully known: Nay, the People there, did dot
so much as mind it; for every one, as well as his W^^e, believed that the Man's
Brai^s were ^ut of order, when he talked of his Vision. But at the some time,
the Vision appeared to another Inhabitent of the same City, and made him the
same Compliment; and he was as foolish as the other; f^r he spoke of it that
same day to the Curate, and his indiscretion was followed by the same ^ate; for
he di^d upon the spot. The noise of his Death, and the manner of it, being
spread abroad, the People recalled to their memory, what was said upon the
Death of the other. This was the only subject of discourse all ^ver Salon, and
for 20 Leagues round it; nay, every body took the liberty to Comment upon it.
But in the mean time, the Vision appeared to a Blacksmith, whose House was not
far from those of the two Men, I spoke of but now. It Is possible, he was as
much afraid, as the other two; but their example being recent, and of too great
consequence, to suffer him to be guilty of the same fault; he was very
attentive to the Words uttered by the Ghost; and immediately upon its
disappearance, went to the Intendant, pursuant to its orders. That Magistrate
gave Audience every day, to all that had any business with him; so that, the
Smith had no occasion for any one to introduce him: But his Story being such as
could not well be told publicly, he begged of him, that he would retire with
him to his Closet, because he had an Affair of extreme Consequence to imp^rt.
The Intendant, seeing that the Man made ^ut a sorry appearance, could not
conjecture, wh^^ this important Affair might be. But being obliged to hear
every one, and to neglect nothing relating to his Post, he desired him to stay
a little, till he had given Audience to the rest; after which, he would hear
him at his leisure. Accordingly, after the general Audience was over, he and
the Smith retired to his Closet.

Then the Blacksmith acquainted him, That the Affair he was about to open,
would at first view seem to be a pure Whim; and that he knew he would be
dismissed for a Fool; that to prevent such apprehensions, he told him so much
beforehand; and in fourteen Days time, he would send to see for him, being
then sensible of his error, in treating him as a Man troubled with Maggots. In
fine, he set forth the occasion of his coming thither, namely, That a Vision
having appeared a Month ago to two different Persons, (that certainly he had
heard of, upon the account of the fatal Consequences) had likewise appeared to
him, very lately; That it had ordered him to come to the Intendant, to desire
he might be sent to the King; That it had promised to appear again to him, at
Versailles, or near to it, in order to instruct him in what he was to say to
His Majesty; That accordingly, he came to discharge his Commission faithfully;
and upon that score, was not afraid of meeting with the same Fate, that befell
the other two.

The Intendant had heard something of this odd Adventure; but had always taken
it for a fabulous Fiction; and, pursuant to that Thought, checked the Man in a
strange manner. He asked him, If that was his way to abuse an Intendant's Time,
every minute of which he knew to be precious; and at the same time, gave him to
know, that he deserved nothing but a Goal. The Man replied, That his Threats
made no impression upon him, for that the Vision had sufficiently prepared him;
That he would return home, since the Intendant ordered him so to do; and that
he would only have the trouble of returning, when the Intendant should send for
him.

Though the Intendant used him at this rate, yet he had a deep impression of what
he said. His talking so sensibly, and so unlike a distempered Head, was
sufficient to suggest some Reflection to the Intendant; especially, if we join
to this the former reports of that Apparition. In effect, the Marshal was no
sooner gone, but the Intendant wrote to the Lieutenant General of Salon,
praying him to acquaint him, Whether the reports of that Apparition were true,
or false? But to prevent the communication of retractible Things, he ordered
him to draw up a formal Information, in case he found any credit due to the
reports that were spread abroad. At the same time, he desired a Character of
the Man that had been with him; for he had taken down his Name at first, and
wanted to know, whether he was always reckoned a Man of Sense, such as he
appeared to be. He likewise ordered him, to enquire, whether there ever were
any of his Family, either by the Father or Mother-side, that were Rattle
brained. For if any such had been found out by chance, he had not failed to
infer from thence, that he imitated their example, and by consequence, that no
stress was to be laid upon what he said.

The Lieutenant obeyed this Letter punctually. He drew up an Information, and
sent it to the Intendant; by which he saw, that all the reports of the
Apparition, and its consequences, were true; and that the Marshal was always
reputed a Man of good Sense. The Lieutenant likewise g^ve an account of his
Family; which contained ^ thing that could hinder the Intendant to (...) the
Court with the Affair. Accordingly, he Wrote of it to the Marquis of
Barbesieux, Secretary of State; but he did it in such a way, as signified, that
he only looked upon the Man as a Madman. For, he did not only set forth his
own incredulity upon the Matter, but the Measures he had taken to prevent his
being imposed upon; and sent him the Information he had caused to be taken at
Salon. By this he mean'd, and justly indeed, to justify, That if there was any
imposition in the Matter, he was not the first Author of it. His plea was, That
the Magistrate of Salon, being upon the place, ought to know the Matter of Fact
best; upon which, he concluded, That if he was deceived, the fault ought not to
lie upon him. He thought himself obliged, in a particular manner, to season his
Letter with a great many Circumstances, to clear himself from too much
Credulity in that Minister's Opinion; for that the Marquis being very Young,
must be less Credulous than other People. He knew, that at such an Age as he
was of, such things are hardly credited; and that even the Apparition of Samuel
would meet with no Faith from them, if it were not spoke of in the Books that
cannot be called in question, without Sacrilege. But the Marquis was more
Credulous than one would have thought. He Writ him an Answer, probably, after
speaking of it to the King; importing, That he might send him the Man, but so,
as not to give any ground for charging either the one or the other with any
Weakness.

The Intendant receiving this Order, enjoined the Lieutenant General of Salon
to send him the Man, upon the pretense, of answering to the Information he had
made, pursuant to his Order. Accordingly, the Blacksmith waited upon him, and
told him at first meeting, That he had said before, 'twould not be long before
he sent for him again. The Intendant made answer, That he did not send for him
upon the design he thought of, but to reprimand him for meaning to impose upon
him. By this Representation, he thought to turn the Tables upon him, in order
to satisfy the Marquis's caution. But the Man knowing that he was guilty of
nothing that could merit a reprimand, the Conference ended in this, That the
Intendant gave him to know, that if he were as much persuaded of the Fact as he
would have him believe he would be so far from hindering him to go to
V^^sailles, that he would give him Introductory-Letters to the Marquis of
Barbesieux, and to facilitate his Journey, would give him a place in the first
Recruit-Convoy that was to go that way. The Man did not care which way he went,
so he could but satisfy the desire of the Vision; and accordingly, agreed to
what was proposed. There was a Company of Recruits just ready to be gone, which
an Officer of the Town of (...) had raised, and which were to pass near Paris.
The Intendant recommended the Blacksmith to him, and gave him some Money to give
him when he par^^d from him. That Officer carried him to ^erte under J^narre,
after having Wrote to the Intendant, in obedience to his Command, That he could
(...) nothing in the Man, but what bec^me a Wi^e man: For the Intendant had
desired him to observe him narrowly upon the Road, to the end, that if he
discovered any turn of Thought in him, he might acquaint the Marquis o^
Barbesieux with it.

The Blacksmith being thus arrived at ^ert^ took leave o^ the Officer, and
repair^d to Versailles, where he did not knew what to ^ay, because the Ghost
had not yet appear^d to him. But the very Night that he arrived, while he was
in great perplexity, he heard (as he says) one undraw his Curtain, while he was
full awake. Upon that, the Ghost appeared to him, bid him fea^ nothing, and
gave him to know, That both the Secretary of State, and the King, would give
him a Well-come Reception, notwithstanding the difficulties he met with at
first. Being thus instructed in what he was to say, both to the Marquis, and
the King; he was at the same time, strictly charged, never to divulge what was
then told him, to any body, excepting His Majesty. The Ghost acquainted him,
That the Marquis of Barbesieux, would endeavor, by all means, to pump the
Secret out of him; but that he was to conceal it from him, as well as from
every body else; for if he failed in that piece of Obedience, he should
infallibly meet with the same Fate as befell the two Men in his Town.

The Ghost disappeared immediately; and the Blacksmith having no great
inclination to Sleep longer, went in the morning to wait upon the Marquis of
Barbesieux, and delivered him the Intendant's Letter. The Marquis immediately
called him to his Closet, where they both continued for above an hour. The
report of the Blacksmith's ensuing Arrival, had been spread all over the Court
before he came. For upon his departure from Provence, Letters were sent to
Town; and he was every where styled, The Prophet, forasmuch as no body doubted,
but that he was going to Prophecy something to the King, and had undertook
that Journey only for that end. In the mean time, every body was mightily
desirous to know what the Matter was; and there being always some, that pretend
to refine upon Things beyond their Neighbors, a Report was spread abroad, That
he had been put upon at the same rate as James Clement in former Times, though
not in order to commit such a detestable Action as he did, but to acquaint His
Majesty under so fair a covert, a great many things, that could not otherwise
reach his Ears. I do not speak this, as if I believed it; for I know very well,
that these are only pleasant Whims, familiar to those, who, for want of
business, employ their whole time in Commenting upon whatever happens.

However, according to the Ghost's Prediction, the Marquis of Barbesieux
endeavored to work the Secret out of the Blacksmith: But the Smith replied,
That all his efforts upon that score would be fruitless, in regard he had a
Lesson prescribed to him, which he was obliged to observe, under the pain of
being punished upon the spot; but to show that his advances were not
Chimerical, he might give His Majesty to know, That the last time he Hunted at
Fontainbleau, he was suddenly surpised with an Apparition, which put him into
a great astonishment; That the same Ghost which appeared to him, had at that
time appeared to His Majesty, and that his Horse had seen it, and started
aside, as if he would have thrown him; That the Apparition did not continue
above a moment, which occasioned His Majesty's apprehension, of being mistaken,
and his speaking of it to no body; and that all this happened to His Majesty
only, in order to procure him access to the King, by showing, That he knew what
none else in his Dominions was acquainted with. Upon these reasons, he hoped
His Majesty would make no difficulty in giving him Audience.

The Marquis of Barbesieux was much surpised at the hearing of such a
Circumstance as that, which would quickly discover, whether there was any thing
Supernatural in this Man's Pretensions, or whether he was an Impostor. And, in
earnest, if the King confirmed the Matter of Fact, undoubtedly he must have
known something beyond a Natural Capacity. The Marquis acquainted the King with
his Arrival, and with the Story he told; and all he had said, being, as it is
alleged, found true, the King granted him a private Audience. What passed in
this Interview, nobody can tell, because 'twas kept as a profound Secret. All
we know, is, That the pretended Prophet having stayed some days at Court, while
few knew that he had the honor to speak with the King; His Majesty agreed,
that he should come and take leave of him publicly, when he took Coach to go a
Hunting. The Duke of Duas, Captain of the Lifeguard, no sooner saw him, but he
told the King, That if he had not ordered him to admit such a Fellow to
approach His Person, he had been far from doing it, because he was certainly a
Fool, or else His Majesty was much put upon. A great many others about Court
were of his Mind; for people are not easily convinced of such things as these.
But the King took his part, and gave the Captain to know, that he was out in
his Judgment, and that he had more Sense than he thought for.

This Expression was evidence, that he had told the King some very odd Things;
for otherwise, the King would never have given himself the trouble to make such
Declaration of his Thoughts. It awaked the Curiosity of all Mankind; and
everybody would have given any thing to know the result of his Conference with
His Majesty, and Barbesieux. The Marquis's Friends pumped him upon the matter;
but he told 'em frankly, that 'twas in vain, in regard there was something in
the matter that challenged his Secrecy. The vulgar People, who are naturally
very credulous, fancied, that his Business with the King, was to Preach up the
suppression of the Imposts, that Necessity had obliged him to lay upon 'em, in
the time of so cruel a War. The Prophet having taken leave of the King,
returned to his own Country; and the Marquis of Barbesieux having given him
Money at his arrival, and ordered him to converse with no body repeated his
Bounty to him when he went. So that the Prophet spoke nothing of the matter to
anybody while he was there; and indeed, he could not well do it, if he would,
for he was always kept within view.

Such an extraordinary Adventure as this did not fail to make a great deal of
noise all over Paris, and even the whole Kingdom; but notwithstanding that the
appearance of Prodigies ought to make People reflect upon their Duty; yet I do
not find that this made any Reformation of Manners. Debauchery continued still
to Reign among Men and Women; and the exemplary Piety of the King, and part of
the Court, had no effect upon the Libertine Spirits. His Majesty, who, ever
since his application to Devotion, has made it his Business to extirpate Vice,
not only out of those about his Person, but even those who live at a distance,
held at that time a Council of Conscience, at which the Archbishop of Paris,
and some other Prelates, with Father de la Cha^se his Confessor, were called to
assist. In that Assembly, several methods were proposed for preventing the
usual disorders among the Officers and Soldiers. The Archbishop of Paris being
a very z^^lous Man, cried up His Majesty's pious Intention; and gave the rest
to understand, that they ought to join all their Force in bringing it to bear.
For this purpose, 'twas proposed, That a Missionary should be sent to each
Regiment, in order to Preach to 'em, and Catechize 'em every day. But it being
answered, That Missionaries would scarce be ^ound to undertake the Office, by
reason of their necessary Residence with the Regiments; another motion was made
and agreed to. I know not indeed whether it has yet produced the desired effect
but what is not yet done, may be done here after; and that Time will discover.
The motion was, That none should be employed as Almoners of Regiments, but
those who are Persons of pious and good Lives, and who have Men of Merit to
vouch for 'em: And that at the conclusion of every Campaign they should be
obliged to repair to the Seminaries, and continue there all Winter. To speak
the truth, I must say this is an effectual Scheme for having no Almoners but
such as are quite different from what they now are. But I question if they will
find any that will submit to that sort of Life. Most people put in for those
Places only to divert themselves; and as soon as they find what constraint is
mean'd 'em, they will rather desert than submit to it. Probably that is the
reason that the Thing is not yet put in Execution, and perhaps never will.

While measures were concerting for the introducing of such excellent
Discipline among the Troops; one of these Almoners being imprisoned by the
King's Order, in one of the Hospitals for the Poor, made a strange End after a
very odd Life. He was a Recollet by Trade; but being uneasy under the
confinement of a Convent, he procured a Dismission under the pretense of
serving in this Employment, which by Intrigues, and the Interest of Friends, he
had obtained. He had continued in that Office some time; and as those who are
once in any measure Corrupted, do quickly become more Corrupt in an Army; so he
formed a design to render himself so necessary at Court, by a false Accusation,
that he might be in a capacity to throw off his Habit which he ^^r^ with as
much uneasiness as formerly he did the confinement of the Cloister. He had his
eye upon one, Abbot Agnan, who, of a Friar, had made himself a Chemist
Physician. He had a strong mind to follow his Example, not in practicing
Physic which he did not understand, but in wearing the Habit of a secular
Priest, instead of that of a Religious one. His Plea was, That since they had
allowed that Abbot to dispense with his Vows upon the pretense of some Cures,
he might obtain the same favor by some signal Service. Upon that view he
repaired to the Marquis of Chateauneuf, Secretary of State, who managed the
Affairs of Religion, and privately acquainted him, That an Officer of the
Regiment to which he was Almoner, had a design upon the King's Life: He knew
that that Officer was obliged to go off then, or next morning, to some foreign
Country, as well as a great many others who would not change their Religion.
Nay, he had counseled him so to do, and promised to come and see him, though he
mean'd nothing less.

The Marquis of Chateauneuf, who is, in many things, the least of all the four
Secretaries of State, if it be Lawful to call any thing little that is about so
great a Prince, sent Orders immediately to Arrest the Officer, and commanded
the Recollet to continue at Court. In the mean time, the Officer was gone,
which the Recollet knew very well: However the Marquis being informed of his
Departure, told the Recollet he was come too late, and that the Bird was flown
three days before. The Recollet made Answer, That that was none of his fault,
and that he could not do the Business sooner; That after all, he believed he
was only gone to Languedoc, his Native Country, where he would be sure to keep
close; and that in regard, he told him most of his haunts, he believed he could
unkennel him, if the Marquis would sent him to that Country. The Marquis
continued still to believe what he said, and accordingly he send him to
Languedoc, where the Recollet arrived very speedily, with the Money he had got
for the Charge of the Journey. He had a permission upon his going out of Paris
to put on a Gentleman's Habit. But, at last, having drilled on the Affair as
long as he could; the Minister of State not offering to encourage him any
longer, he returned to this City, where he was informed, that the Marquis
designed to take him up. The Marquis begun to see through his Knavety, and would
not suffer himself to be imposed upon any longer. The Recollet came to know
this piece of News very luckily. It fe^l out, by chance, that in the very Inn
at which he alighted, there was one of the Cousins of the Person he had
accused, to whom Mr. de Chateauneuf had communicated his Thoughts. Now, this
Relation had told Mr. deChateauneuf, that his Cousin was, indeed, a true
Protestant; but he could be Surety, that he was not capable of the Thought he
was charged with. At the same time, he had wrote to his Cousin, to know the
truth of the thing; upon which, the Officer receiving such information, wrote
himself to Mr. de Chateauneuf, setting forth, That he was ready to return to
France, to clear himself of the Accusation, if the King would grant him a
Passport, and Assurance that he should not be troubled upon the score of his
retiring to a foreign Counntry, contrary to his Prohibition.

This Letter was but just received, and the Relation having been at Versailles
that day, told all the People about the Inn, the whole Story as a piece of
acceptable News: But the Recollet was wiser than to discover what hand he had
in the matter. Upon that, he dropped his Design of going to wait upon Mr.
Chateauneuf, and took up at another Inn under a different Name from what he had
before: Nay, further, he bought such a Cross as the Knights of Malta wear, and
put a white Feather in his Hat, and went by the Title of Mr. le Chevalier. The
People of the first Inn (...) seeing him next day, were surpised, for that
(...) had told them nothing of his going. But, (...), the Officer's Kinsman had
never suspected him, if the Recollet had not said at Table, that he came from
Languedoc; for somebody telling him so much, happened, by way of Jest, to say,
That, perhaps, he was the Man he had been speaking of, and for that reason had
deserted the Inn. Upon this, the Kinsman returned next day to Versailles, to
know what sort of a Man the Recollet was. Mr. Chateauneuf's Description
agreeing exactly with what he had seen, he acquainted the Minister with what
passed at Table, and with the suspicion that he grounded thereupon. Immediately
the Secretary gave such express Orders for searching all the Inns in Paris,
that the Recollet could scarce escape: For the excellent Orders we have in this
City, with reference to all strangers, whether in Inns, or private Lodgings,
are so admirably well calculated, that it is no great difficulty to make a
narrow Enquiry: All the Landlords being obliged to give an account who are
their Lodgers, and when they arrived; the Commissary of the Ward where the
pretended Knight lodged, was informed by the Innkeeper, that he had got a new
Guest. Thereupon the Commissary observing the time of his arrival, to jump with
that of the suspected Person's, he informed himself of his Features, and so
took him up; so that his pretended Knighthood was not sufficient to keep him
Incognito. Presently he was conveyed either to the Bastile or Vincennes, where
he endeavored to make his escape; but being prevented, and being at the same
time guilty of a horrid piece of Sacrilege, he was indicted according to his
demerit. The Recollets interceeded for him, to prevent the mortification of its
being said in the World, That one of their Society was either Hanged or Burnt.
The King graciously granted their request, and exchanged the Sentence of Death
for that of perpetual Imprisonment. So he was put into the Hospital I spoke of
but now; but he was no sooner got in, than he made a new Conspiracy with the
other Russians to make their escape; now, this could scarce be effected without
Killing him that brought 'em their Victuals. But that being not the first Crime
they had all been guilty of, they mutually agreed, that they should not stand
to do it. In effect, they committed the Murder, and having made their escape,
fled to the Palais Royal where they had an acquaintance by whom they expected
to be entertained. But their Acquaintance abhorring the Crime they had
committed, and knowing they had broke the Prison to which they had been
committed by the King's Orders, refused to receive 'em. Thus they were obliged
to look out for another hiding Place: But the Goal-Keeper being already at
their Heels, they were quickly retaken and Tried. The poor Recollet, by virtue
of the Interest of his Order, was only Condemned to the Galleys; but God not
contented with this Punishment which was infinitely short of his demerit, did
so order it, that the Gang offering to revolt against their Keepers, about
fifteen or twenty Leagues from Paris, these shot upon 'em, and Killed the
wretched Recollet. Such was his End, and the King having notice of it, was the
more forward in reforming the Almoners of the Army; for that he knew 'twas in
that capacity that he first began to signalize himself by Debauchery and
Corruptness,

In the mean time, we received the News of the King of Sweden's Death, which
gave the Potentates that desired a Peace, some occasion to fear some obstacle,
or delay. But though his Successor was very young; and 'twas to be feared, that a
great many Turmoils might fall out in that Kingdom, during his Minority; yet
his Father's Will was so well ordered, that it put all to rights. His Son was
declared to be Major, or of Age, before the usual Term in Sweden, in order to
discourage those who mean'd to disturb the State. At the same time, the young
King's Grandmother being declared his Guardian by her Son's Will, took upon her
the Administration of the Government. The late King had nominated some
Counselors to assist her; among the rest the Count of Bielke, a zealous
favourer of the House of Austria, who had been formerly Ambassador at the Court
of France, and was disobliged there. However, it being feared that he might
endeavor to disturb our Game, perhaps as much out of private resentment, as
any intention to serve the Crown of Spain Count; d'Avaux, the most Christian
King's Ambassador in that Country, had orders to have a watchful Eye upon his
Conduct. I know not whether it was the bad Offices done him by Count d'Avaux,
or his being guilty of several unwarrantable Practices when he was Governor of
Pomeren, that brought him quickly to be disgraced; but, in fine, he perceiving
that he was like to sink under the Power of his Enemies, wrote to one of his
Nephews in France, to entreat his Majesty to forget what was past, and grant
him the honor of his Protection. Immediately, upon the receipt of the Letter,
his Nephew spoke of it to the King: And the Count's hopes were not frustrated;
for the King allowed him to come to France, pursuant to his request; but the
Letter, by which his Nephew gave him this Advice, being intercepted by some of
his Enemies, he was taken up.

At that time, Mr. Lasun had only two Occupations, namely, Pleading and Gaming.
But as he grew Old, Fortune, which only serves Youth, became as unfavourable to
him as it had formerly been kind. 'Twas computed, that in the space of three or
four Months he lost above sixty thousand Pistols. It Is certain he lost a great
deal; but it being known that sixty thousand Pistols, in the Gascogne way of
speaking, does not amount to above five or six thousand, others concluded that
his loss might terminate there. He was likewise cast in a Lawsuit against
Madam Fremont, and her Son; and was more cast down upon that, than upon his
loss at Game; for he still hoped to regain the latter, but the Judgment against
him excluded all hopes of relief. Besides, he was troubled that he had made
such a noise about it, both at Court, and in the City, without better success.
All his Friends endeavored to comfort him; and, to speak the truth, they were
not much dissatisfied with the rub he met with, because they hoped it would
facilitate his Accommodation with Marshal de Lorges and his Lady. But stiffness
is so natural to old People, that their hopes vanished in Smoke. He was a
turbulent sort of a Man all his Lifetime; insomuch, that he oftentimes
thwarted the King: and he would not then disclaim that Quality, though, indeed,
'twas none of the best. The Judgment pronounced against him, related only to
the Question, whether he was to plead before the Court of Aids, or that of
Requests. Now, being remitted to the last, which was the thing he only wanted
to avoid, he resolved to plead his Cause there, though he should meet with the
same success that happened to him in Ireland. Though, after all' I know not what
reason he had to fear any such thing; for he showed, by his Carriage before
them, that he feared K. William ^uch less than them.

However, he was not the only Courtier that loved to be litigious. The P. of
Epinois followed his Example very close. He commenced a Suit before the Council
against the Prince of Bournonville, for the succession to the Vicounty of Gand,
to which they were equally related. The case had been already decided by the
Parliament of Rouan, in favor of the Prince of Bournonville. But great Lords
are more liable to the pursuit of ill Causes than others, because their
Intendants and Agents want only to have 'em engaged to a disadvantage, that
they may fish in troubled Waters. His true Friends gave him to know, That they
feared he would he cast before the Council, as well as before the Parliament.
Upon this, he redoubled his Solicitations, hoping by his Intrigues and
diligence to gain what he was apprehensive of losing in the Court of Justice.
The two Princesses, his Wife and his Mother, took care likewise to make use of
their Friends. His Wife endeavored to persuade 'em, that she desired nothing
but Justice, hoping to blind 'em by their respect for her Quality. But the
Mother was less presumptuous, whether 'twas that she thought she was no longer
to be considered as a Princess, having the Reputation of being married to a
Lawyer, or that she was sensible of the weakness of her Son's Cause:
Accordingly she confined her hopes to the Interest of her pretended Husband.
The P. of Bournonville, for his part, was not asleep, being sensible that he
had to do with a strong party: But 'twould be a great folly in Judges to have
more regard to Interest than Justice; and all that the Prince D'Epinois, and
his whole Family could do, could not prevent his being fined, and obliged to
pay the Costs. Indeed the Debate lasted above five Hours, because some of the
Judges had a mind to oblige 'em.

The Countess of Grignan being then at Paris, went to see the Duchess of
Orleans at St. Cloud, who had Dislocated her Arm, by a Fall from her Horse at
Hunting: But she was so ill received, that she did not care to go again for a
long time. That Princess came to that House, after her Arm had been set by a
Country Surgeon, that performed his Office not amiss: But being still much
Pained, she was so angry at the Countess's saying to her, That she came to
Congratulate the dispelling of her Illness, that she was very near kicking her
out of her Presence. The Princess, who seldom disguises Nature, checked her so
severely, that the Countess, upon her return to Paris, made it known to all her
Friends, and the Duke of Orleans came to hear of it. His Royal Highness told
his Lady, That she was in the wrong; but she was so incapable of listening to
Reason in the case she was in, that there was a necessity of waiting till she
was well, before she could be convinced of an Error, in having used that Lady
at sueh a rate.

The Month of August came on soon after; and the Jesuits, in pursuance of their
usual Custom, had a Tragedy Acted in their College of Louis le Grand; So it is
now called; the Names of the The College of Clermont, or of Jesus being quite
sunk. The Passion that the good Fathers had for insinuating themselves in the
King's Favor, made them prefer Flattery to Gratitude. They have forgot, that
their Founders obliged them to put their Name upon the Gate, and have put up
another in its place; which, indeed, is infinitely greater, and more
illustrious than Clermont's; but, at the same time, did not want Panegyrists
enough besides them, to transmit it with Honor to Posterity: So that the World
did not pardon such an Action; for they had no sooner taken down the Name of
Jesus from above their great Gate, than two Latin Verses were Published which
are well enough known in the World; but there being several that have not seen
them, 'twill not be altogether improper to insert them here, and to preserve
the Memory of them if it were capable to be lost: They are as follows.
Sustulit hinc Jesum, Posuitque insignia Regis,
Impia Genes; alium non habt illa Deum.


The meaning of these Verses, is, That this Society in which Impiety reigns,
took down the Name of Jesus, and put up the King's Arms; and so never
recognized any other God than the Kings of the Earth. I am very far from saying
that this is a truth. Nay, I should rather affirm, that Piety reigns among 'em
instead of Impiety: but considering that they have many Enemies, we must not be
surprised if they have recourse to some Imposture or other, when the smallest
Faults they can be guilty of, are charged upon 'em with Reproach. However,
Monsieur being invited to the abovementioned Tragedy, he and the whole Court
honored it with their Presence; upon which Father Jai, who has a great Genius
for that sort of Representation, complimented him on the behalf of the Rector
of that College, setting forth, that if the Performance pleased him, all the
Honor of it was due to him. The good Father made a long tedious Speech,
screwing in several Panegyricks upon the late Duke of S. Agnan, who was not
only a great lover of Acting, but so good an Actor, that upon occasion he acted
all the different Parts one after another. Having spoke all that he had to say,
he took leave, and went to cause the Representation to be begun. But when every
one was pricking up his Ears, that they might not lose one word of the
Performance, this mighty Inventer fell out with his Fiddlers, insomuch, that
instead of Playing, they put up their Instruments, and offered to go away.
Father Jai being touched with the Affront they thus put upon him, preached to
'em, and catechized 'em, in order to make 'em alter their Resolution. But after
he had thus acted the part of a Preacher, a Trade that in the mean time he knew
nothing of, he at last came to threaten 'em with his Arms, where his greater
Excellency lay. He gave the Musicians to know, that the least they could
expect, was, to have their Instruments broke over their Heads. But all this did
not soften them: They still insisted on their Resolution to be gone; so that
the poor Father was forced to have recourse to Monsieur to make 'em comply.
Accordingly Monsieur interposed his Authority, and the Musicians did for him
what they refused to do for the Father: Then the Tragedy was begun, but its end
was much of a piece with the Prelude. For several People quarell'd, and were so
warm, that they stood in need of Monsieur's Authority to restrain 'em. However,
the Matter was accommodated without Monsieur's Intervention; and the King who
loves to be informed of all that passes in Paris or Versailles, no sooner had
an account of the Adventures at this Tragedy, but he said a word of Monsieur
that sounded well enough. He turned to some Lords that were laughing at this
Adventure, and said, The Court had been long a Sufferer by the less of the Duke
of S. Agnan, but thank God Monsieur was about to repair their loss. In effect,
this Duke was all his life-long a Judge among the Musicians of Paris; he was so
far from thinking that Office to be beneath his Quality, that on the other hand
he thought nothing more proper for him, pleading that the Players on the Violin
not only contributed to Gallantry, but were in a manner the necessary
Instruments to carry it on; and thinking that himself exceeded all other Men in
Gallantry, he upon that score laid claim to the Government of them, entitling
himself to a preference to all others.

The Bishop of Orleans did not keep his Anger long; whether it was that he was
sensible of his Error in being angry, or that he was not apt to continue a
Resentment long. He returned to Paris, whither he brought his Nephew. But his
Nephew, who would not sacrifice his Hopes of a Bishopric to the love he had
for his Uncle, renewed his Addresses to Father de la Chaise, and to the King.
At that time several Bishoprics were Vacant, and among others, the Bishopric
of Mentz, which is none of the most inconsiderable Sees in the Kingdom; for
besides that the Bishop of that place is at the same time Prince of the Empire,
and has a right to put the Sword as well as the Mitre in his Arms, like the
Ecclesiastic Electors, the Bishop of Munster, and several other Princes; his
Incomes amount to almost 80000 Livres a Year. The eldest Brother of the late
Duke of Feuillade had succeeded to it, when the Duke of Verneuil, who had
enjoyed it from his Youth, married Duke Sulli's Widow. The Abbot of Coaslin
scarce made any Pretensions to it, in consideration of what had passed: But the
King, who commonly takes pleasure in granting unexpected Favors, bestowed that
Dignity upon him, to the great astonishment of all France, and even of his own
Family. This entirely put an end to what chagrin the Bishop of Orleans retained
upon the score of the Bank. However, his Majesty, who never does a Favor by
halves, observing that neither this new Prelate, nor his Family, were in a
Condition to raise the 20000 Crowns that he was obliged to send to Rome for his
Bulls; his Majesty, I say, taking this into Consideration, entreated the Pope
by a Letter under his own Hand, to let this Prelate have his Bulls gratis. If
the King had gratified him with this rich Benefice five or six Months later
than he did, he might have saved himself the trouble of writing to Rome, for
the Bishop of Orleans was made Cardinal before that time, and the Cardinal's
Nephews never pay for their Bulls, that being a Privilege among many others
that is tacked to the Purple. The Pope did not deny his Majesty so small a
Request; so that the new Bishop receiving his Bulls gratis, was suddenly
capable to keep his Father's Coach from being seiz^d again. Since our Parents
are the first Poor that we ought to relieve, and since his Father wanted his
Assistance, 'twas his Duty to begin with him in the Dispensation of his Wealth.

The Tuilleries are the place of Rendezvous for all the Persons of Quality of
Fortune in Paris: And at present, it is a Custom among the Ladies, as well as
the Gentlemen, to keep Footmen from 25 to 30 Years of Age; and commonly at the
Gates and Doors there stands such a numerous quantity of Footmen, as upon
occasion would make a Recruit of 4 or 5000 Men. Now, these Gentlemen Lacquies
having the daily Opportunity of seeing the Freaks and Intrigues of their
Mistrisses, and having no great reason to entertain a very good Opinion of 'em,
one may know the History of each Lady by hearing their Conferences. At that
time, one of these Comical Fellows said to his Fellow Servants, that if they
would give him a Bottle of Wine, he would lift up the Coats of the first Lady
that came out. They readily agreed to give that reward for such a nice piece of
Diversion. In the mean time, Mademoiselle d' Armagnac, and the Marchioness de
Villequier came out together; and the Footman, probably not knowing who they
were, offered to perform upon them the Insolence he had promised. The Ladies
surpised with the unaccountable Brutality, cried out for help, and stopped the
Footman themselves; several Persons of Quality alighting from their Coaches,
assisted them to prevent the Fellow's making his Escape; upon this he was
imprisoned* Some Judges were for putting him to Death, to scare those of his
Kidney from such lewdness; but others thought the Pillory and the Galleys a
sufficient Punishment for what he had done. And thus he was only ordered to go
and serve the King in the Galleys; though, to speak the truth, his Insolence
deserved another sort of usage. However, that wretched sort of Cattle
entertained the Public very often with Scenes of this nature, which were still
worse when they wore Swords. Every day they were guilty of some Insolence or
other, and there was a great deal of reason for forbidding 'em the use of
Swords. The occasion of that Prohibition was the Father of Monsieur Tilladet,
whom they killed, and so stopped the Course of his Fortune, which perhaps would
have gone further than that of his Children, because he had married the Sister
of the late Monsieur le Tellier. It Is true, he was not always in good terms
with him. That Minister, whose Projects bore a Proportion to his Fortune,
pretended to Marry his Sister better than to a little Gentleman of Gascony. But
young Ladies often Marry without their Friends Consent, and she particularly
disposed of her self without consulting him upon the matter. This was the
occasion of their misunderstanding. But as time sinks all Differences, so his
Brother-in-law and he were good Friends when that accident happened.

At that time the Duchess of Feuillade died; and her Death was not much
regreated by her Husband, who, if we believe the common Report, lived so
indifferently with her, that he never enjoyed her. But though he did not lament
her loss, all that knew her did, for she was a very amiable Lady, and never
gave any occasion to talk of her. Besides, she was very Young, being not above
20 Years of Age. But there are some invincible Antipathies; and it is plain, the
Duke was not of a Temper suitable to her, since he did not respect what all the
World pronounced lovely. It seems he likewise despised her Alliance; though, to
speak the truth, there were a great many of as good Families as his at least,
who would willingly have married Ladies that had not so much to boast of as
she. For if it is true, that a Family is rendered Illustrious by the past or
present Possession of great Places; we shall scarce find one in the Kingdom, at
least retaining to the Law, that could equal this. It produced six or seven
Secretaries of State, and at present boasts of three. This Lady was the
Daughter of the Marquess of Chateauneuf, who, indeed, is but a little Secretary
of State, in comparison with the other three. But as there are no little Saints
in Paradise, because God, who is infinitely Great, communicates somewhat of
himself to those who have served him faithfully, so there is no such thing, as a
little Secretary of State, under the greatest King in Christendom.

Mean while, Marshal Boufflers and my Lord Portland having removed a great many
Difficulties by their Conferences; the King in concert with the Emperor,
proposed to keep Strasbourg, and to give up to his Imperial Majesty that Part
of Brisack that lies beyond the Rhine. The City of Strasbourg did not belong to
the Emperor, and by right it ought to have returned to the Inhabitants, who
were Proprietors of it, before the King had it. This Innovation did not please
the Princes of the Empire, especially those situated on this side the Rhine, or
just by the other. But great Princes do not much mind little ones, when their
own Interest is in the case; and upon that foot the Consent of the King of
England was enough to make it bear. It Is alleged that that Prince consented to
it, only upon the hopes that his satisfying the King of France in a thing that
he desired so passionately, would move his most Christian Majesty to give him
another recompense that he on the other side, was as eager to obtain He did not
like King James's continuing at St. Germains, thinking that place to lie too
near Versailles. And upon a parallel Case, Cromwell who was not short of him in
Politics, used all his Interest in his time to oblige his Majesty to remove
from his Court, not only the late King Charles, who after his Father's
Misfortune had fled to Paris, but likewise the Queen his Mother. Accordingly he
obtain^d his end with reference to King Charles, and even the Duke of York, his
Brother, who had likewise fled thither; but as to the Queen he could never gain
his Point there, notwithstanding that he wheedled Cardinal Mazarin with the
Proposal of a Marriage between his own Son and one of the Cardinal's Nieces.
For that Princess made a vigorous Opposition against this Minister's Proposal
of her removal from the Court of France, and would never consent to it,
notwithstanding the great Advantages accruing to her upon that Condition,
particularly a large Pension from England.

My Lord Portland gave the Marshal some hint of his Master's Design, with a
good Address. The Marshal, who is not so much a Statesman as a good Servant to
the King, had nevertheless Sense enough upon this Occasion to give him some
hopes of succeeding without going too far. However, People being always apt to
flatter themselves, my Lord was persuaded, That the King could not refuse what
King William desired, after the Condescension in the Affair of Strasbourg; and
nothing was thought of upon both sides, but the Execution of what these two
Ministers should agree upon. The Princes of the Empire were still displeased;
they could not forbear complaining that the Article relating to Strasbourg was
contrary to the Preliminaries of the Peace; they knew very well that the first
thing demanded of Monsieur Cailleres before the Commencement of the Conferences
with him, was the Restitution of Lorrain, Strasbourg, and Luxembourg. The
Emperor's Ministers answered to this, That the King's Conquest of Barcelona had
changed the Face of Affairs, that he demanded an Equivalent, and that
considering how things stood, 'twas well for them that he was contented with so
little. They were glad they had this Pretense to cover the Advantage accruing
to their Master by that new Proposal. In fine, they saw very well, that after
all Europe had drained it self in carrying on the War, the House of Austria
were the only Gainers by it. But the Princes of the Empire, who did not approve
of these Reasons, could not comply so easily with the Proposal. They solicited
the Emperor and the Mediators, to get that Clause altered that seemed to be so
disadvantageous to them. His Imperial Majesty did not mind them; for that in
granting their Request, he should have acted contrary to his own Interest. The
Mediators gave no other excuse, but that all Europe stood equally in need of a
Peace, and that the Cession of all on this side of the Rhine, and stipulating a
Restitution of all on the other side, was the best Expedient, both to put a
speedy end to the present War, and to prevent a future Rupture.

Neither their Answer, nor that of the Emperors, gave 'em any Satisfaction.
They fansy'd the Mediators were influenced by France; at least they persuaded
themselves, that if the late King of Sweden had been still alive, he would
never have tamely suffered things to pass so. Being thus prepossessed with the
apprehension of the great Prejudice accruing to them from the Peace, they did
not comply very early. While the respective Parties were busi'd in managing
their several Pretensions, the Affairs of Poland were brought to that
Confusion, that 'twas thought they would never be adjusted without a Civil War.
The Cardinal Primate sent a Courier to France, to know what was the reason that
the Prince of Conti did not come to take the Crown upon his Head. He
represented, that his Interest suffered mightily by his apparent Indifferency
in lying quiet at Par^s, or the Court, at a time when Poland was in a
Combustion out of Respect and Love to him. That the Duke of Saxony was not
wanting in reaping a mighty Advantage by it; that he debauch d those of his
Party, upon the Plea that 'twould be folly to adhere any longer to a Prince
that deserted 'em in that manner; that his Presence in Poland was desired
beyond Expression; and that on the other hand, the Duke of Saxony was so hated,
that upon the Prince's Arrival every body would side with him out of spite to
the other.

The Abbot of Polignac gave the Court to know as much by every Courier he sent.
At last, the King having called a Council upon the matter, resolved that the
Prince of Conti should go immediately to that Country. And in regard he could
not expect a good Reception without carrying Money with him, his Majesty gave
him Bills of Exchange for 2000000, besides 10000 Louis-d'ores, for petty
Occasions. The Peace was then not made, and 'twas possible it might fail, by
reason of the Interest of the Princes of the Empire, who still opposed it with
great Warmth and Resolution. Upon this account 'twas questioned by many, how
the Prince should get with safety into Poland. To go there incognito was at
once dishonorable and dangerous, and to do it by open force was impossible,
the Enemies Fleet being at Sea, which all the Power of France could not cope
with. But notwithstanding the Strength of their Fleet, the Kng fitted out
Squadrons every Day, which not only got off clear, but were continually
annoying them by taking Prizes. And accordingly a Squadron was ordered to
Transport the Prince: John Bart having taken upon him to Conduct the Prince,
took care to make the Squadron ready by Orders from Court. 'Twas fitted out at
Dunkirk, and the Allies having notice of it, sent 14 Ships to that Road, to
hinder any thing to go in, or come out. This Obstacle did not amuse John Bart,
though another would have been much perplexed with it. It Is not known how the
Enemy had such an early Intelligence of the Design, for the King kept it so
secret that no body in France knew of it, till within two Days before the time
of his Departure. However, it seems, it came by Spies, of which they had a
great many every where, especially at the Seaports.

But that Trade was more hazardous than Bart's Expedition, though at the same
time it was attended by a great deal of Danger. For one of these Spy was taken
up, not long before, in the same place where this Squadron was fitted out; and
considering the risque he run, it is not imaginable how little he got by it. One
Couture, a Paris-Councellor, a Man of little Practice, and a narrow Fortune,
being inveigled by a Woman, that either had debauched him, or had been
debauched by him, went a strowling up and down the Country with her. There he
tried several Trades that did not agree very well with the Bar; but being bred
to Harangue and Declaim, he at last listed himself among a Company of strowling
Actors, which after a great many turnings and windings brought him to the
French Flanders; there he acted his Parts, and coming afterward to Dunkirk,
met there with a Man that having known him at Paris, represented to him the
scandalousness of his Employment. The Counsellor-Actor made answer, That 'twas
easy to talk of things, but when a Man had nothing, he was obliged to do what
he could. Thereupon his Friend gave him to know, that if he would trust him, he
would find him a better Trade, in which he might earn his Bread with less
Labor. The Counselor being not over-satisfied with the Trade he was then in,
took him at his word; upon which his Friend said, They behooved to drink
together, before he could speak farther upon the Matter. Having carried him to
a Tavern, he acquainted him over a Glass, That he had several Relations in
Holland, who were great Traders, and were every day annoyed with the Prizes
made by the French Ships; that they would willingly give 2000 Livers a Year to
any Man that would engage to give 'em timely notice what Ships are fitting out
from Dunkirk and St. Maloes; that if he would find a Friend to reside in one of
these places, while himself continued in the other, he would see that Sum paid
him; and that there was no great Difficulty or Labor in the performance of
what was desired. It Is possible, he likewise set forth to him, that in
undertaking that Office, he would do a charitable Action, by preserving so many
honest Men from Ruin. However the Counselor accepted the offer, and settled
one Martin for his Sub-delegate at St. Maloes, allowing him 500 Livres a Year:
Himself continued at Dunkirk, waiting till he could find out another Deputy for
the same price, that so he might go to Paris; and there enjoy the remaining
1000 Livres of his Pension. Accordingly he found one in a little time. But his
other Deputy, Mr. Martin, being a Man of no great Head, and his Office
requiring an Infinity of Sense and Precaution, he was soon suspected by the
Inhabitants of St. Maloes. Though he colored his Residence in that place with a
pretense of some small Commerce and Trade, that he had taken up only for a
feint; yet they observing his Diligence and Curiosity in going every Day to the
Haven to see what was done there, immediately gave the Court notice of him. The
Court sent Orders to have a watchful Eye upon him. At last, their Suspicion
being still inflamed by his Conduct, they stopped his Letters at the
Post House, which were addressed to Couture at one Madam Clerc's in Paris. At
the same time, Letters were sent to Couture from his other Correspondent at
Dunkirk: Both these were opened, and afterward sealed so artificially, that he
could not discover it. They observed that both the Correspondents made mention
of some Naval Preparations at these two places, and were very particular in
their Accounts. After that, 'twas found that the use he made of their
Intelligence, was to convey the same to Holland. This being sufficient
Evidence, they were all three taken up: Poor S. Martin fearing to be broken on
the Wheel, or at least hanged, would not stay till he was examined; but threw
himself headlong over a Rock, upon which he was imprisoned. Couture's Mother
having married a Council-Barrister for her second Husband, had so much Interest
at Court, as to get her Son's Punishment converted into perpetual Imprisonment:
By which means the Dunkirk-Deputy got off at the same rate. And so there was an
end of the Story.

To return. It Is very probable the Enemy discovered Monsieur Bart's Design by
some such means. However, the (...) Ships coming before Dunkirk, watched Night
and Day, for fear the Man that had already tricked 'em so often, should boast
once more of playing them a new trick. The day before the Prince's Departure,
the King was two Hours with him in private in the Castle of Marli; and there
being no Witnesses of what past between 'em, we can only make Conjectures about
it. What can we imagine it to be? unless we say, That his Majesty, who is so
well versed in the Art of Government, gave him Lessons how to behave upon his
Arrival in the Kindgdom he was called to, in case the Subjects should prove as
affectionate as they were represented to be, as well as in case they should
prove otherwise, which the Prince was very apprehensive of. For all their
Intelligence from Poland, by any other Hands than the Cardinal Primate, and the
Abbot of Polignac, gave a contrary Account of things to what these two
Ministers did. All the Merchants Letters from Dantzick, and the other
neighboring Places, spoke of nothing but of the great number of Creatures
retaining to the Duke of Sax^ny. The Letters that came to the Marchioness of
Bethunes, spoke to the same purpose; but when any body asked her what they
contained, she spoke as dubiously as she could, leaving them to guess more than
she had a mind to tell. Those who were quicksighted knew the cause of her
Silence; but they made no use of it, knowing that one is never thanked for
telling disagreeable News.

All this did not hi^der the Prince to set out. He took with him no Persons of
Note or Distinction, unless you put the Chevalier's de Lausun and Sill^ri in
that Rank; but the one being as poor as a Rat, let his Family be what it will,
and the other being a Cadet as well as he, and one whose Family has nothing but
a Chancellor for its greatest Ornament, I thought I might dispense with the
giving 'em that Title. The latter assumed the Name of Count Silleri at his
Departure, either because he hoped the Prince of Conti, whose Domestic he was,
would raise him to a great Fortune now he was called to a Throne; or because
having declared his Marriage with the Daughter of an Auditor of the Accounts,
that brought him some Money, he had a mind to leave her a more honorable Title
than that of a Chevalier's Lady. The Eve before the Prince's Departure, he
received the Visits of all the Court, who came to take leave of him. At Night
he supped with the Prince of Conde his Father-in-Law, and his whole Family;
after which, a great many Tears were shed, as if they should never see him
again. Perhaps, they knew that he could not set that Crown upon his Head
without coming to the Point of the Sword, and consequently that he had many
Dangers to go through. And in earnest that consideration is more than
sufficient to alarm those who are concerned for a Person; so that if Tears be
allowable upon any occasion, they are upon this. The Princess of Conti appeared
to be less moved than the rest; or at least, if she shed any Tears, they were
not so bitter as they might have been. Though there was no body that was so
nearly concerned for the Prince as her self; yet she thought it her Duty to
behave her self so, as to seem worthy of the great Fortune to which she
aspired. Not that she did not love the Prince very tenderly; but besides this
her Ambition, and the Desire of being a Queen, that had so great a place in her
Soul, she was not ill pleas d to see the Prince go from Court. She knew too
well that he was amorous to a foolish degree; and fed her self with the hopes
that the removal of his Mistress from his Eyes, would unhinge his Affection for
her.

The Prince rid Post to Dunkirk, his Equipage being sent before with all
possible Expedition. The Coffer which contained the 10000 Pistols that the King
gave him, happened to be broke underneath, and the Purse in which they were
being turned upside down, a great many of 'em were dropped about two are three
Leagues from Paris. By chance, 'twas upon a Market Day that they were lost; and
the Gonnesse Bakers having found 'em, no sooner understood whose they were,
than they delivered 'em up; for one of the Prince's Pages had come back to know
if any body had found 'em. It Is alleged, that the Prince had purposely left 3
or 400 Pistols out of the Bag, and put them in that sorry Coffer, in order to
leave with those that found 'em an eternal Memorial of his Departure from
France. It Is true, he is likely enough to do such a thing, for he is as generous
a Prince as any about the Court: And for that reason, 'twas said of him, that
if he showed himself to be of the House of Conde by his Bravery, he would not
do it by his Generosity. He took nothing to himself; and 'twas such a Prince as
he that the Poles wanted, in order, to sink the Memory of the Avarice of their
late King, or rather to make 'em sensible how advantageous his earlier Arrival
at the Throne had been to them; for he would never have sold a Palatinate, or
any other Place; his Humor was too much a stranger to the sordid Measures of
their late King, or at least, if ever he should take up with them, he must
needs be very much altered. Bart had prepar d every thing for putting to Sea,
and scarce allowed the Prince a few hours Sleep, till he weighed Anchor with a
fair Wind. He passed by his Enemies, without being perceived; and steered on
his Course without any Opposition; for they knew nothing of his passing till
'twas too late to pursue him.

All the Northern Princes were mightily concerned about the Transactions in
Poland, for all of 'em had Affairs to adjust with that Crown. However, the King
of Denmark did not act up to the Measures of the rest, who earnestly desired
that the Duke of Saxony should be preferred to this Prince; for he would never
grant Audience to a Minister that the Duke sent to solicit him to hinder the
Prince to enter the Baltic. He put him off with trifling Amusements, till the
Prince had past the Sundt, and then gave Audience to the Envoy; after which, he
waited with Patience and Tranquillity, till God should decide an Affair of that
consequence as he pleased. Some indeed allege that he offered underhand some
Ships to the Prince of Conti; and that the Prince only thanked him for his good
will, because he thought he had no occasion for 'em, and that the Success of
his Expedition depended rather upon the Affection and good Will of the Poles,
than upon any Succors he could receive from any other hand but the King, his
Master. After all, the Prince arrived before Dantzick, being encouraged to hope
that the Inhabitants of that City would open their Gates to him. This City was
to him, as 'twere, the Key of Poland; especially if he should be obliged to
dispute his Title to that Crown upon the point of the Sword. 'Twas by that
place only that he could expect Succors from France, since these could not
come otherwise than by Sea. But instead of answering his Expectation, the
Citizens sent Deputies to entreat him not to come ashore in their Territories;
by reason that in the present State of Affairs, they could not declare either
for him, or the Duke of Saxony, without exposing themselves to great hazards.
The Prince of Conti did not construe their Words literally, but as he ought to
have done. He presently perceived that their Words insinuated all the Enmity to
him that could be; and that they had only disguised their real Sentiments for
fear of displeasing the King, whose Power they were too well acquainted with,
to draw it upon their own Heads. At the same time, some French Merchants that
were settled there, came on Board his Ship, to offer him their Service in what
their Power could reach, and assured him that his Sentiments of the Matter were
very just. Nay, they gave him to know that the City had entered into a strict
Alliance with the Duke of Saxony, by the Mediation of the Elector of
Brandenburg, who had set it on foot as soon as he received Advice of his
Election; That if they might freely disclose their Thoughts to him, they would
not advise him to go ashore any where, without a strong French Army to guard
his Person: That they knew not what Reports might have been spread abroad to
persuade his Highness to come so far, but they were afraid he would only have
the trouble of returning without effecting any thing: That the Poles who were
formerly Friends to the French, began to take up the same Passion against them
that other Nations had: That the Glory of the King had struck them with fear as
well as the others: That they were made to believe that the King aspired to an
Universal Monarchy; and that the fear of becoming his Subjects, scared them
from preferring a Prince of his Blood to their Throne.

Though these Merchants had not given this Account to the Prince, he had
quickly found it out himself. Instead of that crowd of new Subjects that the
Cardinal Primate had made him to expect before his Departure from France, there
came scarce any one to visit him on Board; most of those that came, were only
moved so to do by their Curiosity; so that excepting a very small number that
offered to pay him the usual Honors of Sovereignty, and treated him as King,
there was no body that did any thing like it: But he would never suffer either
these, or his own Retinue to do it, for fear his Reign should be short-lived.
He gave them to know, that he was not so over-fond of a Crown, as to purchase
it at the Expense of his Honor; that he only came thither in compliance with
the Cardinal Primate's Request to Succor their Nation; which, as he alleged,
the Duke of Saxony mean'd to oppress by a boundless Ambition; that the Cardinal
had promised to draw together an Army out of hand to enable him to satisfy his
desire; that when he should have done what he pretended to in serving them, he
would not then declin^ ^he Title of their Defender; but as for that of King he
would never accept of it, till things were upon another foot than what they
were at that time; and indeed they could not be upon a worse foot than they
were, with Reference to him. The Duke of Saxony, after his being proclaimed
King by his own Party, had not only possessed himself of the City and Castle of
Cracow, but likewise of that of Warsaw, where the Kings of Poland used to
Reside. He had got himself Crowned in one of these two places, partly by Force,
and partly by good Will; while the Cardinal Primate protested equally against
his Coronation and his Election.

The Prince of Conti finding that the Duke was thus Master of the Heart of the
Country, and that Dantzick was but too partial to him, used all his Efforts to
gain the Governor of Mariembourg, a place that was not far distant from the
place where he was. Could he have mastered that, and been succored by his
Party, he would have made it a place of Arms. The Governor of that place made
as if he listened to his Proposal, in order to make him speak French; but the
Prince being not in a Humor to do it without seeing further into Affairs, gave
him only conditional Promises; upon which the Governor, who had not yet made up
Matters with the Duke of Saxony, endeavored to do it, though without acquainting
him that he did it, because he could have no Security from his Rival. The
Generals of the Army of the Crown, and that of Lithuania, came likewise to feel
the Prince of Conti's Pulse, and to try if they could finger his Bills of
Exchange. They had hitherto pretended to entertain a Correspondence with the
Abbot of Polignac, upon the magnificent Promises he had made 'em. That
Ambassador thought he might promise any thing, so as to secure this Crown,
without observing that he had to do with People as cunning as himself, and even
engaged underhand to the Duke of Saxony, from whom they expected to draw more
considerable Sums than from him. The Prince of Conti had no mind to bid so high
as the Ambassador, because lying is not the Character of a Prince, as it is of
those Ministers, who commonly think the direct contrary of what they speak.
Accordingly he replied, that he was obliged to them for the tender of their
Service, but if they pretended to be paid beforehand, he willingly dispensed
with it; that he was ready to bargain with them about what he should give 'em,
provided they made his Election good; but if they mean'd only to take his
Money, and afterward to excuse themselves upon the Plea of the impossibility
of making good their promises, he would choose rather to keep his Money, than
expose himself to future Repentance for giving it away to no purpose. These
Generals, or rather their Deputies, hearing him speak in this fashion,
perceived quickly that he was too long-headed for them; and having dropped all
designs of pulling a Feather from him, did underhand advise the Duke of Saxony
to endeavor by all possible means to seize upon his Person. To bring this
about, instead of declaring openly for the Duke, they made their Address to the
Cardinal Primate, as if they had been troubled to quit an Interest that they
were joined to by Inclination. The Cardinal suffered himself to be amused for
some time by glittering Hopes, and even fed the Prince with them. He
endeavored to persuade him that he would speedily send him an Army capable to
reduce the Duke of Saxony; which should oblige the Prince to wait the Execution
of his Promises, notwithstanding the Inconveniences he strugled with upon the
Sea.

This Affair was so long in dependence, that the Peace after dwindling for some
Months, was concluded before it came to be determined. The Princes of the
Empire were forced to submit to the pleasure of stronger Powers. The French
recognis'd the Prince of Orange as King of England; and that Prince coming then
to the Hague, the Plenipotentiaries of France began to pay him the Honor and
Respect that was due to the Dignity they had acknowledged to be his. However,
it happened that Monsieur Harlai being accustomed to call him by another Name
than that of King, used his wonted Expression in a Conference where he was
present; but being at the same time sensible of his fault, he made the best
Reparation he could. Madam Harlai, the Chancellor's Daughter, having gone to
meet her Husband in Holland; and having the Curiosity to see that Prince whom
all the French have a particular Esteem for, notwithstanding the harm he has
done 'em: This Lady, I say, employed some body to desire Audience of him in
some place or other. The New King would not give it her at his own Apartments,
but sent her word to be at the Princess of Vaudemont's at a certain hour. Madam
Harlai had all the reason in the World to be satisfied with his Civility and
Courtesy. As for Monsieur Harlai, he to act the part of a good Courtier,
acquainted my Lord Albemarle, his British Majesty's new Favorite, who began
then to have as great an Ascendant in the King's Affection, as ever my Lord
Portland had: He acquainted him, I say, That he desired his Master's Picture.
My Lord Albemarle promised to give it him; but withal, entreated him to have
patience for some time, because his Master was upon his Return to England, and
he was afraid he could not spare the time to let it be drawn. Whether that Lord
forgot his Promise, or whether the King of Britain was so taken up with Affairs
of Consequence, that my Lord could not have the opportunity of making good his
Promise; whatever was in it, four or five Months passed, and Monsieur Harlai
had resolved not to think of it farther, when he received Information at Paris
that my Lord's Trumpeter staid in his Hall to speak with him. At first he could
not conjecture what should bring him so far from home, for he was far from
thinking that his Master should have called to mind his Request, after letting
so much time slip without sending to him. But after all, he found that his
Errand was to bring him the Picture. My Lord had caused a magnificent Frame to
be made for it at Paris, because that sort of Work is better done there than in
England. The Trumpeter took care to let him know so much, to show what Pains
his Master took to content him. Monsieur Harlai thought this an odd way of
conveying a Picture; but Foreigners have their peculiar Customs as we have
ours; and so he was even obliged to take the Complement together with the
Charges. He gave the Trumpeter a handsome Present; and that being all that this
Messenger wanted, he returned forthwith to his own Country.

Of all the King's Plenipotentiaries at Ryswick, Monsieur Harlai, as it is
alleged, bore the least Figure as to Sense, but he bore the greatest on
another score, I mean his Quality, and the first places of the Robe, which for
a long time have been filled by his Ancestors. Upon this account he had had the
whole, or at least the greatest part of the Honor of the Treaty, if the People
had found any thing in it to their advantage: But 'twas so far from that, that
all Persons regreted secretly, and even publicly all the Restitutions that the
King obliged himself to in that Treaty, as much as if they had been to part
with their own Estates. It must be owned that this fancy was in some measure
foolish; for, besides that his Majesty knew a great deal better than they what
was convenient for him, and his Kingdom; according to all the measures of good
Sense, they ought to have desired nothing more than an end of the War, in order
to prevent their being exposed to the Evils they must of necessity undergo, as
long as it should continue. But, as People do not always act conformably to
Reason, so they made with Reluctance the very Fireworks, that they were
commanded to make, pursuant to the usual Custom upon all such Occasions.
Insomuch that the Commissaries of the Wards were obliged to back their
Injunctions with the Penalty of a large Fine; and without that they would never
have agreed to it. However, even that did not scare 'em from censuring all that
had been concluded upon. To this purpose they handed about a pretty pleasant
Story, which shew^d how little they were satisfied with Monsieur Harlai That
Magistrate had a Son that was as Foppish as his Father was Grave; for in
earnest, the Father resembled the two Courtiers of whom Monsieur de la
Feuillade said, That when his Majesty had a mind to drink his Liquor cool, his
Cup-bearers needed only to cool the Bottles by placing 'em between these two.
This Son, I say, was so far from resembling his Father, that he had always
acted up to the Character I here give him. He was at Ryswick when the Affairs
of that Negotiation were brought to a Conclusion; but neither the Solemnity of
the place, nor his Father's Character could make him wiser than usually.
However, Monsieur Harlai having sent him to the King with the News of the
signing of the Treaty, he stay^d so long by the way, that the News were known
at Court thirty Hours before his Arrival. This slowness did not become a young
Man, especially one of so much Fire, who used always to walk like Lightning.
Upon which account the World was amused with it, but at last they began to say,
That they ought not to think it strange, since for certain the Father was
confounded with the Son; that it was the Son that had made the Treaty, as
appeared from his Impatience in signing it, notwithstanding the prejudice it
did to the King and the State; and that 'twas the Father who brought the News
to Court, which was equally manifest from the tediousness he showed upon the
Road, for fear of wounding his Gravity. The principal foundation of this
Raillery was, that the Spaniards were so mortified by the taking of Barcelona,
that they sought for a Peace at any rate; and that whatever Proposal the French
Plenipotentiaries should have made after an Action of that importance, the
Spaniards would have agreed to it, and consented that the King should retain
Luxemburg as an equivalent for that place, if the Plenipotentiaries had been so
wise, as to take the advantage of the Consternation they were in.

Though the People by this Conduct seemed to control the King's Actions, yet
his Majesty was not ill pleased to find 'em of that mind. For as it was a Mark
of their Folly, so it showed their concern for his Majesty's Interest. Whatever
was in it, they scarce had the sense to observe that neither Monsieur Harlai,
nor any of his Colleagues, had done any thing without the King's Orders. But we
must not pretend that that sort of Cattle are ever governed by Reason; Capricio
and Humor is the ordinary Standard and Rule of their Thoughts. In effect,
those who but two Months before cried out for a Peace with all the Passion
imaginable, had no sooner got it, but they wished the War had continued. Their
Reason was this: Instead of lessening the Prices of things which had been very
dear for some time, by reason of the preceding bad Seasons, they saw the
Markets still rising; besides, that the Wrath of God was seen in the Barrenness
of the Earth, we may attribute this Affliction to another Cause, occasioned by
the War. The King had been obliged to Re-coin the Money twice, that it might
serve instead of an Edict. Indeed he had got considerably by this Project, for
he raised the Louis-d'ors to 14 Livres, and the Silver Crowns to 3 Livres 12
Sous, though the one was not commonly worth above 11 Livres, and the other
three* Now the King for some Politic Considerations keeping up the
Denomination of the Money, it came to pass, that what they used to have at easy
Rates from Foreign Countries proved very dear, by reason of the loss of the
Exchange, which was a full sixth part.

The Prince of Conti did not trouble his Head with these matters. He thought
upon nothing, but either seeing the effect of the Cardinal Primate's Promises,
or returning to see his Mistress. His Eminence had retired to the Castle of
Cowits, where his Partisans assembled several times to no purpose. Many of 'em
complained that Abbot Polignac had fed 'em with the hopes of things that were
not like to be put in Execution. He had gone so far, as to promise that they
should not want either the Money, or the Troops of France; for that being the
only Affair that he minded, he wished that the King, in like manner, might have
nothing else to mind. The Duke of Saxony finding that they began to complain of
that Minister, caus^d a Body of German Troops to enter the Country. This put
those, who were most exposed, into a Consternation; and some of 'em making some
advances toward the making of their Peace with the Duke, the Prince no sooner
received the News, but he resolved to return to France; but at the same time,
to make the City of Dantzick repent of their giving his Rival the Preference,
he ordered Bart to seize some of their Ships that lay just by him. They had
anchored in the Road, with a design to sail up to the Port with their Cargoes;
but Bart obliging them to follow him, carried 'em to Copenhagen, where the
Prince was forced to put in by stress of Weather. At the same time, the King
stopped all the Dantzick Ships in his Harbors, which makes it probable, that
the Prince of Conti's Orders to Bart, did not come so much from himself as from
the King. The Prince who had been very uneasy in his Voyage, was more so when
he came to Copenhagen, notwithstanding that the King of Denmark showed a
particular Esteem for his Person. He set a part a great number of Houses for
the Prince and his Retinue, and the Wind continuing contrary for some Days,
that little time seemed so long to that Prince, that I doubt if the six Years,
that according to the English Historians, one of their Kings spent in Ireland,
before he could find a favorable minute to return to London: I doubt, I say,
Whether these six Years were longer to that King, than those few Days were to
the Prince? The occasion of his uneasiness was, that he was still in Love, and
that all the Comfort he had, was to wait for the Postdays, that he might hear
from the Party he loved.

The Dantzickers made what Reprisals they could; they arrested the French
Merchants at Dantzick, and seized their Effects. But after all, they knew very
well that 'twas not proper for them to Quarrel with a King, that the greatest
part of the Forces of Europe had in vain attempted to bring down; and upon that
view they had recourse to the King of Denmark's Mediation to procure the
releasing of their Ships. The King made 'em stay some time before he granted
their Request; but at last, believing that the Mortification he had given 'em,
was sufficient to make 'em remember it, he accommodated the matter to their
Satisfaction. Abbot Polignac was astonished at the Prince's Return, and the
Conduct of a great many, who after siding with his Party, began to Desert him.
At the same time notice was given to him from the Duke of Saxony, that he ought
to retire with Expedition out of the Country, or if he did not, that he could
not answer for the Security of his Person. The Abbot did not think it his Duty
to wait for a second Message, but set out incognito without any Retinue, and
ordered his Equipage to make toward the Sea, in order to Imbarque there as
well as himself; but they were robbed before they could reach the Ships that
stayed for 'em. The Abbot did not know, whether the Court which had given him
no Orders for his Retreat, would be pleased with it; and therefore he stayed
some time at Hamburg to know the Orders of the Court. He wrote to the Marquess
of Torcy, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, but received no Answer; and
having complained of this to his Friends in that Country, their Answer was not
very satisfactory. They told him, That the Court was very Angry with him, and
that the Cardinal Prima^e did not cease to do him disservices. In earnest, his
Eminence wrote a great many things to France to his prejudice; he even
insinuated that he had applied to his own use part of the Money sent him on the
Prince of Conti's behalf. It Is believed that this Accusation was false, and
that 'twas only the Cardinal's chagrin upon seeing himself abandoned that made
him speak in that fashion. It Is true, the Abbot was Poor, and that some time
before he was reduced to such Straits that his Family would have wanted the
Necessaries of Life, if he had not found Friends to assist him. The Cardinal
who knew his Straits, and likewise knew that some time after he had paid his
Debts', probably grounded his Charge upon that Circumstance. But let it be as
it will; though a Man be never so Innocent; it is a great Misfortune to lie
under an Accusation. The Court sent him Orders to retire to an Abbey he had in
Normandy; whether it was that they credited the Accusation, or, which is more
likely, that they mean'd to make him answerable for the event.

The Duke of Saxony having thus unhinged his Competitor, thought he wanted
nothing to complete his good Fortune, but the Pope's Favor. As soon as he was
proclaimed King, he had sent an Envoy to solicit his Holiness to favor his
Interest. But as that Court moves but slowly, especially when there is any thing
of Religion in the case; so his Holiness would not grant Audience to the Envoy,
till he was fully assured that that Duke had abjured Lutheranism. A Certificate
of the Abjuration was brought to him, but he suspected it mightily. It came
only from the Hands of a Bishop of his Family, who might be suspected to be
gained by that Prince, because their common Grandeur was concerned upon that
occasion. The Duke having never entertained any Correspondence with that Court,
was not thoroughly versed in their Politics, and was so far from seeing through
the true Spring of his Holiness's Motions, that he imagined the Pope to be in
the Prince of Conti's Interest. Accordingly, as soon as the Prince returned to
France, he sent a second Envoy to the Pope to represent to his Holiness, that
he needed not to continue any longer in the Interest of a Prince, who by his
Retreat had given sufficient evidence, that he had dropped his Pretensions to
the Crown. In the mean time, the Pope was far from being biased that way. Had
he been obliged to side with one or the other; he had not scrupled to fall in
with the Duke. He was an Italian, i. e. no great Friend to Frenchmen; besides,
he was by Birth, a Subject of the King of Spain, which Quality did not allow
him to depart from the Sentiments of the House of Austria. However, being Head
of the Catholic Church, and upon that score obliged to observe Measures on all
hands, he sent Orders to his Nuncio at Cologn to go for that Country. He
ordered him, under the pretense of promoting the Interest of Religion, to
reconcile the Cardinal Primate and the Duke. The Cardinal showed all along a
violent Resolution to raise a Civil War, rather than be without Satisfaction
for the Affront offered him by the Bishop of Cujavia, by Crowning the Duke. He
alleged, and justly indeed, That the right of Coronation was lodged in the
Church of Gnesne, of which he was Archbishop. The Pope had another Nuncio
already upon the spot, who of his own head did not fail to anticipate the
Orders given to this. For he knew very well that whatever he did for the
Interest of the House of Austria, would be approved by his Holiness; and
accordingly had privately embarked in the Duke's Party.

Some time being spent in all these Transactions, the Year came to an end,
which was the time alloted by his Majesty for the Conclusion of the Marriage of
the Duke of Burgundy to the Princess of Savoy. Every day he liked the Proposal
better and better; and the young Princess had such a winning way, that he loved
her as tenderly, as if she had been his own Daughter. The Duke was but weak for
one of his Age, insomuch, that though the Ceremony was to be performed out of
hand, yet he was not to enjoy her till he passed 18 Years, and she 14. In
former times, when the Marquess of Louvois married his eldest Daughter to the
Duke of Rocheguyon, the Son of the Duke of Rochefoucaut, the Consummation of
the Marriage was not put so long off; but the Relations on both sides made a
mutual Compact, that the new-married Couple should not see one another but once
a Week, namely on Thursdays, and that they should live in Celibacy without any
mutual Commerce for the rest of the Week. This made 'em always long for the
arrival of the appointed Day of meeting, and inspired 'em with a mutual
Eagerness: And if all married Persons were confined to the some measures,
perhaps they would not be so soon weary of one another, as we commonly find
'em. However, the King having regulated the matter as above, Preparations were
made for celebrating the Marriage, which were expensive to an unparalled
degree. Nay, his Majesty intimated that he would take it well if every body
would act up to his Abi^ity in honoring the Festival. 'Twas not the literal
performance of this desire, that would have satisfied his Majesty; if that had
only been required, the Nuptial Ceremonies would have been a very mean thing,
for the charge of the War, and of the Taxes, that still continued during its
whole course, had so impoverished the Subjects, that they could scarce be
poorer than they were. So that all the Courtiers, and even the Military
Officers that happened to be then at Court, put another Construction upon the
matter. They knew where the Kings meaning lay; and all of 'em being ready to do
any thing to please his Majesty, straightened themselves to obtain that end. The
charge they were at was altogether extraordinary; nay, some of 'em bought
Clothes that were worth more Money than the intrinsic Value of their Estates.
I do not speak by way of Amplificacation, but deliver a naked Truth; witness a
great many Land and Sea-Officers, who laid out 5 or 600 Crowns for one Suit of
Clothes, though at the same time a great part of 'em were not worth 10 Crowrs a
Year of Patrimonial Estate. Herein lies the Folly of the French; and though I
am a Frenchman my self, and perhaps as great a Fool as others, yet I cannot
abstain from censuring our common Folly.

After the Conclusion of the Peace, there was so great a Confluence of
Foreigners at Paris, that in the Suburbs of S Germains only, there was about 15
or ^6000. This Multitude made the Lodgings so excessive dear in that place,
that the Houses which were let at 1200 Livres during the War, were raised now
to ^00 Crowns. In a short time, the numbe^ of these Foreigners increased to
above one half; insomuch, that in a little time after, or about the beginning
of the succeeding Year, they were computed to 36000 in that very Suburbs. And
as they had been informed, that, during the War, France had not only been
exhausted of Men, but also of Treasure, this being a Report spread abroad on
purpose to amuse them, and make them believe that France would be very glad to
Truckle to the Will of her Enemies; they were extremely surprised to find (at
their Arrival) every thing in a different Disposition to what they were made
believe, while at home. They saw that great Town did not only abound in People,
as much as ever, but that Luxury and Pleasu^e were arrived to such a degree in
it, that the meanest Citizen was more splendid than the Persons o^ Quality in
their Country. In effect, the greater the Mise^ies were in private Families,
the more they endeavour^d to blind the World with sumptuous Appearances.
However, these Measures served only to augment 'em: besides, it must be owned,
that the most part of the Women used this Luxury at the expense o^ their
Honor. Few or none of them but had her Gallant; and none of these Gallants was
esteem^d, but in proportion to what he lavish^d upon hi^ Mist^ess. As the War
had rais^d a vast number of People, who apply^d themselves to business, by
which they gam'd a great deal of Money; so having come very easily by it, they
as freely lavished it. A great many, who had formerly been glad to have got
Shoes to their bare Feet, did now bestow Coaches on their Misses. Insomuch,
that in 7 or 8 Years time, the number of Coaches was increased to above 2000.
Gold and Azure were to be seen in every Family, which extremely surprised these
Strangers, who, before their Arrival, had heard that all Paris could not afford
either Silver-Spoon or Fork, and that the King had pillaged them of all, to
support the Expenses of the War. It Is certain, that the War had impoverished a
great many, but such were to be seen rather in the Country, than in Paris. On
the contrary, Paris had never been either so Rich, or so Magnificent, there
being 160000000 Millions expended in it, only by the Parties that were formed
there since the War, without reckoning what others might have gained by a
thousand different ways. For while some got infinitely by the Partisans, in
lending them Money upon extravagant Interest; others applied themselves to the
way of Victualling, or to some other thing, so that it might be justly
alleged, as War had ruined some, it had raised others so prodigiously, that
they were no more to be known for the same Persons: So different were they now,
from what they had been formerly. There was such an infinite number of
Sharpers, and such like Scoundrels, who had raised themselves from the very
Scum of the People, to vast Riches, by sucking the Blood of the poor People.
This was reckoned so good a Trade, that even some Marquisses applied themselves
to it. Thus you might have seen one embrace this Trade, without regarding what
was said, either of his own Relations, or his Wifes, who was either
Granddaughter, or Sister, to a High President. As for himself, there was one
of his Name, a Lieutenant General in the King's Army; but as there is a
difference betwixt Relations, the Lieutenant General behaved like a Man of
Quality and Merit, while he acted like a wretched Miscreant, or at least like
one, who thought it no Crime to dishonor his Name and Family. If the Strangers
abovementioned were amazed to find every thing at Paris so different from the
Relation they had of 'em at home, they were much more astonished to see the
Solemnity of the Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy and the Princess at
Versailles. The Ceremony was performed with all the Splendour imaginable; they
gave a great many Balls, where all the Persons of Quality, retaining to the
Court, of both Sexes, were present. All the Ladies were clothed in Black
Velvet, set out with precious Stones, that cast the brightest Luster
imaginable: The Men were also adorned with Diamonds. As on such Occasions the
Pick-pockets of Paris are very intentive upon their Business; so they came in
whole Swarms to keep Holy Day at Versailles, adorned as others were, and,
abating for their Countenances, that are hardly well known in that place, one
would have thought they were all Persons of the first Rank. The extraordinary
Crowd, as one may easily imagine, afforded them sufficient opportunity to make
up, with considerable advantage, the Expense of their Ornaments. A great many,
after their return home, found at their leisure that the Diamonds they had
carried to the Solemnity were gone. The Rogues had taken from some one, from
others two, and so more or less; and they might repute themselves happy, who
came off free. Even the Duchess of Burgundy did not escape the common Fate of
those, who had suffered by these Pick-pockets. They ventured to cut away a part
of her Gown, where she had a large Buckle of Diamonds. But, what is surprising,
the Chevalier of Sully had the same fate, and what he lost, was by the hand of
a Person of the first Quality: He caught him in the fact, and took the liberty
to tell it to one of his Friends. His Majesty overheard it, and desired to be
further informed of the matter, but was extremely astonished, when they
whispered to him the Name of this young Pick-pocket; he forbid to Challenge him
upon it, being willing to save his Honor, for the Respect he had for his
Relations; however his Charity served to no purpose, for not only all the Court
knew the Secret, but also all Paris.

Upon the Marriage-day, the new married Couple were put to Bed; but the
Curtains being undrawn, there were a great many Witnesses of their Actions,
only in order to see if they lay close to one another. The King, to give them a
sufficient opportunity, caused draw the Curtains, while the Duke of
Beauvilliers, and the other Officers of the young Prince, stood just by to
over-hear what might pass; but nothing having passed, they soon undrew the
Curtains. That young Princess kept Assemblies the same day, and the following
days. Her Court was very throng, and the Ladies strove who should show her most
Respect. There happened a difference betwixt the Princess of Har^ourt, and the
young Duchess of Sully, Daughter to the Duke of Coaislin: She was Niece to the
Duchess's Lude, Lady of Honor to the Princess. This Relation came by her
Husband, who was the Duchess, or Brother's Son; she wanted her Assistance in
regard of her Youth, not being in Condition to enter the Lists with a Princess,
whose only business had been (since she was in the World) to ingratiate her
self with all in Power, from the highest to the lowest Minister. But instead of
the Assistance she expected from her, the Aunt advised her to yield to her
Adversary. All the Duchesses were highly incensed against the Duchess of Lude;
finding she had tarnish'd their Honor by so scandalous an Advice. In effect,
though such sort of Disputes had often fallen out, not only betwixt the
Princesses and the Duchesses, but even betwixt their Husbands; yet, perhaps
such another as this had never fallen out before. The Dukes and Duchesses had
always maintained their Rank, as if St. Louis had begot them. The late Duke of
Montauzier, and the late Duchess of N^^^lles, stretched the Affair yet further;
the one against Monsieur Le Grand, a Prince of the House of Lorrain, and the
other against the Duchess of Bouillon. Though the Duchess of Noailles, was only
the Daughter of a Farmer of the Revenues; yet she was sensible that in France,
Nobility came not by the Wives, but by the Husbands; she sheltered her self
from any Indignity by the Character of her Husband, whom she took to be beyond
Reproach. However it ordinarily falls out in a Difference betwixt two Parties,
that they upbraid one another, even to the five hundredth Generation. The
Duchess of Bouillon produced Records, by which she made it appear, that Anthony
of Noailles had been formerly Master of the Household to one of her Husband's
Ancestors. In fine, this Affair enraged the Parties to that degree, that they
called one another all the Ill Names they could think on. His Majesty was at
last obliged to impose Silence by his Authority; he forbad them expressly to
proceed farther, without deciding any thing in the matter, that caused their
heats. I do not know, if the Duchess of Lude was afraid of these Ill Names in
doing what she had done, or if she thought, because the King had given the
Preference to the Dukes before the Princes of the House of Lorrain, the last
time he made a Promotion of Knights of the Order, that therefore it ought to be
the same in regard of the Women, but it passed after the manner I have told you.

Though the Peace had been made a pretty while, yet none hitherto reaped the
Fruits of it. The Commerce was as dead as in the time of War; whether it was
attributed to the high value of the French Coin, that continued still at the
same Rate, or that the King believed he could subsist without other Nations,
while others must have recourse to him, there was yet no advance made to make
it flourish. In the mean time, there came some Ships from England and Holland,
to take in Wine and Paper at Bourdeaux and Rouen. They bought along other
Merchandise to be sold there. But the Tariff not being yet regulated between
all the Parties, and the Treaty of Ryswick having only mentioned, that it
should be put upon the same foot as it was in the Years 1665 and 1666, which
was not yet done; this together with the loss of twenty in the hundred by the
Money, obliged these Ships to return without either selling or buying any thing
in these Ports. About the same time, the States General sent Deputies to the
King, to demand the Execution of that Article. They applied themselves to the
Marquess of Torcy, Secretary for Foreign Affairs, but Monsieur Ponchartrain
having the Charge of that Commerce, they were remitted to him for the Execution
of their Demands. These Deputies were exceedingly well versed in Affairs of
that nature, and the States having an entire Confidence in them, had given them
a Full Power to Act as Commissaries in the Regulation of the Tariff. Monsieur
Pontchartrain heard them upon the Matter, but being Judicious and Politic, he
put them off with fair Words, until he had acquainted the King with the Affair.
The Commerce of Holland was of far less advantage to France, than that of
England, because they draw a great deal more Money from the one than from the
other. In effect, the Hollanders Import more Merchandise into France than they
Export; whereas England on the contrary Exports more than they Import. So that
the first carries out the Coin, and the other brings it in. This made them
resolve to keep up the Tariff as high as possible, in regard of the
Holland-Trade, its Imposts or Customs, while they designed to lower it in
regard of the English; while they expected the Hollanders should come to Paris
to terminate that Affair, they resolved to send to London to regulate what
regarded that Nation. Ponchartrain pitched upon Monsieur Phelipe^ux D'Herbeaut,
his Relation, for that purpose; he was first Commissary of the Marine, under
Monsieur de Maurepas, who had left him the whole Managment of it. He had the
Character of Commissary-General for regulating the Commerce betwixt the two
Nations; but though his Commission was presently dispatched, yet he stayed a
long time after. In the mean time, the Court named other Commissaries to treat
with the Hollanders, but as they had no design to terminate the Affair to their
Satisfaction, so it continues to this day at the same pass.

While these matters were a transacting, the King named Ambassadors to go to
all the Foreign Courts; and instead of sending Gentlemen of the Law, as had
been always practiced in France, he employed Persons of Quality, or Officers of
the Army. He thought, if they could join the Knowledge of the Cabinet to the
Experience they had acquired in warlike Affairs, they would be more
accomplished for his Service upon all occasions. He chose the Marquess of
Villars, Lieutenant General of the Army, for the Court of Vienna; and the
Marquess of Harcourt, also a Lieutenant General, for his Ambassador to Spain,
who during the War, had acquired a Reputation equal to any; and could he
perform the same thing in his Embassy, which he had done at the Head of a
Flying Army, no more could be expected of him; but that being a hard Task, his
Friends could hardly hope for it. He was going to a Court, where the very name
of French is suspected, much more at a time, when he seemed very earnest to
create all the Obstacles imaginable to the Emperor's Designs of bringing the
Succession of his Catholic Majesty to fall upon the King of the Romans, his
eldest Son, or that failing, upon the Archduke, his second Son. Philip IV. his
present Majesty's Father, had left it by Testament, to the last, though he was
not Born at that time; but the Spaniards showing no Inclination to execute it,
his Imperi^l Majesty labored to engage them to favor the King of the Romans.
He thought, that being his eldest Son, he not only deserved better that
Dignity, which was much more solid than that of Emperor, though not altogether
so splendid; but he expected also to secure the Fortune of his Son the better,
if he could unite these two Qualities in one Person. The Queen of Spain being
his Sister-in-law, he did not doubt of her favoring his Design; and the Count
of Harrach, his Ambassador at that Court, had a Commission to propose it to
her. The Queen joined Issue with the Ambassador in all his Sentiments; and his
Imperial Majesty being hitherto so prosperous in his Designs, as to get the
Queen's Creatures into his Catholic Majesty's Council, and she being very
industrious to gain the other Members, they met often to consider how to behave
in the Scene they were to Act. The Count of Harrach insinuated to the Queen and
them, that the best Method they could fall upon in this Juncture, was, to put
the Government of the Frontiers into German-hands, or into the Hands of Persons
well-affected to the Emperor. The Prince of Darmstadt, who signalized himself
in the Defense of Barcelona, was proposed to be Viceroy of Catalonia; Don
Francisco de Velasco, having rendered himself unworthy of that Command, by
suffering himself to be surpised in his Camp. The Government of Milan seemed
too good to escape one of his Imperial Majesty's Creatures, as did also the
Vice-Royalty of Navarre; for the Count of Harrach supposed very reasonably that
it was by attacking of one of these three places, if not all the three at once,
that the King of France meant to make good his Pretensions to the Spanish
Succession, immediately after the Death of that Monarch. The Queen, and those
of the King's Council, who were in her Interest, found it difficult to manage
that point; for though the Spaniards were too wise to own their Sentiments
openly, yet they had not the least Inclination to own either the Emperor's
eldest or youngest Son, for their Sovereign. They were also of the same Opinion
in regard of the Dauphin and his Sons; though some of the French Emissaries
endeavored to insinuate to them secretly, that if they would choose either the
Duke of Anjou, or the Duke of Berry, they could form their tender Years
according to their own Model, insomuch that it would be impossible for them to
perceive they had ever been born Frenchmen. And by these means they labored
to extirpate the Antipathy, that was natural to the two Nations; but that being
a hard Point to manage, they always rejected it with scorn. They could never
conceive why they would deprive the Prince of Bavaria of that Succession, for
it was naturally his Right, after the Renunciation his Most Christian Majesty
had made of it, when he married the Infanta of Spain. Others wished, since the
King had no Heirs begot of his own Body, the Crown might fall to some Grandee
of Spain. They believed they should be more happy under such a Person, than
under any Foreign Prince. For such a one being trained up from his Cradle in
their Customs and Manners, they could bear more easily with him than with any
other. For, generally, all Men inherit the Genius of the Country, where they
are Born, and it is hard for them ever to change their natural Inclination.

Such was the Disposition of the Affairs of that Nation, when the Queen of
Spain made use of all her Interest to have the Prince of Darmstadt made
Viceroy of Catalonia, Prince Vaudemont Governor of Milan, and Prince Eugene of
Savoy Viceroy of Navarre. For she not only looked upon them as well-affected
to the Emperor, but also very capable to defend against the French, the Places
committed to their care. They had distinguished themselves upon a thousand
occasions; and Prince Eugene was actually employed against the Turks, with whom
the Emperor was in continual War. That Barbarous Nation owed its Preservation
only to the Diversion, was made upon the Rhine, when his Imperial Majesty was
engaged against France. But now the Peace being concluded betwixt these two
Potentates, the Emperor thought of no less than swallowing up the Turks in a
Campaign or two at most, and dislodging 'em of all their Possessions in Europe.
But whether that Prince meant to take his ease after so tedious a War, or, what
is more likely, that true Policy obliged him to desire a Peace, there were
already some Proposals made, that had a favorable hearing from both Parties,
and perhaps without that Prince Eugene, who about this time saw himself at the
Head of the Emperor's Army, would hardly accept of the Office of Viceroy of
Navarre. But now finding himself obliged to put up the Sword, he was glad, that
by the Emperor's Influence, the Queen of Spain had that Deference for him.
However, her success in that was not so favorable as it was on the behalf of
the Princes of Darmstadt and Vaud^mont. For the Services of the first at
Barcelona pleading highly in his Favor, she carried it for him without any
Opposition; but she met with more difficulty in regard of the Government of
Milan. Some would have it continued to the Marquess of Leganez, who was there
already, or conferred upon some Grandee of Spain; but that was far from the
Queen's mind; she meant rather to strip them of what they possessed than
provide them with new Governments. The Duke of Medina Celi, one of the most
considerable Grandees of Spain, and most beloved of the People, was Viceroy of
Naples. He had passed some years in that Employ, and places of that nature are
usually triennial in Spain; yet she would gladly have it conferred upon one of
her Creatures, but her Friends thought it not convenient, and rather advised
her to the contrary to continue it to him; and gave for their reason, that she
ought to be very cautious in bringing him to Spain in the present Posture of
Affairs; which would not fail to awake the People's Affection for him, and
consequently to make some Obstacles to the Emperor's Designs.

The Reasons which obliged the Emperor to strike up a Peace with the Port, were
these. His Power became formidable, not only to the Princes of the Empire, but
even to his other Allies. Besides, knowing his Pretensions to the Succession of
Spain, they not only opposed it privately, but even avowedly. The Princes who
granted him Succors against the Turks, spoke of withdrawing them. The New King
of England, before he was owned by France, offered his Mediation for agreeing
the Parties. He had sent two Ambassadors to the Port on purpose, to propose it
to the Grand Seignior; but they both died upon their way thither. This
appearing very extraordinary, because the Sultan's Interest seemed altogether
opposite to his Conduct; and, besides the Death of these two Persons affording
matter of Speculation upon a great many things, some believed assuredly they
had been poisoned. This might have discouraged his Britannick Majesty from
sending any more Ambassadors into that Country; but considering that the Turks
their rejecting of the Peace, was only grounded upon the Diversion was made in
their favor, and that possibly they would lay aside their Obstinacy, when
convinced of their Error, he assumed his first Resolution, nor was he in the
least deceived; for the Grand Seignior accepted of his offer now with as much
warmth, as he had rejected it before with indifference. He accepted of his
Mediation, and the States-General's, which was offered to him at the same time.
And being satisfied that in the Peace they had made with France, they had
easily surmounted all the Difficulties that commonly attend the Preliminaries
of Treaties, they mean'd to follow the same Method in this. The Emperor
understanding, that the Turks had accepted of the Mediation that was offered
'em, gave notice of it to the Potentates, who were interested with him in the
War; namely, the Republics of Venice and Poland, and the Great Duke of
Muscovy. They were mutually engaged in an Offensive and Defensive League; so he
being resolved to do nothing without their Consent, desired them to give in
their Pretensions in Writing, while the Parties should have condescended upon
the place of assembling. For his own part, he put in his, which he did not
expect would be granted, because the Jealousy the Mediators, as well as other
Princes had of his Power, obliged him to make an end of these Differences. He
pretended that the Turks, by the Teeaty that was on foot, ought to be obliged
to give him up Belgrade and Temeswaer, with all the Right of Sovereignty, that
he possessed in Transylvania. At the bottom, these People thought themselves
very happy, that the Emperor would consent to a Peace upon so reasonable Terms;
but however Barbarous they are, they are truly Politic, and no sooner
perceived that the Mediators, as well as they, were glad to oblige him to lay
down his Arms, but they refused to consent to these Terms.

The Republics of Venice and Poland, and the Great Duke of Mus^^vy, fearing
that Prince would have made the Peace without them, sent Ministers to Vienna to
pry into the Affairs there. The Czar sent thither his own General, while
himself resolved to pass into Holland and England, to establish a more solid
Commerce in these Countries than had hitherto been done. He looked upon himself
as one of the most powerful Princes of Christendom, in regard of the vast
extent of his Dominions; but being ignorant how to improve so great a Power to
the best advantage, he was little more esteemed than the Prince of Courland. He
no sooner thought of his Resolution, then he put it in Execution. He took his
Road through the Marquess of Brandenburg's Dominions, who received him with all
the Respect due to his Person; from thence having passed into Holland, he
continued there some time, applying himself diligently to the knowledge of
their Commerce and Policy. In effect, seeing their State much more flourishing
than could have been thought, in proportion to their Extent, he easily
conceived it was only owing to their Prudence and Conduct; and being thereby
the more induced to imitate them, he entered into a new Treaty of Commerce with
them, and bought some Ships of them. Afterward he passed into England, and
having acquainted the King that he had Affairs to propose to him, his Majesty
appointed Commissioners to hear them.

While the New King triumphed after this manner, either upon the account of the
advantageous Peace he gave to Europe, or the great Confidence his Allies had in
him, or the Consideration they had for him, insomuch that nothing could be
enterpriz'd without his Approbation; the Pope's Nuncio, whom he had sent into
Poland, after he had conferred with the Ordinary Nuncio at that Court, and been
informed by him of the State of Affairs in that Country, signified to his
Polish Majesty, that his Holiness was not so averse to his Election, as he
supposed; that the main thing in question was, whether his Conversion had been
sincere; and provided that Point was cleared, the Holy Father would be fully
satisfied. God alone was capable to know it: there being none besides, who can
search hearts: However, in all outward appearance, this Prince would have the
World convinced, he was a good Catholic. At least he performed all the Duties
of a true Catholic, and omitted nothing to confirm the People in the belief of
his Sincerity. The Nuncio being sensible of what considerable Advantage the
Pope's Consent would be to him, for gaining to him these Persons that continued
still in his Enemy's Party, upon a suspicion that his Conversion was only
feigned, and being apprehensive that as soon as he were peaceably established
on his Throne, he would return to his Vomit: I say, The Nuncio, who understood
how necessary his Holiness was to him, like a cunning Politician, mean'd to
make the best use of this opportunity; and therefore, before he would assure
him altogether of the Apostolic Favor, he represented to him, that it was
impossible for him to persuade all Europe of the Sincerity of his Conversion
any other way, than by testifying, as a new Convert, the profound Respect he
had for his Holiness; that since all who professed that Religion owed an entire
Obedience in Holy Matters to the Apostolic See, he wished his Majesty would
not only renounce certain Privileges that the Kings of Poland pretended to as
their Right, but also dismiss all the Lutheran Ministers that followed him;
without using that pretext for retaining them, that he had a great many of that
Religion along with him. He also proposed many other things of the like nature;
a plain evidence, that the Court of Rome never neglects any Advantage they can
catch. Upon these Conditions he offered to employ all his Interest with the
Cardinal Regent, to pacify the Commotions of the Kingdom, putting him in hopes
that the Respect he had for the Person who sent him, would oblige the Cardinal
to accept of the Terms he design^d to propose to him.

The King of Poland being sensible, how capable the Cardinal's Party was to
annoy him; besides, that new Commotions were arising in Lithuania, which was
all up in Arms to support two Parties that made War against one another, to
wit, Prince Sapieha, General of the Troops of that Duchy, and the Sieur
Oginski, Great Ensign of it, a Dignity of a distinguishing Importance in that
Country; I say, The King of Poland being afraid that this Quarrel, which seemed
to proceed from Jealousy, was only a pretense to reverse his Election, promised
to the Nuncio all he desired. However, he desired to be excused from signing
any thing touching the Privileges he would have him to renounce, until he were
better informed in what they consisted, and had the Advice of the Republic,
without whose Approbation he could not handsomely conclude any matter of that
importance. The Nuncio could not well disapprove of this Objection that
appeared so reasonable. He went to Lowits to confer with the Cardinal Primate,
whom he found so enraged against his Polish Majesty, for protecting so avowedly
the Bishop of Cujavia, his mortal Enemy, that he almost despaired of ever
succeeding in an Affair he had promised so confidently to bring about. But as
the Italians are cunning Politicians, qualified with a deal of Patience, he
gained by degrees upon his Eminence's Passion. He gave him to know, that the
Prince could not have acted other ways than he had done hitherto; for as much
as that Bishop had been all along the Soul of his Party; that he agreed with
him, in thinking, that he had reason to resent the Actions of that Prelate, who
had incroach'd upon his Privileges; that after all, he ought to consider, that
it was not in his Power to hinder what was done, nor so much as revenge it by
force; that his Party, who fell off daily, was in no Capacity to enterprise any
thing against his Enemy, who was supported by his Polish Majesty and his
Troops; that France, by whose means he had hoped to triumph over him, never
pretended to concern themselves any further in the Quarrel, having formerly
declared so much to his Holiness by their Ambassador; so he would find himself
certainly mistaken if he said any stress upon them.

The Cardinal Primate was much surpised to hear the Nuncio speak after that
manner; not questioning, in the least, the truth of this Declaration, he sent
immediately one of his Creatures to his Most Christian Majesty, to assure him
that his Party was not yet reduced so very low, but they were in a condition to
foil their Enemies, if his Majesty would give them a very small Assistance. The
Prince of Conti, who was no more in the humor to return to that Country, and
indeed never was, when left to his choice, gave his Majesty so very bad an
Impression of the sordid Avarice of the Poles, that he was little less than
enraged at the Arrival of this new Envoy. He thought the Cardinal Primate asked
him Succors, only to make his own Terms the better. So he sent back his Envoy
with Letters, signifying what he had already declared to the Pope, namely, That
he would concern himself no more in the matter. His Eminence was too happy in
making use of the Cardinal Nuncio to interceed for him with his Polish Majesty.
There was a Treaty made between the Parties, by which the Cardinal Primate
promised on his own behalf, and in behalf of his Party, to own that Prince for
their Sovereign. The King of Poland, for his part, promised to give him some
Satisfaction upon the Bishop of Cujavia's Account. By this Treaty there was
also an Authentic Provision made for the Injury done to the Cardinal Primate's
Dignity, by the boldness of that Prelate in Proclaiming and Crowning the King
after his Election. It was also agreed upon by this Treaty, That the Nation
should never lay down their Arms, until they had obliged the Turks to restore
Caminieck and Podolia. For it was alleged, That if the late King of Poland had
been cordial in the War against the Turks, he might have recovered it; but he
who had saved Christendom by the seasonable Succors he brought to Vienna,
which had he only delayed three Days longer, all had been lost without Remedy,
became so lazy in what concerned the Republic, that one would have thought he
had lost his Senses. However, by this Treaty they obliged the new King to carry
on the Siege at his own Expenses, and upon these Conditions they condescended
he should keep his Troops in the Country, though formerly they murmured
extremely for that these Troops had entered the Kingdom contrary to their Laws
and Customs. And even from that Subject took occasion to exclaim highly against
him, as if he had entered the Nation by force, and mean'd to secure it by
Conquest, rather than by lawful means.

After the Conclusion of this Treaty, the Cardinal Primate went from Lowits to
pay his Homage to the King at Warsaw. His Majesty sent the principal Gentlemen
of his Court to meet him, and honor his Entry, which had much more the Air of
a Triumph, than what was due to the merit of a Criminal. He was accompanied
into the Palace by a great many Persons of Quality, who were overjoyed to see
this Reconciliation. The King and he had a private Interview for half an hour.
It was generally believed, that the Troubles of the Kingdom were now at an end;
and in effect, the Queen of Poland having lost all hopes of seeing her Son upon
the Throne, which till that time she never despaired of, asked his Majesty's
Leave to pass some time at Rome. The King refused it before he advised with his
Council, which was composed of the principal Senators of the Nation. However,
they saw no inconveniency in granting it, and gave her to know that she should
not be hindered to depart when she thought fit. Accordingly she put her self in
a readiness to be gone against the latter end of the Year. Every Person
applauded that Princess's Conduct, for after all she had done to hinder the
Election of his Majesty, as well as of the Prince of Conti, she could hardly
remain in the Kingdom with any satisfaction, nor could she handsomely pass into
France, where it was impossible for his Most Christian Majesty to see her
without Indignation; yet it was generally believed she would choose France for
her Retreat, it being natural for People to love the place of their Nativity.
For it was openly reported, That she was treating with the Duchess of
Portsmouth, and her Son, the Duke of Richmond, for the Duchy of Aubigny in
Berry, which the late King Charles II. bought for that Duchess upon certain
Conditions, not very acceptable to her. But the King being sensible, that if he
did not tie her up to such Terms, a Woman of her Temper might be reduced to end
her Days in an Hospital, was therefore glad to do her this kindness against her
Inclination. He had already a Mistress of the same Temper, namely, the Duchess
of Cleaveland, who had lavished away all that the King had given her. However,
he bestowed large Sums upon the Duchess of Portsmouth; and such was his
Liberality, that he had laid out above a Million of Money for China to her. But
though there be nothing harder than the Substance it is made of, she found out a
way to melt it all at Paris, without suffering any other inconvenience by it,
than what ordinarily attends Misery.

However, it was not altogether impossible to accommodate the Difference
betwixt the Queen of Poland, and his Most Christian Majesty, if her P^lish
Majesty would condescend in some measure to imitate the Count of Bi^lk
mentioned before She might have owned her self in the wrong, and supplicated
his Majesty for the Honor of his Protection; but she was too haughty to
condescend to it, insomuch, that she was now wholly intent upon leaving
speedily a place where her Circumstances had suffered so sensible an
Alteration. For during her Husband's lifetime, every one was glad to truckle
to her, in regard of the Ascendant, they knew, she had over him. Now the Scene
was changed, and so different from the former, that every one was ready to
impute to her, what was blamed in her Husband, as if she had been the only
Person who prompted him.

The King of Poland being thus owned by the Pope, and wanting only now to be
recognized by his Most Christian Majesty, in order to enjoy peaceably the
Dignity of a Crown that had been so much disputed, sent a Person of Quality to
France, to excuse the Robbery committed upon the Abbot of P^lignac's Equipage,
and to establish a good Correspondence with his Majesty; for, though in
appearance he had no need of him, especially, being so strictly joined in
Alliance with the Emperor, and all the Princes his Neighbors; yet, considering
that Kings have long Arms, especially the King who governs France at this time,
he would omit nothing that was due to Policy. The King received his Envoy with
all the marks of Respect he could wish for, and all Parties forgeting the
occasion of their Differences, a good Intelligence and Union was established
betwixt the two Nations, though hardly to that degree it had been formerly. In
the mean time, the King returned to the Prince of Conti, the Money he had
expended in the pursuit of that Crown, which in all probability pleased him
much more, than if he had obtain^d it. Not that he is Covetous in any degree,
but continuing still Amorous, the satisfaction he enjoyed in seeing his
Mistress, rendered him insensible of all other pleasures. Besides, he was soon
comforted for the loss of that Dignity, by the liberal share he had with the
Duke of Vendome in the Dauphin's Favor, and the hopes he had of gaining his
Process before the Court of Parliament, as he had done formerly.

However, there happened an Accident to the Duke, that was like to deprive him
both of that Advantage and his Life. In his return from An^t, a House which
King Henry IV. had given to the Lady Jane Gabriell, of whom he was descended:
He was like to be drowned in a Post-Chaise, for he was up to his Chin in a
little River, which he was obliged to pass, and it being the middle of Winter,
the Cold which he suffered, was capable to do him all the mischief that could
be expected from so cruel an Accident. But as he is a Noble Prince, who
delights to do good, and has no Enemies; and besides, had acquired a great deal
of Glory before Barcelona; so every one was overjoyed to see their Fears end
more happily than they expected. It only cost him a fright; however, this
General, who by his Conquest, had gained the Reputation of the greatest Hero,
being subject to a great many Infirmities, as well as the Ancient Hero's, found
himself so bad, that he was obliged to apply himself to Physicians. He had
contracted a Disease that gave him more trouble, than the taking of four
Barcelona's. And his trouble was so much the greater, that his Malady was of an
old standing, and created him every moment insufferable Pains; he enjoyed no
manner of rest, and it was to be feared; that if he neglected it any longer, it
might be passed all cure. He resolved to put himself into the hands of a
Chemist Physician, named Chambon. This Gentleman was nothing different from
those of his Kidney, that is to say, neither better nor worse than a Quack, who
boast as highly, as if they were many degrees above Aesculapius; but if he
cured four Persons, he certainly killed a whole Dozen, and the Cures he had
performed, were rather the Product of Chance than of Skill. He was much at one
with Dr. Carette, who had but one Remedy for all manner of Diseases, and yet
would have Mankind believe that he was the ablest Physician in the Universe. Be
it as it will, this new Physician set himself up in form, because he had cured
some few Persons in the World, and amongst others, a certain Abbot of Chaulieu,
who was a sort of Intendant of the House of Vendome. This Abbot was very
desirous that the Duke would make use of Chambon to cure him. However, the Duke
withdrew in a short while, and had no great reason to brag of his Physician's
Remedies. For Chambon did nothing, and at this time, the Duke finds himself in
little better Circumstances, than when he first made use of him. It may be
rather said, That he is still worse, for the more inveterate these Diseases
are, they are the more difficult to be cured. Yet some will have it, that his
Grandfather found the means to be cured after Forty Years; but that was scarce
done by the Skill of a Chemist, and its probable, that if his Grandson had
copied him, he had applied himself to some other Person, than his Intendant's
Favorite.

The Duke of Savoy had no reason to complain of his Daughter's Marriage; but
knowing that the King had no mind to have it consummated, he entreated his
Majesty to consummate it, to the end his Daughter's Condition might be more
secure. He was afraid that the Duke of Burgundy might come to die by some
mischance, and so his Daughter be returned upon his hand. But that was far from
his Majesty's Inclination; on the contrary it was well known, if that had
happened, he would have married her to the Duke of Anjou; and in view of that
only, he hindered all Commerce betwixt them, to the end, that a Dispensation
might be the more easily obtained. I cannot tell, whether the King made his
Design known to him; but it is certain, that after the Marquess of Ferrette had
spoke to him by his Majesty's Command, the Duke was not only out of all hopes,
but showed no Inclination to it. However, if he could not obtain that Demand,
he succeeded (in a short time after) much better in another he made to his
Majesty. He entreated him to Banish Madamoselle de Soissons (whose Conduct was
offensive to him) out of his Kingdom. He also desired of him to cause shut up
Mademoiselle de Carignan in a Convent. The last showed a great deal of
Complaisance to a married Man, who lived after a very indifferent manner with
his own Wife; whether it was that he had inherited that of his Father, who had
never been a good Husband, or that the Affection he had for this Princess, made
him peevish at the sight of all others. It was much suspected, that the King
himself was the principal Author of these Demands, to the end that these two
Persons might no more be seen at Court, nor in Paris. Though they had the
Honor to be so nearly related to the Duchess of Burgundy, yet their Behavior
was altogether unworthy of their great Quality; for besides their Conduct, that
was not very regular, they were both in extreme Necessity, and so far from
being in Circumstances to support a Rank suitable to their Birth, that they had
hardly wherewith to maintain sufficiently the Condition of very ordinary
Persons; besides, the King was fain to supply them by his Royal Bounty, without
which they had often wanted the very Necessaries of Life. The eldest was sent
to Brussels to keep Company with her Mother, who resided there; the other was
shut up amongst the Carmelites in the Suburbs of St. James, with express Order
to the Superior of the Convent, that she should be permitted to speak to none,
but certain Ladies, whose Names were transmitted to him in Writing.
Mademoiselle de Carignan might have easily avoided this Indignity, if she had
had a mind; she had been warned of it a long time before; and the King himself
sent her word, that if she meant to please him, she would take a Maid of Honor
of his Recommendation. At that time he offered her Apartments at Versailles,
with sufficient Maintenance for that Lady of Honor; but she excused her self,
under pretense, that she had one already, and that she could not handsomely
accept of another, without exposing the first. However sincere she might have
been in her Excuse, yet in a thing capable of a double entendre, People are
more ready to take them in an ill Sense; every body believed that her Excuse
proceeded only from the great desire she had to continue her Intrigue. But the
King having put an end to it, after the manner above related, her Gallant was
to look for his Comfort where he could find it.

In all appearance he could not be so easily comforted, whether he thought that
his Honor was concerned, or that he was really afflicted, as he would have the
World believe; he displayed his Wrath more than ever against his Wife, and
though she was reputed a Lady of entire Virtue, yet (as it was generally
believed) he used often to lay hands upon her. But till that time, she
concealed very industriously what just Reason she had to exclaim against his
Conduct; but after that, and several other Outrages, it was no more in her
Power to dissemble her just Resentment of them. She complained of them to all
her Relations, that they might the more readily approve of her Intention to
commence a Process of Separation of Bodies against him, for she had been of a
long time separated in Goods, without which, she and her two Children had been
reduced to the greatest Indigence. In effect, this Man's Conduct was so mean,
that he went often, not only without one Penny of Money, but without Clothes
and Hat. No body could disapprove of her design, which she put in Execution a
few days after; and her Husband, who had retired from her some days before,
told his Wife's Friends, that it was altogether needless for her to plead for a
Separation from him, since for a long time he desired no better, and would
allow the Sentence to pass whenever she thought convenient. But there being
many more People who delight in Debauchery, than in virtuous Living; this
Gentleman was nevertheless acceptable in certain Companies, even Princes
countenanced him as they had usually done; and being one day at the Duke of
Chartres's Table, there was by chance some Sauce dropped by one of the
Attendants upon his Clothes; and however Plain and Coarse these Clothes were,
he was extremely vexed at the Accident; no wonder, for he had got no other in
his Wardrobe for a change. This he told the young Prince betwixt Jest and
Vexation. The Prince seemed not to regard it, but talking with the Company,
said, That ordinarily Misfortunes attended them who were least able to support
them. He entreated two or three Persons of Quality, who were there, to go keep
him Company the next day: For in all appearance, said he, you will find him in
Bed while he sends his Clothes to the Scourers, and at least that will be some
Comfort to him. This poor Husband was actually obliged to do what the Duke
said; but the next day the young Prince sent him four Suits made by his own
Tailor, to the end, that if any such misfortune befell him another time, it
should never hinder him to appear as usually.

About that time the King caused to Arrest one of the Ushers of his Chamber,
one of the most visionary Companions in the Universe, whom, notwithstanding his
Majesty allowed to Discourse with very often, in regard he durst not let his
Folly appear before the King, which he had not the wit to conceal in other
Company. He had of a long time thought to cause Hang all the Seamen, from the
Marshal D'Estree and Tourville to the very meanest. He pretended they were all
Rogues, upon certain Memoirs which a Commissary of the Marines (who was broke)
had given him. He had importuned his Majesty a thousand times upon it, and
represented to him, that if he would examine the Abuses which had crept into
the several Employments of these Officers; he might find a fair opportunity of
raising, justly, a Tax upon them to the tune of Sixty Millions. It was about
the middle of the War when he spoke after this manner to the King; they had a
deal of difficulty to raise Money, and therefore his Majesty thought the Advice
was not to be despised, and supposing there might be somewhat in it, he sent
him to Monsieur Pontchartrain: But that highly displeased this Extravagant
Gentleman, who probably had a mind to regulate this Affair himself with his
Majesty, or perhaps designed to involve that Minister in these pretended
Malversations; for a Fool is capable of any Extravagancy. However, he was
obliged to obey the King; there was hardly a Person to be found, who thought
himself more able and fit for business than this Fool. But Monsieur
Pontchartrain being as Prudent, as he was rash, knew presently how little
ground this Numskul had for what he advanced. He acquainted the King with it.
His Majesty was much of the same Opinion; yet this Man, who had the opportunity
to speak to his Majesty, whenever he pleased, could not be persuaded of his
Error, but still presented new Memorials to him, by which he entreated him to
appoint some other Commissioners to hear him, who might have more leisure to
examine the matter, than Monsieur Pontchartrain; offering upon pain of Death to
make out what he advanced to be as clear as Daylight. This Confidence of his,
together with some secret Springs he set at work, made the King resolve to give
him a Hearing. He obtained also some Acts of Council, by which he pretended to
give a light to some obscure Affairs. From that time forward, this rash Numskul
never saw any of the Officers of the Marine enter into the King's Chamber, but
he told to such as were by him, that these Gentlemen were to be taxed in
immense Sums; one in two Millions, some in more, some in less; and he though ^t
himself already one of the first Peers of the Kingdom, because he had asked of
his Majesty a share of what was to be recovered of these Gentlemen by the Tax;
and the King had granted it to him; but himself had promised a share of it to
such as were capable to ingratiate him with his Majesty. This must needs have
been very disagreeable to the Person concerned. However, this little Gentleman
forgot himself more and more daily, even to that degree of Impudence, as to
vaunt, that notwithstanding all what Monsieur Pontchartrain was able to do, he
did not doubt in the least to succeed in his Enterprise. In fine, That Minister
being no longer able to bear with his Extravagancies, made it his business to
represent them to the King. He had slighted them long before, as well as the
Person who was guilty of them. He thought him only unworthy to be regarded; but
every one told him, That his Interest was concerned more than he was aware of,
in making his Majesty acquainted with the truth of the Affair, for he having
the whole Power of the Sea-Affairs, it seemed as if he accused him underhand,
of conniving at these pretended Abuses, that he suffered in others. So he was
at last prevailed upon by these Reasons; and therefore made known to the King,
that this Man was only an extravagant mad Fool, fitter to be sent to Bedlam,
than countenanced by so great a King; that his Impudence, or rather his
Madness, appeared too evidently, in daring to accuse two Marshals of France,
together with the whole Body of the Sea-Officers, without any regard to so many
Persons amongst them, equally considerable for their Services, and
distinguished by their Quality; and very incapable of doing any thing against
their Duty; who came daily to him to demand Justice of that Fool for his
Insolence, and entreated him earnestly to represent it to his Majesty. He added
that he hoped, that his Majesty would cause to examine once for all, the
Accusations of that unaccountable Fool, to the end he might be confounded, when
it should be made manifest that the Accusation was rather visionary than real.

The King having heard this Minister very attentively, promised to do all he
demanded, without loosing any time. Accordingly he commanded the Commissioners
whom he had ordained to examine that Affair, to search narrowly into it. The
Commissioners applied themselves presently to it, and having discovered that
all what he advanced, was in effect nothing else but the Imagination of his
empty Brain, they gave his Majesty a full account of it. The King immediately
forbid that Man ever to trouble him any more with that Affair; but he not being
wise enough to take the advantage of this Advice, would still insist as
formerly, and had almost said, that all of them had conspired to save the
guilty. The King told him a second time, that he commanded him absolutely never
to speak to him of that Affair, though he was so good as to conceal what he had
reason to believe of him. This Man thought at last his best way was to
dissemble, and obey his Majesty in appearance. But while he seemed to be
silent, he left no Stone unturned to return to his former Trade. He brought
over the Knight of Lorrain to his side, in order to engage the Duke of Orleans
in the Affair; and though such eternal Protens's as this Knight, are little to be
credited, yet he made use of his Interest with that Prince to succeed in his
design. The Duke spoke of it to his Majesty, who was exceedingly surprised,
that this little Gentleman dared to fall upon these Methods, after he had
expressly forbid him. He told freely his Sentiments of it to the Duke, and
forbid him ever to concern himself with such Affairs. From that time the King
resolved to get rid of him, though it is always against his Inclination, when
he falls upon such extreme Measures with any, who had the Honor to be his
Domestic; for no Prince ever showed greater kindness to his Servants. However
he suspended his Resolution until he saw that it was impossible to make him
Prudent. This little Gentleman being severely checked by the Knight of Lorrain,
because he brought him into bad terms with the Duke of Orleans, was still so
Impudent, as to put up a Petition in the Duke of Rochefoucaut's Name, without
ever acquainting him with it beforehand. It Is true, he had been twice at the
Duke's Lodgings after he had done it, without having the opportunity of meeting
with him. He hoped that the Duke, who was in very good Terms with his Majesty,
would regard his Visions as real Truths, and espouse his Interest as his own.
This Petition was presented to his Majesty before the Duke had time to return
home, and the King made mention of it to the Duke. He made him also the same
Compliment he had made formerly to his Brother, the Duke of Orleans, to wit,
that he would not take it kindly if he harken'd to that impertinent Fool, or
ever spoke of his Affairs to him. The Duke extremely surpised at this Check,
which he had by no means deserved, because the Petition had been given in
without his knowledge, protested to the King that he was ignorant of what he
meant, and was so far from excusing his Fault, that he desired Justice for what
he had done. The King promised to give him full Satisfaction, and resolved now
more than ever to get rid of such a dangerous and meddling Fool. However, as if
this Numskul had not already done enough toward his own Ruin, he wrote a
Letter, in which he complained, that the King himself opposed the Service he
intended to do him: This Letter was intercepted and brought to his Majesty. He
found it too Insolent to confine his Punishment only to a Banishment from his
Presence. He caused him to be sent to the Bastile, where he was commanded in
the King's Name to lay down his Charge. He shifted the matter for a while; but
in the end, it being insinuated to him, that he must expect to continue
Prisoner there for life, if he would not comply; he chus'd to do the last.

The Sea-Officers were not the only Persons who were accused unjustly. There
came about that time a certain Abbot of Quality from a Foreign Country, of whom
they took the liberty to say no better things. For they accused him of having
desired to speak with King William, before the Peace was signed, and to
persuade him, that he ought not to think of making a Peace with France, for
that France could not fail to be absolutely destroyed, if the War was continued
two Years longer. His Family being one of the most considerable of all Britain,
was extremely afflicted when they heard him talked of after that manner,
especially his eldest Brother, who was in the Service, and pretty well
advanced. He durst not show himself any more to the King, fearing his Majesty
would make him answerable for the Crime alledg^d against his Brother.
Nevertheless, his Majesty, after the Example of the Almighty, had long before
explained himself upon that Head, saying in presence of all the Court, That
every one should bear his own Crime, and that Relations were not to be
answerable for the Iniquities of their Relations: And in effect, one of the
Musketeers having committed a horrid Murder in the Year 1676. His Majesty knew
no sooner that his Brother, who was a Captain of Horse, was so extremely
afflicted at it, that he designed to make his escape into the Low Countries,
than he advanced him in the Life-Guards. He could give no more evident Proof to
all the World, that he never meant to make one answerable for another's Crime.
However, this Abbot's Brother being a Man of singular Honor, though he was
sensible of the King's Justice, yet he could not avoid g^ieving extremely at
it; and what added much to his Grief, was, that he distrusted his Brother
altogether. He knew very well, that his little Band never hindered him from
doing many things, which reflected mightily upon that Habit. He had occasioned
a Divorce betwixt a Husband and a Wife. He carried on an amorous Intrigue with
a President's Wife, which occasioned great wrangling betwixt them; nor had the
Husband stopped his Resentment there, if his Relations and Friends had not
convinced him, that a great many Chances attend our Lives, which it were better
to conceal than declare. These things he partly believed, but it was not in his
Power to hinder himself from Murmuring, which did the Abbot a great deal of
injury, who both by his Quality and his Brother's Service, pretended to have
already a good Abbey, but now saw himself a thousand Miles distant from it. The
King, who desires that every one should mind his Duty, that is to say, that a
Soldier be a Man of Courage, that a Judge be Just, and a Churchman Honest and
Pious; no sooner knew that he made it his practice to Debauch other Men's
Wives, instead of confirming them in Virtue, than he absolutely forbid Father
de la Chaise, (who had put him down in his Pocketbook, in order to have a good
Benefice) ever to propose him any more as a Subject worthy of any Dignity.

The poor Abbot, who had more Quality than Riches, was extremely vexed to see
his hopes so frustrated by his own faults. However, knowing that there was
Mercy for all Sins, he put himself into a Seminary, Whether he truly repented
of what he had done, or would make the World believe he did so; by these means
he meant to free his Majesty of the bad Impression he might have of his
Conduct, and insinuate himself into his Favor. The King, who is a very
Judicious Prince, and is seldom or never mistaken in his Opinion of Persons,
did not allow himself to be imposed upon by that Change, so very different from
his former Life. For he Preached, Fasted, and Catechized; and in a word, there
was not one Churchman, not only in the Seminaries, but even within twenty
Leagues round it, whose Conduct was more Exemplary than his. Father de la
Chaise was very desirous to oblige him, but could never comprehend whence arose
the King's Aversion for him; being naturally good, and more inclined to judge
well than ill of any Person, he took occasion to speak to his Majesty of him,
and represented to him, that the Austerity of his Life, and his regular
Conduct, did not only deserve an Abbey, but even a Bishopric; that the
greatest Sinners become ordinarily the greatest Saints; and if God Almighty
were like him, they must blot out of the Calendar a great many Saints; who
after having committed very great Crimes, had showed the Abbot the way he
followed at present. The King was nothing moved at his Confessor's Discourse.
On the contrary he answered him, that he might blot him out of the List of
Bishops, as he had done a while ago out of the List of Abbots, for he never
would honor him with that Dignity.

I do not know, if ever this Answer was made known to the Abbot, or if he was
already weary of passing his Days in a Seminary, and waiting so long time for a
Benefice, of which he saw no appearance; whatever was the matter, he changed
his Residence very soon. It Is true, it did not renew his Intrigue with the
President's Wife, or with any other. On the contrary, he avoided all for a long
time, as if he meant to continue the Life that he made so great a show of in
the Eyes of all France. But whether he saw that they would eye him narrowly, or
that he intended to continue his Course, he passed into Flanders, where he
applied himself to Catechizing every day: He also began to assist dying
Persons; and the Marquess of Blanch^ford, second Son to the Duke of Crequi,
falling Sick about that time, it was he that exhorted him to prepare himself
for the Passage that appears so terrible, especially to those of such a
youthful Age as he was of. Father de la Chaise took occasion upon this also, to
speak to the King in favor of this Abbot. He told him, that the Abbot did not
require his Presence to oblige him to good Actions, and so he could not be
reproached (as a great many others might justly be) with Hypocrisy. But the
King nothing moved by this new Attack, answered, That he could never persuade
him but that the Abbot was no good Man; that time would discover very soon
which of them was most deceived, but he did not believe it was himself. Father
de la Chaise replied, That he was afraid his Majesty offended God Almighty, in
judging so badly of his Neighbor. But his Majesty returned it smartly home, in
saying, That he was afraid, that he offended him more, in desiring him to give
a Bishopric to a Man, whom he thought altogether unworthy of it. I know not
whether this Answer came to the Abbot's Ears, but all of a sudden he left the
great desire he had shown (while in Flanders) to Catechize Men; and without
acquainting any Person with his design, went into Holland to caress the Women
there; at least he was seen doing it soon after his arrival. However, his going
often to the House of one of the Plenipotentiaries, gave occasion to some
People to say, That this Preacher was not only debauched, but also a very
dangerous M^n. In a word, he was suspected to have given not only Memoirs to
that Ambassador, but also to have had a private Interview with King William,
and revealed to him a great many Secrets. However, all that was false, nor had
he any other design to go so often to that Ambassador's, than to pay his
Respects to a Person who filled the President's Lady's Room in his Heart. She
was also somewhat more deserving than the other, without doing her any
injustice. However, as one Lie general^y begets a great many amongst those who
vent them; the next Day all Paris would have it, that the King had wrote to
King William to entreat him, to send him the Abbot bound Hand and Foot; they
made it also known to the pretended Criminal by a Letter unsign'd, and the
Handwriting was altogether unknown to him; but advised him, if it came
seasonably to his Hand, he would make it his Business to save himself by flying
to Turkey, rather than suffer himself to be taken.

The poor Abbot was much astonished at this Accusation; if they had accused him
of being Amorous, he had been obliged to own it, because it was true. Neither
the Seminary where he had been, nor the Mortifications which Pere de la Chaise
had advanced so much in his Favor to the King, were capable to wean him from
that unhappy Passion to which (to his great Misfortune) he was very subject. In
fine, knowing himself not only Innocent, but also incapable of the crime laid
to his Charge, he went to wait upon Monsieur Harlai, in order to ask him, if he
had received the Order, of which they had given him Advice secretly; if so, he
came to put himself into his Hands, so that it would not be necessary to Arrest
him; and if it was sent to any other Person, he came however to deliver himself
Prisoner to him, that they might not be at the trouble to search for him; he
entreated him to acquaint the King with it, that his Majesty might be satisfied
of his Innocence, until he could make it evident before any Commissioners his
Majesty should be pleased to appoint. Monsieur Harlai had heard somewhat of the
Matter before. This obliged him to examine his Conduct, and to set some Spies
upon him, in order to watch whither he went at some certain hours; for he
judged that it must needs be about that time that he was most busied about his
Treason, if Fame was to be believed; but at last, these Spies reported to
Monsieur Harlai, that he was altogether took up about his Mistress, which
justified him so much in his Opinion, that he gave him to know, he wished with
all his heart, the Prison he was engaged in, might not prove more troublesome
to him, than what he came to look for at his House; that it would not prove
very hard for him to break his Chains, because he not only declared him free,
but also Innocent of what was laid to his Charge, as far as consisted with his
Power. However he believed, that his Heart was not so much upon the French, as
it had formerly been; but as it is impossible to be always in Love, he was
persuaded it might return to its former Inclination when he thought least of
it; and by these means he might be at ease, for he would secure him, none would
impute to him this as a great Crime. In effect, this was the Abbot's Crime: And
though he was sheltered in it from all he was threatened with; nevertheless he
was not so happy as to continue always in the good Esteem of Father de la
Chaise. He durst not speak any more in his Favor to his Majesty, considering
he had set up a Holland Lady in the place of the President's: His Majesty asked
also that good Father, if he was now convinced, and if he intended still to
demand a Bishopric for that Abbot. The Jesuit was somewhat humbled at that
Reproach, and all he could say for his Justification, was that he could not
hinder himself from being imposed upon, by the Tricks of an Hypocrite, no more
than any body else.

But if his Majesty was proof against the Recommendations of his Father
Confessor, whose Opinion in Matters of that Nature gains generally the King's
Consent, the Case was quite different with regard to another Abbot, whom this
good Father protected also. I mean the Abbot of Coadlet, whose sad Adventure
has no Parallel in any Ancient or Modern History, nor perhaps ever will have in
those to come. Not but that they afford us Examples enough of deposed Bishops;
but as that is seldom done but by the Authority of the Church, or upon the
account of manifest Heresy, or for some other Capital Crime, If I be not
mistaken, I may confidently say, that the History I mean to insert here,
exceeds what can be said of these Examples. But be it as it will, the Abbot of
Coadlet, a Gentleman of Britany, though he had already a Dignity in the Chapter
of Vannes; yet he thought it not amiss to ask some other little Benefice, by
which means he might subsist the more conveniently, and confined the utmost
extent of his Ambition to the having four or five thousand Livres a Year. And
to that end, by the means of very good Friends, applied himself to Father de la
Chaise, upon whom he believed all these Matters depended. This good Father told
him, That he did himself an injustice in restricting himself to so narrow
Bounds, and that he ought to ask some better thing, for he could hope to obtain
it. The Abbot was overjoyed to hear him speak after that manner; and as
generally a good Appetite increases by eating; so this Gentleman of a little
Abbot, was now very desirous to become a fat Bishop. However, he durst not
mention it suddenly to Pere de la Chaise, but the good Father gave him to know,
that the Dignity he enjoyed already in the Cathedral, rendered him worthy of
the other, especially when it was joined to all the other Qualities requisite
for a Bishop; so he got himself to be listed in the Catalogue of the Candidates
for the Episcopal Dignity. However, he continued at Paris until the King had
filled up some vacant Bishoprics, which had Pretenders enough. For now the
Scene is altered from what it was formerly, amongst those, upon whom they
conferred that Dignity, who said ingenuously, Nolo Episcopari: I will not be a
Bishop. For nowadays, they think at least, if they do not say, Volo
Episcopari, ( i. e.) I will be a Bishop, and no doubt they think it from their
very Heart, because it is impossible to give an account of all the Friends they
employ, or of all the Springs they set at Work, in order to obtain the Mitre.

The Abbot of Coadlet, who knew pretty well the Secret how to come by it, was
not sufficiently satisfied to hear only Father de la Chaise for him, though he
was the best Friend he could employ, but he applied himself to others also, who
were capable to do him as considerable Service as the former. For he thought as
in legal Processes, abundance of the Law breaks not the Law; so in offers of
this nature, he could never make use of too many on his behalf. However, as
there are many, who Ruin themselves in making use of the Methods that others
save themselves by; so he found that what he took to be of greatest advantage,
proved most destructive, and that to such a degree, that it is impossible for
him ever to retrieve it. Being informed, That in the Age we live in, Women are
as serviceable as any thing else; he made his Address with his utmost
Application to Marshal Crequi's Lady, who was his Country-woman. That Lady
promised him her Favor, and was as good as her Word. But he having likewise
heard that old Women have not so much Interest as young ones, quickly abandoned
her, and took up with her Daughter-in-law, whom he took to be more capable to
serve him. He waited upon her punctually every day; and in the Holy-week, he
happening to be at her House, had not the power to refuse to accept of a match
at Ombre that she proposed to him; some say it was Bassette; but either of 'em
is equally criminal before God, unless it be that the one is a greater
Instrument of Passion than the other. However, he considered that 'twas not a
proper Employment for one that pretended to a Bishopric, especially at such an
unseasonable time; and for that reason he carefully requested the Lady, and all
her Company, that the Doors might be kept very close lest any body should see
him engaged in an Exercise so inconsistent with his Profession. It Is such a
common thing at Paris to see the Gentlemen with the little Band playing at all
sorts of Game, that the very Footmen, who overheard his Discourse, looked
upon him as a Hypocrite; but they were strangers to his Pretensions, and
considered very little of what consequence it was to him, to have it concealed
from the King, nor how necessary it was for him to have it kept secret, least
it might blow up his design.

However, that Week having passed before the King heard any thing of these
Transactions, he filled up the vacant Benefices, according to his usual Custom,
upon Easter Day, for he never names any body but at that time, whether it be,
because it is a Formality of a long standing, or that the King's Confessors have
introduced it in order to have themselves courted the more during the Interval;
but passing over that, as a thing I have no mind to search into, we must
believe, that this Abbot was only known to the King upon the account of his
Brother, who was Lieuterant of the Guards; however seeing him first in the List
of the Candidates for Bishoprics, he asked his Father Confessor who this Man
was. The Good Father meaning to do him a kindness, had no mind to say any thing
to his disadvantage, but extolled him to the Heavens for the best of Men;
insomuch, that his Majesty believing him one of the best Men, and of the most
exemplary Life in his Kingdom, named him for the Bishopric of Poictiers. This
news was no sooner known at Paris, than every body was amazed, for his name was
never heard of out of his own Prov^nce before, though by what happn'd to him in
a short time after, it was in every one's Mouth. Every body, who heard he was
to have that Bishopric, believed he must be a Person of extraordinary Virtue,
in regard the King had chosen him to so good a Benefice, to the prejudice of a
great many considerable Persons who expected it. But those who had played with
him at the Marchioness of Crequi's, made no Secret to tell others, that he was
not so wonderfully Godly, for he had employed one day in the Holy Week at Game.
This News came the same Day to the King's Ears, which made his Majesty pass
that Night in a mortal Anxiety, fearing that God Almighty would call him to an
Account for having named a Person to a Bishopric, that was capable of so black
an Action.

The next Morning, Father de la Chaise coming to him to have the List of those,
who were named to the Benefices, Signed, as soon as the King saw this Abbot's
Name underneath, instead of signing, he blotted it out: The Good Father asked
him what he did, not understanding what he meant. The King answered, That there
was a Man in that List, who did not merit to be there; that he knew nothing of
him, when he had given him a Bishopric, nor he himself could not have known
him, when he propos d him as a fit Person; but, that he had been since justly
represented to him, and that the oversight he had committed, had almost thrown
him into Despair. This reflected in some measure upon the Good Father, who had
told him Wonders of this Man, the more to oblige those who had recommended him;
and perhaps he himself believed all was told him to the advantage of that
Person. However, the Jesuit altogether amazed at these Expressions, made use of
the Authority he had over his Conscience, to oblige him to change his
Resolution. Though it was easy for him to judge, by what the King had said,
that of necessity some People had given him a strange Character of that poor
Abbot; yet he said, That we must not believe upon light grounds, all that we
hear of our Neighbor, that he had often recommended to him the reading of the
little Book of the Imitation of Jesus, and there he might see a Chapter done
purposely upon that Subject; that Lying abounded in a great measure amongst
Men, as well as Jealousy; insomuch, that his Majesty's Bounty was sufficient to
move all the Malice of Hell against him.

The King having hearkened attentively to what he said, replied, That it was no
Lie they told him, as he imagined; that it was a thing happened lately in the
presence of a great many, that he also knew the Witnesses; insomuch, that he
had not the least ground to doubt of it. The Good Father desired to know what
the matter was; the King made no Secret of it, adding moreover, That if Fame
was to be credited, that Abbot was no less a Lover of the Sex than of Game. And
in effect, this was told the King with a great deal of assurance; but whether
he loved them or no, for I know no body hates them; it was certain that he gave
no Scandal to the World that way, as his Enemies alleged; so the King was soon
persuaded that he was imposed upon in that Affair. However, Father de la Chaise
seeing that the other was a weighty Accusation, and that the King kept close to
it, he thought of throwing some scruple into his Mind. He told him then, That
there was more of Infirmity than of Crime in what the Abbot had done; that it
was certain, it was rather out of Complaisance than Inclination, or want of due
Respect to these Holy Days, that he had handled the Cards at that time; that
very few People knew of this his fault, but now all France would begin to pry
into it, and even suspect an infinity of things, as soon as his Majesty should
deprive him of what he had once conferred upon him; that his Majesty ought to
be very cautions in giving that Scandal to his People, that certainly he must
be answerable for it before God: That a small Reproof given in secret to that
Abbot, would prevail more with him, and oblige him to ask God pardon for what
he had done, and by this means all would be buried in Oblivion; that after all,
it ought not to be regarded as a heinous fault, but in respect to the time it
was committed, for he was not the only Ecclesiastic who a had Passion for
Game; since there were many Bishops and Abbots, who made it their principal
Exercise; though after all, they were not deprived of their Bishopric and
Abbots upon that account. He owned freely to his Majesty, it were more decent
for them not to do it, and was of Opinion, that these things ought to be none
of their Diversions. But in fine, the Spirit of Mankind is weak, and there
being four and twenty Hours in the Day, it is impossible to employ them all in
Exercises of Piety, and therefore they are allowed to refresh themselves with
innocent Recreations.

The King had no great opinion of this Morality, he thought it too loose,
especially with regard to those Men who were the Subject of the Discourse. For
he put a vast difference betwixt them and a Courtier, or a Man of the Sword,
whom he thought might be allow^d such things; but to believe that
Ecclesiastics ought to have the same extent of freedom, was a thing, with all
due Respect to his Father Confessor, he could never be persuaded off. So it
being impossible to convince his Majesty by this Objection, he was fain to have
recourse to some other Argument. He insisted upon the Scandal he was like to
give, but that gaining nothing upon him, he pray^d him to advise with Heaven
before he would determine absolutely the matter. His Majesty consented
willingly. For in that he demanded only what became a good Christian, and was
conformable to the Inclination of this Prince. So the King kneeling that very
minute upon a Cushion, Father de la Chaise kneeled by him, to make him say the
Prayers which he desired. Prayers being ended, the Good Father asked him what
return the Lord made. His Majesty replied, Nothing of what you wished for, and
that he was as resolute as formerly to execute his design. He added, That he
saw it very inconvenient not to do it; for if he should make that Abbot a
Bishop, and if he should neglect his Duty in his Diocese, God Almighty would
one day call him to an Account for it; that he had faults enough of his own to
answer for, without taking upon him those of other People; and he believed him
too Good, and too Pious, to advise him otherwise. The Good Father was not yet
put off with that Answer. He asked of the King as the last Favor, to suspend
his Resolution until he should return from Mass, whither he was just agoing. He
conjured him to invoke earnestly the Holy Ghost, that he might enlighten him.
The King condescended very willingly; but not having received the Inspiration
which the Good Father pretended, he declared, That he had blotted that Abbot
out of the List, because he did not believe him so proper for a Bishopric as
he at first imagined. The poor Abbot of Coadles heard of these News with all
the Surprisal and Grief imaginable. He retired into a Seminary, there to bury
his Vexation However, the King calling to mind what Father de la Chaise had
said to him, and being desirous that he should be suspected of nothing but the
Truth, declared at the same time, before all the Court, That what that Abbot
had done in the Holy Week, was the only cause of his Misfortune; that whatever
else was said of him was false, and that he was obliged to give that Testimony
in his Favor.

The King having showed himself so full of the fear of God in an Affair of so
great Consequence, showed himself equally full of Justice in another Affair
that concerned a Man of the same Country. Which was as follows: a Counselor of
the Parliament of Britany, called Montchamp, having cudgelled the Nephew of
Moreau, the famous Actress in the Opera; and who gave some ground to speak of
her upon an account different from what she acted upon the Theater; the young
Man carried his Complaint to his Majesty. The Counselor expected that his
Interest in the Parliament, in whose Assembly that Affair was done, would
shelter him from all Accidents. He treated already that Man very slightingly
and meanly. But the Lady of that Opera, whom Persons of the first Quality
adored, having espoused her Nephew's Quarrel, obtained a private Letter in his
favor. This Letter enjoined the Parliament expressly to do the Plantiff so
good, and so ready Justice, that he should have no reason to complain of it.
Montchamp understanding by these means, that he had to do with a more powerful
Party than he thought of; had recourse to such Tricks as are usual among the
People of his Trade. He made a diligent Inquiry into the Life, not of the Aunt,
(for it had been no difficulty in the least to prove a great many things of
her) but of the Nephew. For he thought that if he could d^s^over any
unwarrantable Action in it, as he hoped he might, he could at least retard the
Process, which his Adversary had commenced against him. However, not trusting
very much to these hopes, he was fain to fall upon other Measures to get rid of
this unlucky hit; and therefore entreated the Marshal of Cr^^^'s Lady, who was
his Relation, to cause an Accommodation to be proposed to M^r^^^.

This Actress was no sooner applied to, than she stood aloof. The Marshal's
Lady threatened her with the discovery the Counselor made in her Nephew's
Life, on purpose to fright her. But whether she was afraid of nothing from that
Faction, or that she thought she had Friends enough to protect her, she carried
her Pretensions so high as to demand Ten thousand Crowns of the Marshal's Lady
for her Nephew's Interest and Damages. As soon as the Lady had acquainted her
Relations that there was no hopes of an Accommodation for him, he spoke very
scornfully of such an exorbitant Demand; so applying himself altogether to a
vigorous Defense, he would certainly have confounded the opposite Party, if the
Parliament had condescended to it. He gave in a Petition against the Plaintiff,
showing that he had two Wives. He desired to have a Decret passed against him;
but bringing no valid proof for his Accusation, the Parliament durst not
declare in his Favor, for fear of a Reprimand from the Court. For the secret
Letter which they had received, together with a Letter from the
Attourney-General of the Parliament of Paris, gave them to know, that they must
proceed justly, if they meant not to have their Sentence liable to a Revisal.
Above all, they were afraid of the Aunt's Friends, suspecting very much, that
if they gave them the least ground of Complaint, they should have them, more
than her, for their Adversaries. In fine, Montchamp failing in his Expectation,
and not being able to produce any Proof for what he alleged; though he had
employed some considerable Persons in it, Sentence was pronounced upon the
Affair. He was suspended for six Months, and having received a Reprimand behind
the Bench, he was condemned to pay the costs. He had made an offer before of
Four thousand Livres to his Adversary; but by the Calculation made of the
Charges, they did not amount to so much, which was no small Mortification for
our Actress M^r^au. For had it depended upon her, she had protested against the
Sentence. But the Gentlemen of the Robe assured her she would fail in the
attempt, so that she was fain to condescend against her Inclination.

As Britany furnishes us thus with an instance of Violence committed upon the
Person of one of her Public Magistrates, so Paris produced somewhat like it in
the Son of one of here is; but what is something more, it was executed upon a
Person of Quality. The Marquis of Novion, Son to the late Monsieur Novion,
Master of the Rolls, and Brother to the present Monsieur Novion, President of
the Sovereign Court, falling in Love with a certain Chanoinesse, whose Mother
was of the same Family with Monsieur de Caumartin, he humour^d her to that
degree, that he promised, as is alleged, to revenge her Quarrel upon a
Gentleman, of whom she complained heavily. She was extremely vexed that this
Gentleman, who called himself the Knight of St. Geniers, should have pressed
her somewhat too hard to pay him some Money, that he alleged he had lent her.
He had been formerly her Lover; but whether she pretended, that when once a Man
is in Love with a Woman, he ought to give and not lend, or that he had demanded
his Money after a rude manner; she had told the Marquess so often, that this
Gentleman was troublesome to her; that he was charged with what I am now to
recount. The Knight of St. Geniers passing one Day along a Street that was
pretty near his former Mistriss's Lodgings, was attacked by five or six
Bravado's of Paris, who are always at a short distance from one another, when
they design any thing. And their Valor consists only in that, which has some
Relation to what Monsieur de Turenne was used to say, namely, That God Almighty
was always of the strongest side. In effect, their Train obliges those, who
would have no regard for them, upon the lay of Man for Man, to show them some
Respect. But whether it was upon that account, or that the Knight, being one of
Maltha, owned no Enemy but a Turk, he had no Inclination to meddle with this
Man. But this pretended Hero, who had served his Apprenticeship to
Slaughtering, being the Son of a Butcher, seeing the Knight took no notice of
some small Indignities he had given him, had a mind to know, whether or no he
had forgot his first Trade, though some time ago he had exchanged it for the
Rapier. He meant therefore to slit his Nose, and performed it so dexterously,
that all the Nose was left the poor Knight, hung by one small Tendon, and he
had certainly cut it off quite, had he not been hinder^d by some People who
interposed, but he made his escape while the Knight's Wound was a dressing. The
whole Town was immediately alarmed at the boldness of this Action. It was no
great difficulty for the Knight to judge who had hatched this Mischief; and
therefore as soon as the Chyrurgion had dressed him, he went immediately and
made his Complaint to the Commiss^^y. The Lieu^enant Criminal gave out a
Warrant against the Bravado, and some other certain Gentlemen who accompanied
him in the Exploit. But as to the Marquess, the Chanoinesse and her Mother,
whom the Knight had likewise accused, he had some more Consideration for them;
for the Respect he had for their Relations, obliged him to proceed very nicely
against them. He thought it sufficient to Issue out a personal Summons against
the three: The Mother and the Daughter made their Compearance, and were
interrogated. But the Marquess of Novion durst not show his Countenance, in
regard his Bully had been so foolish as to suffer himself to be apprehended.
But he retired to a Friend's House, hoping that by his Reputation in the Robe,
he might save the Guilty from a just Punishment. But his Majesty being informed
of the whole Affair by one of the Knight's Friends, commanded the Matter to be
examined very strictly, so that the Marquess was fain to leave Paris, and save
himself by flying to Swisserland

It (...) happy for these Women, that they never had either seen or heard of
this Bully; insomuch, that he not being able to accuse them, they were without
any farther difficulty absolved from their personal Summons. However, the Bully
was sentenced by the Lieutenant-Criminal to be hanged, nor could he avoid
giving of that Sentence. However desirous he was to oblige the Marquiss's
Family. The Marquiss's Friends advised the Criminal to fear nothing, for the
Parliament, to whom he had appealed, would infallibly clear him. But the Knight
suspecting the matter, prevented their threatenings, and petitioned the King, to
give him other Judges, which he obtained. The Appeal, instead of being brought
before the Parliament, according to the usual Custom, was brought before the
Great Council. The Measures of the Marquiss's Friends and Relations being by
this means quite defeated, they advised him to keep himself close where he was,
for seeing his Affairs had taken so fatal a turn, it was by no means safe for
him to return into the Kingdom. But being Colonel of the Regiment of Britany,
and all the World believing him guilty, a great many People made Interest to
have his Regiment. Monsieur de Boveron, the Marquess of Harcourt s Father,
asked it for the Marquess of Sesane, his eldest Son of a second Marriage. For
he had married for his second Wife, the Marquis of Genles's Widow, who was the
late Marshal de Fabert's youngest Daughter.

The Marquis's Relations were sensible of what importance it was for them to
weather this Storm; for if once the King disposed of his Regiment, it would not
only prove a mortal Stroke to his Fortune, that was already pretty low, but the
World would also look upon it as a sort of Conviction against him. They
therefore supplicated his Majesty that he would be pleased to delay that Affair
for some small time, promising to oblige their Kinsman to return quickly in
order to clear himself of the Crime laid to his charge; and alleging he was
reduced to mean Circumstances, upon which account it would be equally
acceptable to take away his Life, as his Regiment. The King, in consideration
of their Services, granted their Request. And the Marquis of Sesane was obliged
to provide for himself somewhere else, if he meant to have a Regiment. However,
this made no stop in the Appeal of the Condemned Criminal, for the Sentence
being confirmed; when he perceived that all their fine Promises were not
sufficient to save him from a Rope, he charged the Marquis of Novion with the
Crime at his Death. This Sentence satisfied in some measure the Knight's
Revenge, who always saw the Marks of his Affront when he looked into his Glass.
For though his Nose was stitched up, yet the Seam appearing, was no small
Mortification to him; so that he could never be at ease until he had the same
Satisfaction of others, that he had already of the Bully. He prosecuted them
very eagerly before the same Tribunal. However, he could never have his Revenge
of them, as he pretended; for though he prevailed so far, as to have the Cause
removed from before the Parliament, where the Marquis had a great many Friends
and Relations, and generally all Judges stick close by one another; yet to this
minute the Affair remains undecided. For they started so many difficulties,
that it is impossible for one of a more considerable Interest than his, to
remove them; besides, to plead in Criminal Matters, requires a more weighty
Purse than his, and yet could easily exhaust it. In the mean time, another
Adventure happen^d to President Novion*s Nephew, and however extraordinary the
first appeared, yet it bears no proportion with this I am about to mention now.

This President's Wife was a Gentleman's Daughter, whose Office it was to give
out the Powder, by which he had got immense Sums of Money. She had a Sister by
her first Marriage, who was the Widow of a certain Man, called Ombreval,
Advocate-General of the Court of Aides, by whom she had some Children, and
amongst the rest, a Son of one or two and twenty Years old: He studied the Law,
that he might succeed his Father in his Profession. This young Gentleman coming
from the Law-School, saw two Jesuits passing along, and at the same time a Cart
loaded with Bundles of Rods, then he told his Companions, that these Dis^^ples
of St. Ignatius had often whipp^d him in the College, and he had a good mind to
be revenged of them now that he found his opportunity; he mean'd to bang them
like Bridewel-Birds, and to that intent each of them might take a Bundle of
these Rods from the Cart, and oblige these good Fathe's to ask them Pardon for
all the Cruelty they had made them suffer before. In all appearance he had only
said this to divert himself But his Companions understanding him literally, the
most foolish, and most bold of 'em, leaped upon the Ca^t, and in spite of the
Carman, untied the Bundles, took up handfulls of the Rods, and like so many
Furies fell upon the poor Jesuits, who never dreamt of the like Adventure.
There was no great matter of Ceremony in the Compliment they made them. They
told them only, they had often obliged them to pull down their Breeches against
their Inclination, and now they meant to do the like to them; that common
Justice required they should pay them presently for all the Evil they had
suffered by them, and they would make them sensible, by which means they
intended to perform it. This Folly appeared so extravagant, that the two
Jesuits could never understand what they meant. But these Furies made them to
know very quickly by falling suddenly upon them; that its altogether as
dangerous to fall into the Hands of Scholars, as into the Hands of the most
barbarous Hangman upon Earth. Some pulled off their Cloaks, others their Gowns,
while another Party untied their Breeches, another pulled up their Shirts, the
young Ombreval serv^d for Executioner, together with another of the same
Family, who had consigned his Money in order to be a Councellor of Parliament.

All the People got to the Windows upon the noise these poor Jesuits made, to
call to the Neighbors for Assistance; and among others, a pretty young Girl,
who was more zealous than the rest, to hinder them from receiving any greater
Affront, cried aloud, that it deserved a severe Punishment, as in effect it
did; but perceiving she was not heard, she went down Stairs to see if her
Presence could have a greater Influence than her Words; but alas! her Charity
cost her very dear. For these Scholars, who were far from having so much good
nature as she, seeing her espouse so earnestly the part of these good Fathers,
that she reproached them for their Injustice; seized her also, pulled up her
Peticoats behind, and whipped her as they had done the Jesuits. After that, she
pleaded no more for them, but as soon as she got out of their Hands, she run in
and shut the Doors, and got up to her Chamber in great Confusion and Vexation
at her Adventure. The Jesuits had reason to be no less vexed. However, though
the same fate happened to them all, they having been all three whipped in the
open Streets; there was still this difference in the Sequel, that the Adventure
proved more fatal to the Girl than to them. The Fraternity received them always
with the same kindness into the Convent. They vowed also to revenge it in a
little time, or dye in the Attempt; whereas the Girl was abandoned by her
Lover, and swore he would not have her; they had agreed upon their Marriage,
and the Articles had been already signed, but he fearing that if he proceeded
further, he might be called all over the Town, The Husband of the whipped Girl,
could not endure to hear it spoken of. They threatened to prosecute him, if he
did not make good his Promise. He answered, He valued it not, and that he would
defend himself the best way he could; and its probable his Reasons might have
prevail^d, for every one condemned the Indiscretion of the Girl, to meddle
where she was so little concerned.

This Action was too public, and too bold, not to spread in an instant over
all Paris. Monsieur D' Argenson had soon advice of it, and it being his Duty to
find out Criminals, he sent so many of his Spies abroad, that he soon
discovered young Ombreval to be one of them. He also knew, that this Gentleman
began the Fray, and was one of the Executioners, through whose Hands those
Jesuits had passed. He likewise found out the other's Name, who had executed
the same Office, and caused them both to be taken up. President Novion was
extremely offended at him, as if he ought to have that deference for him, as
not to treat after that manner a Person that concerned him so nearly. But this
Vanity and Haughtiness were very familiar to that Family, though it was of a
far later standing than Monsieur D' Argenson's. Before St. Innocent's Shrine
was altered, which was but lately, we had an Epitaph extant, that shows
sufficiently, they have neither so much Nobility nor Grandeur in their Race, as
they would make the World believe. It is far different from what we see at this
time in the Celestines, where the Duke of Gevres, one of that Family would have
us believe, that he is lineally descended from St. Louis. Though the Family be
only come from a Merchand, one Fourner, who made his Son an Advocate, and that
Son laid the Foundation of the vast Grandeur. However it be, President Novion
minding that less than the Post he possessed, thought himself far above
Monsieur D' Argenson, and wrote to him very disrespectfully upon what he had
done. Monsieur D' Argenson regarding his Letter very little, went on in his
ordinary Course, so that the President was fain to take his Nephew out of
Prison, and his Companion came out after the same manner: Both of them had a
good many Friends, and the Accusation they were charged with, being destitute
of Proof sufficient to bring them to a Trial, they were very happily cleared of
it. This was all the Jesuits had for their Satisfaction, and the poor whipped
Girl for here is; besides the Mortification of having missed of a Husband,
together with the Grief and Indignity she received.

In the mean time, the New King of England sent a New Ambassador to Court,
namely, the Earl of Portland, his old Favorite. For the Earl of Albemarle only
succeeded to him, if I may say so; for though he was his Britannick Majesty's
Darling, yet Portland was in as good Terms with his Master as ever. Moreover he
had this advantage over the other, that besides the Favor which was common to
them both, he was confided in. This Earl renewed that Grandeur at our Court,
which was to be seen in the time of the Duke of Buckingham, when he came to
demand in Marriage for the King his Master, Mary Henrietta of France, Sister to
Louis XIII. of glorious Memory. I mean by this, that he came with such a
stately and magnificent Equipage, that the like had not been seen, of a long
time, with an Ambassador. He had a permission to bring over with him some
Frenchmen, who had gone into England after the Revocation of the Edict of
Nants, and who never durst have ventured to return afterward without a
Passport. However, Degrez, whom the Court had employed to take up Ministers,
and other Persons of that Religion, looked upon this as a favorable
opportunity for him, and did not fail to make his advantage of it. It being his
ordinary Custom to render every Person suspected, in order to make the best of
his Trade, he upon a certain Day took up one of the Ambassador's Ministers,
while he thought of going to see one of his Friends, who was an Advocate. It
was very happy for this Advocate, that he had been all along a Catholic, for
that Quality, and his wise Conduct sheltered him from the evil Designs of this
Kidnapper, whose Gain it was to cast every one in Prison. He told him freely
his Sentiments of such proceedings; for he had no Orders to do what he did
then, but it was his ordinary practice, that he might be thought the more
Zealous, though all his Zeal consisted only in his Interest. The Minister asked
him, what it was he accus^d him of; and why he made his Prisoner after that
manner, he being the Ambassador of England*s Domestic, to whom only he was
obliged to give an account of his Conduct. It was upon that score that the
Advocate exclaimed against Degrez, making him to know, that the Court would
never approve of such Proceedings. Degrez found himself obliged to answer all
those Demands, which the Advocate backed with all the Arguments he could
invent, telling him, That he engaged himself, as well as the King, in an
unwarrantable Action. The Wound that the War had given to France was still
bleeding, and Degrez knowing that all this Mischief was brought upon them by
the Ambassador's Master, he thought he was obliged to give him some Reason for
what he had done. He told him that the Minister had administered the Sacrament
to one of his Religion, and had sent for him to that end to the Ambassador's
House, and that being forbid, it was very warrantable for him to take him up,
as he did. And thus he was not afraid to declare himself Sacrilegious, the
better to color his Design. In effect it is true, that was prohibited; but it is
as true that the Minister was never guilty of it, and therefore desired to see
the Person who accused him. Now Degrez had brought a Fellow along with him to
the Advocate's Door, who had endeavored to impose upon the Clergyman. For
this Rascal had pretended to be a Protestant, and applied himself to the
Minister to procure him a Passport for England. The Minister was in effect
imposed upon. He believed him in good earnest to be some poor Man, whom the
Zeal for his Religion obliged to quit his Country and Friends; but knowing that
was not permitted, he endeavored to comfort him, without giving him any other
relief. But the Rascally Fellow had no mind to tell his Master that answer, or
if he had, Degrez pleaded ignorance. However, the Minister was so exceedingly
vexed at this Calumny, that if his Character had allowed him to meddle with any
of them, he had doubtless banged the Villain to some purpose. But that being
impracticable, he desired Degrez to cause arrest him, and told him if he
refused it, he must be answerable for it to my Lord Portland, and that the King
their Master was capable to do himself Justice, and he might come to hear of it
in a short time. The Advocate added, That he might find it to his disadvantage.
These Expressions put the little Gentleman into a fright; he went to Monsieur
D'Argenson, to know of him how to behave in the matter. His Officers had always
an eye upon the Minister after that; but Monsieur D'Argenson found that the
Advocate had advised him well, and commanded him to put his advice in
Execution. In fine, he was forced to send his Man to Prison, and set the
Minister at liberty, according to the Order that Monsieur D'Argenson had given
him. It Is certain, this false Witness deserved to be hanged, or at least to be
sent to the Galleys, to teach all those of the like Kidney prudence upon their
own expenses. But as the wick'd find favor rather than honest Men, whose
misfortune brings them into any inconveniency, they delayed to proceed against
him, until my Lord Portland was gone, and then they set him at liberty.

All the Court showed this Ambassador singular Marks of Honor. The Daup^ine,
the Duke of Orleans, and all the great Lords of the Court, invited him to
Dinner, while he for his part kept a very splendid Table. The Count of Auvergne
youngest Son to the Duke of Bouillon, gave him the use of his Lodgings while he
stayed at Paris; and himself went in the mean time to Holland to his Wife's
Estate, who died there about that time. This Ambassador had at his Entry a
hundred Livery-men, and six Coaches, three with eight Horses, and three with
six; and continued the same Grandeur all the time he stayed at Court. He always
made his Visits with all that Attendance, to let the World see how little he
resembled a great many of that Quality, who discharge three parts of their
Equipage the next day after their Entry; so that he spent almost a hundred
thousand Crowns in the two Months that his Embassy lasted.

King James passed his time very indifferently all that while. He heard from
all hands the Honor done to my Lord Portland, which was such as perhaps was
never shown before to any Ambassador. This made some People believe that there
were some Alliances on foot betwixt the two Kings, and the more, because my
Lord Portland had three or four Private Audiences of his Majesty. However,
while some French People suspected, that they thought of dividing Flanders
between them two, after the Death of the King of Spain, whose Health was very
infirm, it came to be known that these private Audiences were upon a very
different Subject. My Lord Portland insisted upon the removing of King James at
a farther distance from the King's Presence, promising in his Master's Name to
give him and the Queen a Pension sufficient to excuse his Majesty from the
Expense he had been at upon that Prince, since he had made a Sanctuary of his
Dominions. But the King would never give ear to it, which exceeded King James's
Expectation, who, in case the King had abandoned him, was resolved to retire to
Avignion, for he began already to inform himself, if he could live conveniently
there. For as the King was obliged in Policy to make Peace with his Enemy,
though he had promised never to make it, until he had restored him to his
Crown, he was afraid that the same Policy might also induce him to grant what
was demanded.

The King of Spain's Malady increasing every Moment, insomuch, that it was
generally thought he had few days to live, did not only move all the Powers of
Europe to delay the Reform of their Troops after the Peace, but likewise
retarded the Evacuation of some Places, which his Majesty was obliged to
Surrender. However, the Marquis of Harcourt received Orders to go with all
di^igence to the Court of Madrid with this Instruction, that if he saw no
probability, as in effect there was none, to bring the Succession of his
Catholic Majesty to fall upon one of the Dauphine's Sons; he should endeavor,
at least, to hinder its coming to any of his Imperial Majesty's Children. For
it was to the Emperor and his Descendants, that Philip IV. the present King of
Spain's Father had left it by his Will. And the Emper^r becoming already very
powerful by his Conquests in Hungary, he was thereby become so suspected to his
Majesty, that he was resolved to have recourse to his Arms, rather than suffer
it to fall into his Hands. And, accordingly, to fright the Spaniards, he caused
to file off Sixty thousand Men to the Frontiers of Italy, Catalonia, and
Navarre. He was sensible that would add some weight to his Ambassador's
Discourses, and might also awaken the Ambition of some Grandee of the Country.

The Marquess was no sooner arrived in Spain than he applied himself to
business. He told those, who were capable to act in concert with him in an
Affair of such importance, that Philip IV. had gone beyond his Power, when he
pretended to dispose of his Crown at pleasure, against the Laws of Nature. That
it belonged lawfully to his Daughter's Children, and not to his Relations in
the fourth Degree, who could pretend to no Right of themselves. That the
Dauphine had three Sons, and the Duke of Burgundy's second Brother was still as
pliable as wax, whom they could Mould into any Form they pleased, and if they
would fix their Eye upon him, they might easily breed him to their own Customs;
that if this failed, the Prince of Bavaria being Grand son to a Daughter of
Spain, the King, his Master, would rather approve of his Election, than of the
Emperor's, or of any of his Children, unless they had a mind to follow the
Example of the Poles, who to oblige Strangers to agree among themselves, had
twice chosen a Sovereign of their own Country. And this was all the King
pretended to, considering he could not expect to bring the Crown of Spain into
his own Family. But the Queen of Spain having a watchful Eye upon the Conduct
of this Ambassador, who made it his business to renverse her Designs, pried
narrowly into his Intrigues, and removed the King, her Husband, some distance
from Madrid, under pretense that the Air was prejudicial to his Health. She
carried him to Toledo, and pretending it was only upon the account of his
Health; would allow no body to follow him thither. Nay, she left some Ministers
that she confided in at Madrid, in order to receive whatever any of the
Ambassadors had a mind to offer. The Marquis de Harcourt saw clearly with what
view the Queen made this Journey, and that she intended to be so fully Mistress
of the King, her Husband's Inclinations, that she could obtain of him whatever
she had a mind to. He feared she might prevail with him to confirm Philip IV's
Will; and at the same time observed, that the Count de H^rrach was no more to
be seen at Madrid, and in all probability was gone to Toledo; upon this, he
went immediately thither also, under pretense of having received a Memorial
(which he forged) from the King his Master, with positive Orders to communicate
it to his Catholic Majesty.

The Queen of Spain, who did not in the least expect it, was extremely
surpised to see him there; and caused the King, her Husband, to whom he
presented his Memorial, to acquaint him, That he had left the Cardinal of
Corduba at Madrid on purpose, to whom he might have communicated his Memorials,
as well as to him; that his principal Intention for coming thither, was to
recover his Health, and not to trouble himself with Business; and therefore he
might apply himself to the Cardinal in all Affairs of State. However,
considering that the Memorial was not very long, and that in all appearance it
tended to his own advantage, he thought he was obliged to answer it himself.
One thing to be considered, is, that the King of Morocco had for a long time
besieged the Fortress of Ceuta in Barbary, which belonged to his Catholic
Majesty, but could never take it. Nor was the King of Spain in circumstances to
raise the Siege, though he had attempted it several times. In all appearance
these (...) did not carry it on very vigorously; whether they were ignorant how
to carry it on, or that they thought the Conquest the more Glorious after a
Siege of so many Years. His most Christian Majesty, by this Memorial, offered
to the King of Spain, if he pleased, to send Men of War and Galleys to succor
that place. His Catholic Majesty had enough of his own for such an Enterprise,
without being obliged to borrow of any other Prince. But he was so
treacherously served by him, whom he had entrusted with his Orders, that
instead of executing them, he deserted to the Enemies. Nay, he did much worse,
for not being satisfied to Renounce his Master only, he renounced also Jesus
Christ, which was esteemed so great an encouragement for these Infidels, that,
after that, they thought they had gained all. Such an accident, in effect,
confounded all the Governors his Catholic Majesty had upon that Coast; and
this was the Subject, or rather the Pretense of the French Ambassador's
Memorial. But whether his Catholic Majesty had no mind to accept of such
suspected Succors, or that he thought he could do without them, he thanked the
Ambassador for the proffer, observing with him, at the same time, all the
measures of Civility, that were proper for the occasion. However, he who had
renounced his King and his Faith, beginning to be sensible of his fault, and to
repent of it, confessed that he was a Christian, and abhorred his Apostasy. But
the Infidels, who had made a great deal of noise of his change, expecting to
oblige him to return to them by the force of Presents and Promises, endeavored
to regain him; but seeing him continue in his Repentance, and that there was no
possibility of bringing him over again to them, they threatened to treat him as
they usually do Apostates from their Religion, I mean, they threatened to
Empale him after torturing. But he expected no less, and was fully resolved to
undergo all, being extreme glad to expiate by these Torments, the heinous Crime
he had committed against his God and his King. So being no ways frightened by
their Menaces, he submitted himself very freely to all the Torments they could
invent. In ^ine, in the middle of these dismal Torments, he joyfully confessed
him whom he had denied: upon which they put him at last to Death, least by his
Constancy some amongst them might be moved to acknowledge, that he suffered for
a good Cause, in regard he seemed so insensible of Pain in his Torments.

After this Answer, the Marquis of Harcourt was obliged to return to Madrid,
and endeavored by all means possible to gain the People by a very agreeable
Conduct; his Wife, the Marchioness, came also from France to second him. For
having an infinite deal of Wit, she thought to infinuate her self by degrees
into the Queen's Affection, and gain her Confidence by the means of some
Proposals she believed would prove mightily to her Advantage, with regard to
her Person. It was highly presumptuous in her to entertain that thought. To be
sure, her Majesty would be much upon her guard against her; for besides her
being the Wife of a M^narch, who is a capital Enemy to France, there was not
the least appearance she would hearken to any thing that came from that Nation.
The Queen of Spain, notwithstanding her being a German, began to conform her
self to a Court, where Trick and Policy are in Vogue as much as in any in the
Universe, and therefore se^gn'd presently to be exceedingly charmed with the
(...), to the end she might the more easily know her Secrets. The Marchioness
told it to her Husband, meaning to persuade him to rejoice at it with her: But
the Ambassador, though he had always been a Man more inclined to the Sword than
the Court, was yet cunning, and advised her always to suspect so excessive
Civility. He told her, it was not natural for the King of Spain's Wife, to be
so early in a good Correspondence with the Ambassador of France's Lady, that it
looked like a Trick among those who knew better than to judge of things by
appearance. And therefore all he recommended to her, was to be prudent, that
she ought to hear the Queen speak, rather than speak her self, and by these
means she would certainly advance her Affairs much better than by endeavoring
to be the Head of the Conversation.

While these Intrigues proceeded after this manner, the Princess of Conti, the
King's Daughter, had some thoughts of marrying Mademoiselle de Melan, eldest
Daughter to the Princess of Epinoi, to the Marquess of La Valiere, her
Cousin-German; she had a great Respect for her, and went very often to Paris to
see her; and as for the Marquis, he was in very good terms with the Dauphine.
She had it in her view, at the same time, to get him made Duke and Peer, by
obtaining from the King the Title of his Duchy of Vaujour to her self, in
expectation of his succeeding to the Propriety of it after her Death. This Land
pertain'd for a long time to the House of Bueil, and while it continued in that
Family, had only the Title of Marquisate, but was erected into a Duchy in
^avour of Madam de la Valiere, who since made her self a Ca^^^ ^^^ess. Monsieur
Colb^rt, who had the Secret to get her into his Interest, while she was a
Favorite, bought this Land for her, by which means he ingratiated himself both
in the King's Favor and here is. It cost him only a hundred thousand Crowns,
though there was as much Wood upon it as would answer that Money, which he sold
in a short time after the Purchase. However, Mademoiselle de Melan flattered
her self already with being a Duchess very soon, which was somewhat better
than the imaginary Principality her Family flattered themselves with, when the
Princess of Conti came to know that his Majesty had no Inclination for that
Marriage. This made her shift sides, and seeing the Duke of Noailles was in
great Favor with the King, she cast her Eyes upon one of his Daughters. There
was a whole Regiment of them; and though there had been three of them already
married, yet there remained still such a number of them, that he was the Person
in all the Court, the best provided with Means to make Sons-in-law; besides,
they strove who should have them. For his Majesty had lately conferred a Favor
upon him, that evinced sufficiently the Esteem he had for him. Madam de
M^i^^^n^n had a Nicce, who was the only Daughter of the Count of Aubig^^, her
Brother, Governor of Berry, and Knight of the King's Order. This young
Creature, who was very lovely in her Person, was much more such by the Favor
and Merit of her Aunt, who took particular care of her Education. For she
thought that her Father, who loved his Game and Pleasures, and by these means
had ruined his Affairs, so that he was oblig^d to retire, in order, either to
pick up what might pay his Debts, or to learn that he must die. I say, she
thought that her Father was in no Capacity to do any thing for her, and
therefore by her care she made her a very well-accomplish'd young Lady, and
this Quality, with all the others, which she possessed in an eminent degree,
made her the desirable Object of all the Great Men of the Court, who had any
Sons to Marry; but there were particularly two, who had a great design upon
her, namely, the Duke of Rochefoucaut, who would have given her the Prince of
Marsillac, his Grandson; the other, the Duke of Noailles, who had his eldest
Son, the Count of Again, to Marry. Either of these seemed very advantageous for
her, though the first appeared to be much more such than the last. For in
effect, though the House of Noailles be very good and ancient, yet the Family
of Rochefoucaut exceeds it; at least in the Opinion of a great many, for all
who pretend to know any thing of the Grandeur of Families, make a great
difference between them; besides, though the Duke of Noailles was Captain of
the Life-Guards, a very considerable Post, the Duke of Rochefoucaut had two
others, which were fully as considerable, and both of them carry great Titles,
which distinguish them from many others; though in effect, that of Great
Marshal of the Lodgings is small enough for its Grandeur. On the other hand,
there are a great many larger Estates in his Family, than the Duke of Noailles
can pretend to. The Estate of Noailles that lies just by Turenne, is nothing in
comparison of Wertheux, and of Rocheg^yon, that must, of necessity, fall one
day to the Prince of Marsillac, without reckoning a great many other Lands,
which the Duke of Rochefoucaut, and the Duke of Rocheguyon, his Father, have;
so that every one believed, that the Prince of Marsillac would carry the young
Lady, when the King declared himself in favor of the Count of Again. The King
himself gave her a Portion; and not thinking it sufficient to give her eight
hundred thousand Livers, he also conferred so many Favors upon her Husband,
that a great many Princes, and even Princes of the Blood, would have been very
glad to receive 'em. He gave him the Survivance of the Government of
Roussillon, which the Duke of Noailles had; that of the Government of Berry,
which the Count of Aubignie had; a hundred thousand Livres in Jewels to the
young Lady; and in fine, a great many other things, that showed no less the
Magnificence of the King, than the particular Friendship he had for their
Relations. And this demonstrated how much they were in the Right, who courted
the Alliance of the Duke of Noailles. But the King, as an additional
Super-abounding Favor, gave the young Count his Shirt when he was ready to go
to Bed, while the Duchess of Burgundy performed the same Office to the young
Lady. One would have thought that there remained nothing to be done after so
many Favors* But his Majesty, who is an inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness,
gave each of them a Pension of eight thousand Livres a Years, and to complete
the Work, said, That provided the Count were a good Man, he might assure
himself, he should never want for any thing.

It being no mean thing to become a Brother-in-law to such a Gentleman as this,
Madam, the Princess of Conti, managed the Match betwixt her Cousin and his
Sister; she secured to her his Duchy by the Contract of Marriage, and the
Affair being thus concluded, the Dauphine conceived so great a Friendship for
the new married Gentleman, that he could go no where without him. He had him
always by his side in his Coach, as if they had but one Coach betwixt them
both, and leaned his Head always to his, as if he had been his Mistress, and in
a sporting way called him Violet, a Name that formerly was not much coveted,
being only proper for Footmen, or that sort of Cattle, but now became very
fashionable amongst the Courtiers. The Dauphine is naturally of a sweet Temper,
and an Enemy to all manner of Constraint. He is not capable of having any great
Inclination for Women; and though he may have loved one or two of them, knowing
that the fair Sex requires complaisance, he did not regard them so much upon
the account of their easiness as of their Virtue. Dumont, one of his Masters of
the Horse, who was much in his Favor, brought them always to him by Private
Stairs when he wanted them, and sent them immediately back when he had done.
This Prince chus'd them ordinarily amongst the Actresses of the Opera or
Comedy, upon which there happened to him a very pleasant Rencounter, that
deserves some place in this Work. Having caused Dumont to speak to one of the
Actresses of the Opera, he agreed with her that she should come to Meudon, to
the end he might introduce her to the Dauphin's Closet by the private Stairs;
they condescended upon the Day and Hour. The Actress, though a Person void of
Ceremony, thought it not very decent to go thither alone, and so brought one of
her Sisters along with her. The Dauphine had some Person with him in his Closet
when they arrived, which obliged Dumont to tell them to wait in a place where
he posted them near the Closet; at the same time he made it known to the
Dauphine by a sign, that his fair Lady was come, to the end he might discharge
his Company. The Dauphine ordered him to go some where or other, and in the
mean time the Dauphine's Company judging they where somewhat inconvenient to
him, took there leave. Dumont having left the private Door half open, the
Actress's Sister hearing no noise in the Room, had the Curiosity to look into
it. The Dauphine, who only waited for Dumont's return to have her Sister
introduced, having his Eyes fixed, by chance, that way, where the other was
looking, no sooner saw a Woman's Coiffe at the Door, but taking her to be the
Person he had a mind to, he desired her to come in. She thought it good manners
to obey, though it was none of her he meant. But whether his Eyes were somewhat
Dim that Day, or that he was in such haste, that he had no time to consider her
aright, he gave her the same usage he designed for her Sister. After which,
having no further Inclination for the Lady's Conversation, he sent her away
immediately. She told her Sister nothing of this Adventure. The Actress still
waited for Dumont, and longed much for his coming. In fine, he returned by the
Private Stairs, and told her he was a going to speak to the Dauphin, in order
to bring her in. The Dauphine told him, The he had had all the Conversation
with her he intended, and desired him to give her five hundred Louis d'ores,
and send her home. Dumont, who had seen her very impatient to enter, knew
nothing of what he meant by that, and entreated the Dauphine to explain
himself. In fine, he came to know what passed, but not knowing with whom, he
went and told the Actress, that if her Appetite was so very good, it was not
the same with the Dauphine's. She was extremely surpised at his Complement;
but understood by it, that her Sister had deceived her, and was so extremely
vexed at it, that she would never be reconciled with her, till she condescended
to divide the five hundred Louis d'ores with her, which the Dauphine had sent
to her.

The furious War which the King had maintained against so many Potentates, had
encouraged some of the new Converts to profess their former Religion,
notwithstanding the Prohibition to the contrary. His Majesty caused to take up
a great many of them in the Neighborhood of Orange, as they were returning
thence from Sermon. Some of them were treated very severely, while others got
off for a Month or two's Imprisonment. The King set also Guards upon all the
Avenues of that Town, to hinder them from returning thither any more. But not
being entirely satisfied with this Precaution, he made very strict Edicts
against all such, who should dare, in prejudice of the Prohibition, to venture
to go thither again. But this was not the only disobedience that appeared in a
short space of time, for not one of them went to Mass. And his Majesty being
informed of it from all Parts, and finding it a matter that ought to be
remedied, if he meant to prevent some dangerous Accidents, deliberated with his
Council, how he ought to proceed against these obstinate People. They were all
at a loss how to advise him upon that occasion, insomuch, that the Affair
remained undecided, and the King wrote to the most part of the Bishops and
Intendants, to have their Judgment in writing: These differed in their
Sentiments from one another. Some advised him to make use only of Exhortations,
in order to make them Obedient; others were for a severe usage. Those, who were
of this last Sentiment, were so much the more warm in it, because they imagined
(though unjustly) that the King of England had used these means with regard to
the Catholics of Ireland, who not willing to submit to the present Government,
were fain to look for a Sanctuary in France, to shelter themselves from the
Punishment that was due to their Rebellion. These People of all Ages and
Conditions, coming over in whole Troops to France, never failed to spread
abroad, that they had been obliged to quit their Country in order to avoid the
Violence that was done to their Consciences. The King gave them five hundred
Pistols in Charity, which was thought but a small mite for so great a King.
However he appointed some Ladies of the Court to raise an Offering for them
amongst the Persons of Quality. The Curats of Paris followed that Example, and
caused also an Offering to be made in their Parishes to supply their Necessity.
But their being a great many Monks and Priests amongst these Refugees, the
Archbishop of Paris would have them to say their Masses in No^re Dame, by way
of Preference to all the French Priests, who used to Celebrate 'em there. He
did them also particular Acts of Charity, for being extraordinary Pious, he
omitted nothing that was in his Power for their Relief.

In the mean time the Earl of Jersey, Brother in Law to the Earl of Portland,
was Named by the King of England, to succeed this last in France: The King had
no mind to speak to my Lord Portland, of any thing that passed in Ireland,
least he might thence take occasion to speak to him of the Protestants in
France. He made him a present of his Picture, richly set with Diamonds,
according to the ordinary Practice of this Court, with a regard to all
Ambassadors.

But there was this difference made betwixt him and others; that the Diamonds
upon the Present made to him, were Three times more rich than they upon any
others: The King probably meant, that his present should bear some proportion
to the expenses he had been at; or perhaps knowing he was in good terms with
his Master, he was glad to have his favor upon occasion. Some few Days before
his departure, the King made a review of his Household; and King James was
there, as was also this Lord, who perhaps had forborne coming, if he had known
that the other was to be there. The Prince of Wales came thither also, and had
particular Orders from the King his Father, to join Conversation with that
Lord's Son, to whom he had caused to insinuate before, that he never pretended
to make him answerable for what his Master had done against him. This young
Prince being only a Child, was hardly capable of such an Entertainment, but he
had placed such Persons about him, as were able to inform him, and even
continue the Discourse if necessary: I do not know what he meant by it: However
my Lord Portland knowing the young Princes design, sent to tell his Son to
avoid him, and himself shunned all those of King James's Court. The review being
over, he left France in a few Days after, leaving a great esteem for him
amongst all the Courtiers. However before he went, he was to see all the King's
Houses in the Neighborhood of Paris, and found them of a far different
magnificence from his Majesty's Houses in Holland and England. He went to
Chantilly in his road, whither the Prince of Conde went a purpose to entertain
him; and thus here turned home, extremely satisfied with the Honor done him
every where, and gave an Account to his Master of all that passed in his
Embassy. This Prince was not ill pleased, at the News of the King of Spain's
sickness; for it being upon that account that France continued still Armed, he
likewise kept up his Troops, so as that the English could not find fault with
it: He knew his Greatness and Safety, consisted in the Number of his Troops;
and having Enemies both within and without his Kingdom, there was nothing more
capable to gain him respect, than to have always a good Army at his Command.

This Prince having made it to appear upon all occasions, that he had an
infinite deal of Sense, was not in the least mistaken upon this occasion: For
finding it his interest upon two Accounts, to keep France continually in Arms;
both as it was a means to exhaust his Forces; and as it would prove always a
good pretense for him to keep up his own Army: He advised to have it ratified
at the Diet of Ratisbon, that the Princes of the Empire, should always keep up
a Hundred and Twenty Thousand Men in Arms, in the time of Peace; for he was
sensible, the more they had, the more France would be obliged to have on that
side. And there being but a small distance betwixt England and France; he would
by those means be always upon his Guard. It was also believed, that in Policy
he asked of the King, to remove King James and his Wife at a distance from him,
though he doubted the King would never consent to it. But it would be such a
pretense for him to show the Parliament, that having a considerable Enemy so
nigh him; prudence would oblige him to keep himself always in a condition to
resist him in case of necessity.

But whether he meant to enlarge upon that, or that in effect, King James who
had attempted several times to remount his Throne, by fomenting insurrections
in England, began to attempt the same again, or whatever else was in it, he
caused a great many Persons to be taken up; and among others the Earl of
Clancarty, as if he had meant to raise new troubles. The Earl had been Captain
of the Guards to King James, and had passed once more before into that Country,
in Order to do him Service. But he had no such design at this time; He had only
went thither under the benefit of the Peace, though the New King had excluded
him from it, as he had done a great many others, who had continued after a
certain time in the Service of his Enemy. However this Earl being a Person of
quality; his Imprisonment made no little noise, for instead of sending him to
the Tower, they put him up in Newgate. This was by no means disagreeable to the
King, for the more the Prisoner was a Man of quality; the greater Impression
his return into the Country, made upon the minds of the People, for they knew
he was guilty the last time he came into the Kingdom; because he had made his
Escape out of the Tower. For at that time he proposed to a Lady of quality, who
came to see him, to allow him to make his escape under her Petticoats. This
Lady being as large as he was little, condescended very willingly at the Peril
of whatever could happen: For besides the apprehension she was under, of being
caught in the Commission of a flaming Crime, and being kept Prisoner her self,
she allowed his approaches to a place, with which the Ladies hardly suffer such
near communication, at least without some scruple; whatever was in it he played
his Game so well, that he made his escape without being discovered, and from
that time kept always about King James, till the time of his being retaken,
that I mentioned but now.

It was a long time before the English could be sensible of any pretense their
King had, to keep any Troops on Foot, in the present posture of the Affairs of
Europe in General, or of their own in Particular. On the other Hard, it was
given out a pretty while before that His Christian Majesty was to have a Camp
near Campiegne, where the Duke of Burgundy was to Command. And though it was
said publicly, it was designed only to let him see something in warlike
affairs, and to accustom him by degrees to such great things as were due to his
Birth, yet it bred some Jealousy, so that the English continued still quiet.
But the Natural restlessness of that Nation, never allows them to be long at
ease: In fine, they complained that being exhausted by the War, it was
impossible for them to continue the same expenses in the time of Peace. The
King of England thinking to satisfy them in some degree, made a reform of some
Regiments, and of others, he sent some into Holland, and some into Ireland,
believing that these being once out of their sight, they would be apt to forget
them; but they still insisted upon their former complaints. And to speak the
truth, they had good politic Reasons to do what they did, not only with regard
to themselves, but also with regard to all Europe.

In the mean time the Encampment which the King intended, was put off to
September, to the end that the People in the Neighborhood, might have
opportunity to make their Harvest, and gather in all their Corn; so in this
interval of time, there fell out some remarkable things at Court. One of the
most considerable, which perhaps has no parallel in this Age, was as follows.
Monsieur de Pelletier, who had been Controler General of the Finances, and whom
the King had made an Officer of State, quitted a Hundred Thousand Livers a
Year, which he possessed by the King's liberality, to be freed from all manner
of business, and have time to mind his Salvation. His Majesty had a mind to
allow him some Pension, and was so much the more earnest to do it, because he
could never sufficiently admire such a resolution; but after all his
remonstrances, he only prevailed so far, as to oblige him to accept of Twenty
Thousand Livers a Year, to maintain a Table for his Family. His place in the
Post House, which was valued at Two and Thirty Thousand Livers a Year, was
given to Monsieur Pomponne: Who, however Pious he was thought to be, thought
such a Post not inconsistent with his Devotion. Monsieur Pelletier retired
immediately to his Castle of V^lle Neuf, within Three or Four Leagues of Paris;
and discarded the most part of his Domestics. His Brother who was Intendant of
the Finances, being angry that he had not Named him to his Majesty for
Comptrouler General of the Finances, when he quited it, was exceedingly vexed,
because he had not acquainted him with his Intention, in order to fall upon
measures, to make some advantage of his spoil.

Moreover he went the next Day to Versailles, and told the King (without
waiting in the least for what his Majesty had a mind to say upon the Subject,)
that though it was generally said in the World, that the Younger ought to
follow the example of the Elder; yet he would take care not to imitate his
Brother; that in effect he was so far from believing, that his Majesty's
Service could in the ^^ast hurt his Salvation, that on the contrary there was
nothing more useful either for this World, or the World to come: So that his
Majesty might, when he thought fit, load him with more business, without giving
him the least disturbance; that he would always continue in his ordinary road,
without ever thinking of shuting himself up, either in a Cloister, or a Country
House.

He was easily believed without swearing, for every Body was sensible, how
little inclination he had to quit the World. Besides, the World knew that he
was not a Man, who troubled himself very much with business; he never loved to
overcharge himself, for of whatever Consequence the Affair was, his Buildings
and Garden were first looked after: Not but that he had a great deal of Sense,
and in that even exceeded his Eldest Brother; but being of their Judgment who
believe, that Charity begins as home, he never cared to belly a Maxim, which
time and custom had so well established in the World.

While both the Court and King admired Monsieur Pelletiers Conduct: There fell
out an accident betwixt two Courtiers at Marli, that had proved of a more
troublesome consequence, if it had not been moderated by the Bystanders The
matter was this, the Count of Auvergne was playing at Omber, with some other
Lords, and Monsieur de Lausun looki^g over them, began to utter a great many
silly expressions which vexed the Count, insomuch that he threw down his Cards.
The Gamsters asked him what he meant; the Count answered, that it was
impossible to play while he heard Monsieur Lausun's ^edious Discourse, and as
for him he could not have the complaisance to relish it. Monsieur Lausun being
always sensible of the honor he had in marrying Henry IV. his Grandchild, and
upon that Account respecting very little such digrities, which had no better
Foundation, than the Count's, was something moved at these words, and m^de him
a harsh answer. The Gentlemen who were present, asked them what they meant by
quarrelling in that Place, and being Friends to both Parties, presently put a
stop to the Quarrel.

About the same time, Two more Considerable Persons happened to quarrel; I mean
the Prince of Conti and the Chevalier of Vendome, Grand Prior of France. They
were also playing at Omher, and the Grand Prior having called Gano, at the
third Lift, and gaining Codille; the Prince of Conti, told the Person who had
made him Gano, that he was too simple to believe him, he being a Man that took
his Advantage, where he could find it; and that he had never seen him play,
after any other manner. The Grand Prior took notice of that Word, and said it
was very reproachful, under a dubious sense. The Prince of Conti, took no
notice of what he had answered, whether he meant to show himself somewhat wiser
than the other, or that he thought the Terms he made use of, obliged him to
make that Answer. But after the Game was ended, the Chevalier of Vendome went
to Paris, and returned the next day to Versailles, with a long Rapier by his
Side. The Courtiers asked one another, whom he had a Design upon, in carrying
that Rapier. No body dreamt of what had passed the Night before, betwixt him
and the Prince of Conti; and the rather, because there were hardly Two Persons,
less capable of counteracting the King's Orders. However, the Grand Prior
having posted himself, where the Prince was to pass along, no sooner saw him,
than he drew upon him, telling him, he must needs remember, what he had said
the Night before, and as these things were not to be suffered, by People of
their Circumstances, so he had a mind to see him with Sword in hand. The Grand
Prior meant by these Words, to put himself in Competition with him, which
displeased the Prince exceedingly, insomuch, that he told him, he had forgot
himself, to speak to him after that manner. The Duke of Bourbon, was coming
along in the mean time, and the Prince of Conti calling him, told him that he
was equally concerned with him in the Affair, the Chevalier having said, that
there was no difference, betwixt him and the Princes of the Blood, so he
desired to know his Opinion of it, and if he thought fit to suffer it. The Duke
acquainted the Dauphin with it, and the Dauphin immediately informed the King.
Upon which his Majesty gave Orders to Mr. Pontchartrain, to send the Grand
Prior to the Bastille The Grand Prior desired to be admitted to the King, to
acquaint him, with his Reasons, but his Majesty had no mind to hear him; and
ordered his Vshers to shut the Chamber Door against him, insomuch that this
Prince, was at last obliged to obey, and went of his own accord to Prison.

At that time, there was no Governor of the Bastille; for Mr. de Besma^x, who
had been Governor Forty Years at least, was dead Six or Seven Months; and his
Majesty had not yet named any for that Government: Not but that there were
Persons enough who solicited for it, for the vast Riches which the late
Governor had made by it, was a sufficient Motive for a great many. The
Governor of Pigner^l, being at that time without Employ, that Place being
given up by the Peace, solicited earnestly for it. He had also a great many
Competitors; for even the Duke of M^ine had a mind to it: For that Castle,
being joined to the Arsenal, he would have been very glad to unite the Ch^rge
of it, to that of Great Master of the Artillery, as it was in the time of the
Duke of S^liy. The Marquis of Sanveri, Under Governor of the young Princes and
the late Governor s Son in Law, had also an Eye upon it, but upon Condition
that he should not be obliged to reside there, and might have a fixed Sallary,
as other Governments had. But this was quite contrary to his Father in law his
Practice, who always thought the Advantage he made by the Prisoners, more
preferable a Thousand times, than what the King had given other Governors. But
whether his Son in Law considered that these Profits were much sunk by the
Peace, or that (...) to keep also the Post he was in, he insisted (...) the
same thing. The King had a great Inclination (...) him, but was desirous to
have the (...) reside ther^: So the Gentleman dropped his Pretensions, as soon as
he knew his Majesty's Intention. M^. (...) Captain of the Guards, put also in
for (...) without doubt had carried it, had it depended (...) the Prisoners to
choose a Governor for themselves. He was in effect, of a more generous Family
(...) the Gentleman who possessed it last; nor did (...) degenerate from the
Virtue of his (...), he was Nephew to Mr. de Pontchar^^ (...) in sufficient
Circumstances to relieve th^^ (...) ^ffect, was very charitable, ever since
(...) ^ed into the Ministry. This Minister (...), that it was very proper for
his Nephew, ^ho was very sickly, and upon that account ready to lay down his
Charge, not being capable to serve the Two ^ast Campaigns, and therefore he
supported his Pretentions. But Mr. Barbesieux, proposed to the King, Mr. de
Cinqmars, Governor of the Islands of St. Honorat and St. Marguerite, and his
Majesty seeming to have some inclination for him, desired Barbesieux to write
to him, that he might have that Government instead of his own, if he inclined
to change.

St. Mars was very old, and having passed his younger Days, in the Service of
the Prince of Conde, he had made a prodigious Fortune; for he was chosen by the
King, to guard Mr. Fonq^et and Mr. Lansun; so that by these means, he was
become extremely rich, and besides he was far from being covetous, as Mr.
Besmaux was: Upon that account, he returned answer to the Marquis of
Barbesieux, that he had no Inclination to change, if his Majesty pleased to
continue him where he was. But this Minister being very desirous to have that
Government in the Hands of a Person devoted to his Family, as Mr. St. Mars
ought to be, because he was obliged to his Father for his Fortune, had no mind
to be satisfied with this Answer, but wrote again to him upon the same Subject,
setting forth that he neglected his own good Fortune; and besides, might have
the Advantage to be near his Family, which he ought to regard as a singular
Happiness, having been absent from it for many Years. Mr. St. Mars was born in
the Neighborhood of Paris, moreover, he was married to Madam Frenoy's Sister,
which had contributed above all to his Establishment. This was therefore the
way to attack him, upon his weak side. However it be, he took this Letter to be
a kind of Command; and therefore made Answer, that he would obey it. As soon as
Mr. Saumery knew this, he asked that Government of the King, which his Majesty
granted to him; but in a few days after, he broke a Company that had been
raised on purpose, for Mr. Cinqmars, when he guarded Mr. Fouquet; and which he
had ever since along with him in the Islands of St. Honorat and St. Marguerite.
The Captain had a Sallary of Two Thousand Crowns, besides his Profits; so that
Mr. Saumery lost all on a sudden, the half of the Gratification he thought to
receive. In the mean time the Chevalier of Vendome was come to the Bastille,
whither very few Lords went to see him, for fear of displeasing his Majesty,
who had so resented his Conduct. Some were also unwilling to go, fearing the
Prince of Conti's Displeasure, and in effect, the Prince checked Mr. d' Alegre,
for having gone thither. Mr. d' Alegre answered, that he did not believe that
his Highness would have took it ill, but since he knew his mind, he would for
the future avoid displeasing him. The Prince accepted of his Excuse, and the
Marshals of Catinat and Tourville, having also gone thither, they thought to
make the same Apology, but the Prince saying nothing to them, it passed over in
silence.

The Duke of Vendome was at Anet, when his Brother was commanded to Prison, but
as soon as he heard it, he took Post to be informed by him of the Affair, and
after he had learned it, he thought the best way to obtain his Freedom was, by
the Interest of the same Person, who had got him confined: he therefore went
immediately to wait upon the Prince of Conti to that purpose. And this being
all the Satisfaction the Prince demanded, he went himself to the King, to ask
the Grand Prior's Liberty. The King made him answer, that if he was satisfied,
yet himself was not; so that Eight or Ten Days were gone, before his Majesty
would pardon that Prince. At last, his Majesty was prevailed upon, by the
Solicitations of the Prince of Conti, and the Duke of Vendome. The Duke himself
carried the Order for his Liberty, and brought him along with him to a certain
Place, where Four or Five Persons were drunk, in solemnizing their Joy for the
Grand Prior's Liberty.

In the mean time, the Marquis and Marchioness of Mont^hevreuil, sent also one
of their Sons into that Prison, not because he intended to fight, like the
Grand Prior, but rather upon the account of a Report was spread abroad of his
being married at Rochelle, whither they had sent to apprehend him. They
resolved to send him to the American Islands, in order to make him forget his
Amors. The King was preparing a Fleet to be sent into these Countries: and de
Gennes Captain of a Man of War, a man very well known amongst the Sea Officers,
was to command it. It was thought, the Court designed to seize an Island in
those Parts, the Inhabitants of which had driven the Spaniards from the
greatest Part of it, insomuch that they were forced to retire to a small Corner
of it. It was thither that the Father and Mother intended to send their Son, in
order to do Penance for his too warm Amors, as if Love had been a Capital
Crime. But this Fleet giving some Occasion of Jealousy to the English and
Hollanders, his Majesty was fain to desist; though it was already pretty well
advanced. And that excused the Ch^valier of Moutcheuruil from the Voyage, who
was made Lieutenant of a Ship, and doubtless had quickly been made Captain, if
his Prudence had been equal to his Courage. But he made a very insolent Answer
to Monsieur de Maurepas, when he asked him concerning some things he was
accused of having taken out of one of the Ships, which the Marquis of Nesmond,
had taken. So that his Relations did not judge it convenient to continue him
any longer in the Sea Service, for having once failed in his Respect to Mr. de
Maurepas, there was no Probability, that he would ever pardon him.

The Duke of Rochefoucaut, after the Marriage of the Count of Again, had not
only reformed his Table and Reti^ue, that were both very magnificent, but under
some special Pretext, retired to Liancourt, a Place belonging to one of his
Sons, at Ten or Twelve Leagues distance from Paris. However having staid 6weeks
there, he returned to Court. The King suspected that he was somewhat out of
humor at the Match. He had Experience enough to know, that his Favors
conferred to the Pre^udice of another, gave as much Jealousy, as a Mistriss's
Favor to the Prejudice of a Rival, yet he took no notice of it to him, but he
loved his Person, and received him as affectionately, as he had used to do. In
the mean time, the Duke of Lerraine sent Monsieur de Couvonges to Versailles,
to demand in his Name, Mademoi^elle in Marriage. The King expected always, both
before the Peace, and since it was made, that this Princess, should have no
other Husband but the King of the Romans. Nor was there any Princess in Europe,
had more Pretentions to that Happiness, than She. But the Empress had so very
little Inclination for France, that though Mademoiselle had been the King's own
Daughter, instead of being the Duke of Orleans's, she would have preferred the
meanest Princess in Germany to her. But the Queen of Poland, the Duke of
Lorrain's Mother, when she perceived the Design of the French, was extremely
vexed at it, in regard of her Son's Interest. For being a Princess of
extraordinary wit, she knew that the situation of that young Prince's Estate
would oblige him to prefer an Alliance with France to any other, and therefore
she thought of making Mademoiselle her Daughter in Law. However she was willing
to have the Emperor's consent to it, who insinuated often to her that he would
gladly bestow the Archduchesse his eldest Daughter upon the Duke; but the
Emperor was prevailed upon by her Reasons; and the King accepted of Monsieur
de Couvonges's offer in the Name of his Master, having named Mr. P^ntchartrain
and some other considerable Persons of his Council todraw up the Articles of
Marriage; which both Parties soon agreed upon. However there arose a difficulty
that retarded the Affair for some time, for the Duke of Orleans had no other
male Children, than the Duke of Chartres, and that Duke had only Daughters:
This they had not foreseen in the beginning, but the Court thought fit to find
some expedient for it, before they would proceed any further. The difficulty
consisted mainly in this point; that if the Duke of Chartres came to die
without Male Issue, then Mademoiselle might have right to divide the succession
of the Duchess her Mother, with her Brothers Daughters. Moreover, that
succession was very considerable; for besides ready Money, Plate and Jewels, and
a vast quantity of Furniture, which she had already inherited by the Death of
her Brother, the Elector Palatin, they had also adjudg'd to her Two Hundred
Thousand Livers of Rent, until they had regulated the share she ought to have
in the Succession of that Elector. But they would have Mademoiselle renounce
her Succession, in case her Brother came to die without Male Issue; which
Monsieur de Couvonges had no mind to do without express Orders. The Duke of
Lorraine's Council found that Clause too severe. However this Prince being
still very young, and of a very exemplary piety, in which he resembled his
Mother very much, who died soon after the Marriage had been resolved upon; he
thought that upon all Accounts it was his advantage (as indeed it was) to have
a Princess of France for a Wife, and therefore Sacrificed all other
considerations to that policy; and consented to renounce all he could pretend
to by the Dutchesses Succession, in case the Duke of Chartres dyed without
Heirs, upon condition of having Four Hundred Thousand Livers paid to him.

In this manner the marriage of the Duke with Mademoiselle was agreed upon, and
they delayed only the final conclusion of it, till the end of the Camp, that
was to be made in Honor of the Duke of Burgundy. They brought thither a great
many more Troops, than they had at first thought upon, which created some
mistrust in the Neighboring Potentates: They were sensible, that the King had
filed off a great many Troops to the Frontiers of Spain, nor were they ignorant
of what was commonly reported of his Catholic Majesty's health, and therefore
were afraid that this Camp and all these Troops were designed to make a sudden
irruption into his Territories, if by chance he came to die, which in effect
appeared very probable by all the accounts we ^ad of him. However the King had
at last evacu^ted all the places he was to give up by the Yreaty of Ryswick:
And as it must needs take up a great deal of time to retake them; the Spaniards
and their Allies had always this comfort, that they could dispute every Inch of
Ground, if they came to be attacked. The King named Mareshal de Boufflers, to
command this Camp under the Duke of Burgund. And as the King was very sensible,
that he was a Person very apt to ruin himself, in order to maintain the Dignity
which the King conferred upon him, as preferable to all others; his Majesty made
him a present of Fifty Thousand Crowns, before he marched, though the Camp was
to continue only Th^e^ W^^ks, so that this Sum appeared pretty rea^onable for
so short a time: But this Mareshal, who affected always to be expensive, and
even in his first employments, would fain appear somewhat like Turenne, in
regarding nothing but his Glory, and having no manner of value for Money, made
such a prodigious expense in that Camp, that twice so large a Sum hardly
excused him. He had Five Tables Morning and Evening, all equally served; the
most rare and nice things in the Kingdom were there in abundance, nor was there
ever seen better or more delicate Cheer. He had above a Hundred head Cooks,
besides those who served under them, and those who wrought in the Morning, took
their Rest in the Afternoon; he had an infinite Number of Carriages in the
Field, to bring his Provisions: He had two Carriages for Ice only, which was
brought from Paris every Day, and had fresh Horses laid always half way for
them, because it was impossible for the same Horses to bring it all the way,
without bursting, and all his other Carriages he had in the Field, were served
after the same manner; He had ^ourveyors not only at Paris, but also in all the
great Towns within Twenty, or Five and Twenty Leagues of the Camp, every Table
had two Stewar^s, and the chief Overseer of his Officers, was a Person who had
served formerly the Archbishop of Paris; for he was perhaps the only Man in the
Nation, who understood these Affairs best, being always obeyed at first Word,
so that all was done with such an extraordinary sumptuous splendor, that it is
impossible to describe it right.

This Camp ruined the Officers entirely, who had suffered extremely before, by
the expenses they were obliged to be at, during the War. However, not one of
them minded any thing, but how to please the King, neither more nor less, than
if he had been a Deity; there was never any thing to be seen so splendid and
magnificent, as all (...) Officers, from the highest to the lowest. All the
Troops and Foot Soldiers were new Clothed, and that cost some Regiments above
Five and Twenty Thousand Crowns. But while they impoverished themselves, Paris
was enriched by it, for (...) Twenty Days before the Camp was formed, there was
nothing to be seen at the Merchants Doors, but large Bales, which were carried
away every moment. It is altogether impossible to tell how much Provisions were
carried from that (...) to that Camp, and in all probability it had been
sufficient to have starved the City, if the Merchants had not been very
provident before Hand; and as Strangers are always curious, there was not
hardly one of them who went not to see the Camp, opportunities of that Nature
falling out but very seldom; so that prope^ly speaking, it was only one
continued Procession from Paris to Compiegne, where it was impossible to find
Lodging for Money, and all Innkeepers were expressly forbid to receive any body,
whether they meant to save their Lodgings for the People of the Court, or that
they had no mind to (...) that Town with a number of unknown People, and by
that means prevent all dangerous accidents. (...) the (...) the Camp was to
continue, being quite (...), the King returned to Versailles with all the
Court, having first bestowed considerable Largesses upon all the Troops. The
great Magnificence that appeared here, undeceived the Strangers of the Opinion,
they had brought with them from their own Country; to wit, that France had been
exhausted both of Men and Money. They had already seen the contrary at the Duke
of Burgundy's Marriage, by the great confluence of People they found at Paris.
But what they had seen upon this occasion, having quite disabused them, they
began to look upon the King as another Croesus, whose Riches were inexhaustible.

But, if this Prince was so Rich, as there was no reason to doubt of it, his
People were in extreme Poverty, insomuch, that they wanted a great many things
to supply their Necessities. But as soon as the King had made the Peace, he
thought of contributing to their ease. He made diverse Edicts in favor of the
Country People, whose Lands were altogether waste for want of means to
cultivate 'em. He also provided, by an Act of Council, that there should be no
order to sell the Lands of those who carried Arms the preceding Years. He
allowed them some time for the payment of their Debts: But all this being only
Paper, 'twas impossible for any body to relieve their Necessity without Money.
And a great many People thought, that it had been of far greater advantage to
the Kingdom, if His Majesty, instead of spending his Money so lavishly upon
that Camp, had dealt it amongst his People, in order to buy them Cattle: All the
Country was quite out of Cattle, and by lending the People some Money, whereby
they might furnish themselves with some, he had restored a great many to Life,
who were ready to Perish upon the want they had suffered for a long time. Not
but that the King had relieved his People in some manner, in taking off the
Capitation. He had also sunk a great many other Taxes which were raised during
the War. But the Subsidies were agumented by a third; besides, the Corn that
had continued dear for a long time, became daily dearer, which occasioned new
Desolation in a great many Families. And the poor Gentry was most of all to be
pitied, especially those who had Children; for after the Peace they knew not
how to bestow them because by the reform which was made of the Troops, they
sent home all the Lieutenants as useless Members. Nor did they continue the Pay
of a reform to any, but to Captains and Lieutenants, who had served at least
Ten Years; insomuch, that those, who served under that Time, were in the most
deplorable Condition imaginable.

The Marquis of Dangeau, great Master of the Order of St. Lazarus, made, at
that time, an Establishment, that evinced sufficiently how much Good he would
have done, if it had been in his Power. He had established Companies of Cadets,
that had been very useful for poor Gentlemen, as well as for those they
received amongst them: For though these Companies had been instituted, in all
appearance, only in consideration of them, yet, of late, they have received all
sorts of People, even such persons as could have no other Communication with
them, but with regard to the Liveries they had carried formerly. In effect, you
might have seen Foot-Boys amongst them, and many others, who were so far from
being the Children of Fathers who lived Nobly, who only ought to be admitted
there, that they were only of the ^^um of the People: But it was not with
regard to that alone, that Affairs took another turn some while ago in the
Kingdom. The World was asto^^^h'd to (...) that the same Nobility, who were
formerly reputed the support of the State, was now (...) in^o so great Contempt
under the Ministry of the Ma^quis of Louvois, that very odious Li^^^s were
p^sted up against them. They were (...) with the greatest indignity imaginable,
(...), forsooth, that one Man who had (...) Nobility of Anjou (though he was
rather (...) up his Liquor than to command them) (...) himself to be surprised.
And thus made them answerable for his Fault, insomuch, (...) there was nothing
to be seen but Libels posted up in every Corner against them, as if the
Ig^^r^n^^ of one Commander was sufficent to make as many Criminals as there
were Gentlemen; and ever since they were obliged to mix-themselves amongst the
Burgesses to go upon the Arier Ban: And, besides serving upon their own
Expenses, according to the ordinary Custom, they had the additional
mortification to serve amongst a Scum that was unworthy to have any room in
their Company. However, the Marquis of Dangeau who had not always been very
rich, and consequently knew what satisfaction 'twas for a Man of Quality, who
was not in circumstances to educate his Children according to their ranks, to
have them otherwise provided for, resolved to establish a fond out of a certain
share of the Revenues of the Grand-Mastership, for the Education of some
Children of Quality. He proposed the Thing to the King, and His Majesty left
the disposal of it to his own choice; upon which, he took eight Children out of
the principal Families of the Kingdom, viz. of the House of Montmorency, of the
House of Crequi, of the House of Ailly, of Maille, etc. He hired a House for
them near Charonne, and gave them Masters of all sorts with Boys to serve them.
The Abbot of Dangeau, his Brother, being willing to contribute to so excellent
an Institution, took upon himself the charge of overseeing them. There was non
more capable of the Employ, he being very learned; and it was long of himself
that the King had not conferred a Bishopric, and considerable Abbeys upon him;
but His Majesty knowing he loved his pleasure too much, he thought it
sufficient to secure him from Starving.

About that time the Duke of Chaulnes fell Sick, and languish'd some time
before he Died. He possessed a great many considerable Employments both within
and without the Kingdom; and by these means, made himself both Friends and
Enemies. A certain Gentleman who had always appeared to be of the number of the
last, thought it now his Duty to endeavor a reconciliation with him before he
expired. I mean the Cardinal D'Estrees, who was at Rome while the Duke was
Ambassador Extraordinary, at that Court, from the King. The Cardinal was
reputed a Man of Parts, and, upon that account, was ambitious to have the
preference over all, which was the cause of their difference. But the Respect
shown to the Duke, at the Court of Rome, gave him some Ombrage: So that their
misunderstanding was no secret any any where; and no consideration obliged the
Cardinal to observe any measures in it. However, whether he thought himself in
the wrong, or that he had a mind to appear a good Christian, he came at that
time to ask his Pardon. The Duke was extremely surpised when they told him the
Cardinal was come to wait on him; it was no more seasonable for him to think
upon any Resentment, though, perhaps, he had been very capable of it at another
time; therefore he desired he might come in, and there they were reconciled to
one another. In a few days after the Duke Died, and left the Chancellor his
Testamentary Executor. The D^ceas'd had Married the Widow of the Marquis of St.
Maigrin, Lieutenant of the Light Horse. They had been Married a long time
without having any Issue; so that in order to make his ^^urt the better to
Monsieur Colbert, when he Married his Eldest Daughter to the Duke of Che(...),
his Cousin German, he instituted the (...) should be begotten of that Marriage,
for ^^s Her. He only reserved for himself the (...) ^undred thousand Livers, of
which he l^^t twenty thousand Crowns to the Chancell^^, and the rest to some of
his Domestics. At the time o^ his Death he was Governor of (...): He had
formerly been Governor of Brittany; But this last government was thought very
proper for the Count of Thoulouse, the King's Natural Son; therefore His
Majesty got him to resign it in his favor; and the King gave him that of
Guyenne in exchange.

The Government of Guyenne was not long vacant after his Death, which fell out
very conveniently for the Duke of Chartres, to whom the King had promised it,
when that Duke Married the Count of Thoulouse's Sister. The King had given the
survivance of it to the Duke of Chevreuse; but that Duke had already a hundred
Thousand Livers in Rent; and, besides, the Duke of Chaulnes his Lands produced
no less; so, that all of a sudden two hundred Thousand Livers a Year fell into
the Family. So that he was already become so Rich, that that Government would
prove rather superfluous than useful to him. But Quietist as he was, he loved
Riches nothing the less. However, I believe, they did wrong him in Reputing him
a Sect^rian. At last he made so much Interest to have the Survivance of that
Government, that it was easy to perceive Molinos's suspected Disciples are not
indifferent of Matters. Yet, be how it will, the Archbishop of Cambray was
nothing like him: He suffered his Exile very peaceably; and, without making the
least noise, bore the Imprisonment of his good Friend Madam Guyon. She was
brought from the Convent about Easter time, in order to be sent to the
Bastille, where she was left for four or five Months to examine her Conscience,
and then she was interrogated, though it is impossible to know upon what; for that
sort of things are always very secret: But, according to what one can judge, it
was upon some things contained in a Book Published by the Archbishop of Meaux
against the Archbishop of Cambray, in which she was made mention of. That Book
contained very extraodinary matters against her. It charged her with a great
many Revelations and Miracles; in a word, it endeavored, by rendering her
ridiculous, to make the Blow fall upon the Archbishop of Cambray, her good
Friend. However, the Bishop of Meaux his principal Adversary, could not obtain
his being declared a Heretic, pursuant to his Allegations. The Court of Rome,
whose business it is to give Sentence upon that Head, was very reserved upon the
Point; whether it was that they saw no occasion for such a Declaration, or that
by drilling on the Affair, they thought to appear more mysterious. The Court
espoused the Bishop of Meaux's Interest very much; and after having removed the
Archbishop of Cambray from the Duke of Burgundy's Presence, did likewise remove
his Nephew, that Prince's Sub-preceptor, together with some other Persons who
were suspected of adhering to his Sentiments. Two of his waiting Gentlemen were
among the number of those who were disgraced, though the occasion of it might
seem foreign enough to their Profession. In fine, to cut off all hopes of ever
returning to be about his Person, others were put in their places, who,
perhaps, are no better Men than they: For we must know, that those who were
removed, were Persons of exemplary Piety; insomuch, that all the Kingdom over
there were none to be found that lived a more Christian Life. However, their
Enemies employed all their art to ruin them, whether it was that they really
thought them tainted with that Doctrine, or that they only covered their
private views with that Pretense: So it was; that new Faces started up all of a
sudden about the Young Prince. This was not at all agreeable to the Prince, at
least it seemed so. The Bishop of Cambray, who wrote from time to time to the
Pope, according as the diverse Charges were laid against him, having, at that
time, sent His Holiness a Letter which was mightily cried up; the young Prince
declared openly, that he would be glad to see it. But, besides that there were
but very few Copies of it to be seen in the Kingdom, grievous Punishments being
inflicted upon those who dispersed them, nobody durst offer to satisfy his
Desire for fear of displeasing the King. From thence the A. B. of Cambray's
Friends took occasion to censure his Enemies. They Published that it was always
allowable for any Man to make his Defenses, and their offering in this manner
to hinder them, spoke their unjustice. The vulgar People, who commonly take
upon them to decide every thing, though without forming any Judgment of the
Affair, presently applauded these Complaints, without considering that in
Religious Matters, there are some things better concealed than known, that
Heresies are sooner propagated by Reading than by Conversation; so that all
Writings though never so little suspected, cannot be too cautiously prohibited.
But notwithstanding all the prohibitions against the bringing in of these
Letters, two Bags were brought, not only into the Kingdom, but even into the
Gates of Paris. Monsieur D'Argenson smelt the Matter, and understood that they
were brought into Town in Coaches: And, in effect, two Hackney-Coaches were
sent to take them up at the Houses where they were Lodged, without knowing what
they were. But before they entered the Town, care was taken to examine them; and
as soon as Monsieur D'Argenson found what they were, he Burnt them one after
another in his Closet. But, after all, such was the Curiosity of some, That,
though every one detested Quietism, as it was represented by the Bishop of
Cambray's Enemies; yet, all that could escape that Marshal's View, were sold at
four Louis d'Ors the Piece.

The Duke D'Estrees, Governor of the Isle of France, followed Monsieur
D'Chaulnes very speedily, though there was a great deal of difference between
their Ages; the one being but fifty Years Old, and the other Seventy. The D. of
D' Estrees Died after being cut of the Stone; and the fault was not so much
laid upon the Surgeon, as upon an Accident that he could not foresee. He
had delayed the performing of the Operation till the great heat was over: But
the heat returning unexpectedly with much Thunder, his Wound, which had
formerly been in a good Condition, gave over Suppurating, and so he tip'd off
in a minute. He left the Affairs of his Family in great Disorder. His Son had
Married, for his first Wife, the Daughter of Monsieur de Lionne, Secretary of
State, by whom he had a Son, and some Daughters; and for his second, a Daughter
of the Marquis de Vaubrun, Lieutenant of the King's Armies. This last did not
know where to recover her Dowry, and, by consequence, had been at a loss where
to secure her Jointure, if the Bishop of Laon her Husband's Brother, had not
engaged in the Contract of Marriage, for two hundred thousand Livers to the
Children that he should have by her. The King, to whom the Duke had recommended
his Family before he was cut, gave his Government to his Eldest Son; the other
depended solely upon his Succession to his Mother, who could not but be very
Rich, tho she had lost something by her Husband: For her Mother was still alive
as well as her Mother's Father, who was worth two Millions of Money. Now, he
having only two Heiresses, namely, the Marchioness of Ma^levrier and her self;
the half of it was one day to be he^s. It is true, the Duchess had a Brother,
who pursuant to the preference of Males, was entitled to the better half of the
Succession; but ^e being set apart for the Church, by reason of his
D^cripitness and being already possessed of Benefices, s^^ reckoned that he
ought never to Marry. And i^ (...), there was no great appearance or it, though
we every day meet with things more extraordinary than that. But the Thing that
troubled her most was, That he loved Money; so that tho he did not Marry, it was
to be feared he might not grant her his share of his Grandfather's Estate. He
had but lately given a signal instance of his Love for Money, by maintaining a
Lawsuit for a small Living, that he had procured from him, whose natural right
it was to grant it. The Dean of Nants possessed it formerly; and he having
resigned it to one of his Friends, Abbot Vaubrun pretended, that his
Resignation could not be vali'd; for that he had not lived upon it a competent
space of time, for being admitted in the Court of Rome. However, the contrary
seemed to appear, by the Will of the Deceased; but he affirmed that to be a
Fraud, and said, that the Cura^e was Cheated. In the mean time he had a
Permission to raise monitory Letters, in order to find a Discovery by those
that had assisted to keep the Body a long time after his Death, that they might
favor his Party. However, fearing lest those who were concerned might be
pretty nimble, he obtained a Decree in Justice, that the Body should be
uninterr'd, pretending, that by viewing it, it were easy to discover the
Cheat. The Judges granted him his Demand, and so the poor Body was pulled out
of the Coffin half Rotten: In fine, though it cast a very nauseous Smell, so that
it was impossible to approach it by a hundred paces, yet he caused it to be
viewed by the Physicians and Surgeons, in order to have their Opinion of it.
He put 'em upon an odd sort of Business; but thinking they were very well
accustomed to these sort of Perfumes, he did not regard it so much. The
Physicians and Surgeons turned over and over the Dead Body, and having given
a doubtful account of it, it was interred again in a more stinking Condition
than it had been when it was taken up. The Abbot Vaubrun, seeing, that by their
Judgment he was like to be Cast, and condemned to pay the Charges, obtained
another Judgment that the same Body might be viewed by other more skilful
Persons: And thus it was taken up a second time; and these skilful Gentlemen
having been more favorable to him than the former, he, in the end, gained the
Suit.

In the mean time the Abbot of Rochefoucaut coming to die, the Abbot Verthuel
his Brother, asked two good Abbeys which he had possessed; but His Majesty
refused him. However, having always a great esteem for the Duke of
Rochefoucaut, Brother to the two Abbots, though he had absented from coming to
Court for six Weeks after the Count of Ayen's Marriage, he condescended to give
him a Reason for that refusal; because, as His Majesty alleged, He had not
found the Abbot Vertheuel's Conduct regular enough to oblige him to bestow upon
him Goods of the Church, which, perhaps, he might employ to an other use than
they were designed for. His Majesty added, that to show that he was very
willing to oblige him, when it did not interfere with his Conscience, he
restored the Abbeys possessed by the Deceased, upon the Old Abbot de la
Rochefoucaut, his Uncle. The Old Abbot dreamed nothing of such a Wind-fall. He
had retired into his own Country a long while before, without thinking of ever
returning to Court: But Fortune pursuing him as far as his Retreat, his only
care then was to return Thanks to His Majesty, and to send to Rome for his
Bulls.

The Princess of Epinois, and the Duchess of Richelieu died soon after, the
one three days after the other. The former Died in less than an Hours Sickness,
the latter had been long troubled with a tedious Distemper. The Princess
d'Epinois was walking out of the Marquis of Barbesieux his House, when she was
seized of a sudden with a violent Pain: Presently she stopped and took hold of a
Window-shutter to keep her from falling: But in that minute she lost her
Senses, and being carried Home Died in the space of a Quarter of an Hour. She
was one of the greatest players at Lansquenette, at Marli, and many imputed
this Accident to her considerable losses, which hadmade so great an alteration
in her Blood, that it had been a Miracle if some troublesome thing or other had
not come upon her. Mr. Pelletier, Intendant of the Finances, to whom, it is
said, she was Married in the way of Conscience, was mightily afflicted at her
Death. However, that did not keep him from going to Versailles to Council. The
first time he appeared every body condol'd his Loss, because all the World knew
how far he was concerned; nay, the King himself knew it, and one time when the
Princess had lost a great Sum at Marli, and paid it next day, to the great
surprizal of a great many who thought she was not in a Condition to raise it so
soon; His Majesty did not stand to ask Mr. Pelletier if 'twas not he that had
lent it her: Upon that Mr. Pelletier owned that she had had recourse to him to
save her Honor. I know not whether His Majesty did not carry his Curiosity
further, and asked him if he was not Married to her; That being above my
Knowledge, I shall know nothing of it for fear of incurring the imputation of a
Lie. That Lady had two Sons and two Daughters by her Husband. The Daughters
were still Unmarried. 'Twas the Eldest of 'em that the Princess of Conty, the
King's Daughter would have married to the Marquis de Valliere. As for the Sons,
the Younger Died a Natural Death, and the Elder had married a Daughter of the
Prince de la Isle Bonne, of the House of Lorain.

The Duchess of Richelieu left behind her a Son, and some Daughters. The Birth
of that Son had extinguished all the hopes of the Marquis of Richlieu, the
Duke's Nephew, who was entitled to the Succession, in case of no Male Issue. He
being a little upon the fret, and nothing being more capable to disturb one's
Conduct than Poverty, his Wife and he did not agree very well; notwithstanding
he had run away with her, and she deserved a more honorable Usage. In fine,
whether this misunderstanding increased every day, or that his Poverty obliged
him to avoid the Charges that attend People of their Quality, they parted in
the beginning of the Year School; and she went to England to her Mother; but it
being impossible that so pretty a Creature as she, should not have many
Admirers; her Husband was quickly sensible, that in striving to be rid of one
evil, he had brought another upon himself, that was equally unsupportable. He
was seized with a deep jealousy, and being, upon that score, restless both
Night and Day, he set all Springs at Work to oblige his Lady to return out of
that Country. She thinking she could not be better than with her Mother, would
not listen to any Proposal he could make. A Wife seldom gives ear to the Voice
of a Husband at a distance, especially a Husband that gives her no relief in
time of need: So he was obliged to fall upon other measures. In the mean time,
the Duke of Orleans's Daughter was Married to the Duke of Lorain by way of
Proxy. The King sent the Young Princess some Presents, upon which she left the
Court immediately, and after staying but 24 hours as Paris, set out immediately
to Bar, pursuant to the Duke the Bridegroom's orders, who was to meet her
there. The Castle of Bar was fitted up for her Reception. When the Duke went to
his Estate, he found all his Houses out of order; for the King's Intendants, in
that Country, had minded themselves more than any thing else, and had scarce
taken care to make the necessary Reparations. The Duke did not go at first to
Nancy, because the King's Troops were there demolishing the Fortifications: So
he stopped four or five Leagues on the other side of it; whither he, who
Commanded the King's Troops, sent him a Captain, with some Soldiers for his
Guard: But that Prince refused 'em, thinking it more convenient to employ the
Militia of his Country. Accordingly the Inhabitants of Nancy, and the other
Towns, provided some Companies of Horse and Foot, till such time as his regular
Troops should be in readiness, for which he had given out Commissions. In fine,
the Duke came to his capital City, when the King's Troops marched out. As soon
as the Duke heard the News, that the young Princess was upon her Journey to
Lorrain, he came to Bar, and, in the mean time, the Inhabitants of Nancy, made
preparations for her Entry, in proportion to their Ability. For, besides the
oppression they had lain under for the fifty or sixty Years, that their Country
was covered with foreign Troops, they began to feel the terrible effects of a
Famine, which was general, not only over that Country, but all the adjacent
States; so that their Neighbors were almost in the same Condition. In some
places, indeed, the Season seemed to promise Plenty; but when they came to
thresh the Corn, it did not yield the half of what it used to do. Nay, France
it self, which used to furnish others with Corn, was first sensible of the want
of it; and such Disorders happened upon the marching of the Troops, that the
Judges of the Police were obliged to defend the Bakers with the strong hand;
for the Poor People were like to fall upon 'em and Rob 'em; so great was their
Misery. In the Streets of Paris there was nothing to be seen but Troops of
Beggars, which were yet more numerous in the Country. Mr. d' Argenson was so
watchful in the City, that they durst not harass the People there, as they did
elsewhere: Though, after all, some of these hungry wretches paid a visit to the
Bakers that were coming from Gonnesse, and one of 'em gave a Baker a Wound with
his Knife, because he would not sell his Bread at what price he pleased.

As every body thinks of nothing but getting, so this Dearth put a great many
Usurers upon raising the price of Bread yet higher. It being reported that the
Farmers General were the People that laid up Magazines of Corn, in order to
make up the Loss they had sustained upon the Taxes for that the Wine was quite
lost that Year; the first President gave 'em to know, that if it was true, they
not only run the risque of being pillaged, but ruined to boot; for he was a Man
that would not pardon such things; and the Interest of the State and Country
was sufficient to draw such Threats from him in good earnest. Though this was a
sufficient cause of Fear to those who were conscious of their own Guilt; yet
some were so covetous, that they would venture all rather than miss such an
opportunity of getting Money. There was one Miotte that had Farmed the Estate
of Meudon, from the D. of Orleans; and, upon that score, thought himself proof
against any thing that might happen: This Man bought up Corn every where, and
made vast Magazines in the Castle of Montereau Fautyonne. Mr. D'Argenson and
the chief President being informed of it, the former took him up, and the
latter passed a Decree against him, insomuch, that if he had not found Friends
to dissuade the President from seizing upon his Person, he had gone near to
have been Hanged: But the Court it self inspected the matter, and it being
tried before the Council, he was cleared for a Fine of 1000 Livers, and the
confiscation of some part of the Corn. Some other Usurers had much the same
usage; for the Judges could not deal more severely with them, without making it
known that Miotte's Friends were the occasion of the Favor shown him. However,
Mr. d'Argenson concerted measures for preventing the like for the future; and
sent Commissaries with Persons that he could confide in, all over the Country,
for there was no doing of it without ranging the Country.

The misery of the People filled both Paris and the Country with Robbers; and
the Inhabitants were scarce safe in their Houses. They durst not stir abroad,
nor travel either early or late, because the poor Wretches were so desperate as
to be capable of any thing; but Mr. d'Argenson took the Alarm upon this, as
well as all other disorders; while Mr. de la Reinie, his Predecessor, minded
nothing but the peaceable enjoyment of the Fruit of his Labors. He had but a
Son and a Daughter with a vast Estate; for being all a long very cunning he had
laid up an infinity of money. He was somewhat dissatisfied with his Son, who
had been at Rome a long while, and minded nothing but the Pictures and other
Curiosities of the City, without regarding his Father's Example, who had raised
himself to the highest Post of the Law, though he begun with the Lowest. So that
Magistrate careing only for his Daughter, resolved to marry her as honorable
as he could. There was enough that offered to be Suitors; but one Machaut, a
Master of Requests, carried his Suit so far, that, after some Dispute, Articles
were mutually signed. After that, the Lover came to pay his Respects to his
Mistress, whom he had never seen. But she being not Handsome, he liked her so
ill, that he told her Father, That the only way to make him miserable, was to
oblige him to finish what he had begun. Her Father was a little nettled at the
Compliment; however he endeavored to get off as honorably as he could. He did
not ask him the cause of the Breach; but suspecting what it was, he agreed to
what he desired, because he would not give his Daughter to a Man that did not
Love her.

The D. of Loraine having stayed some days at Bar with his Spouse, carried her
to Nancy, where she met with some Magnificence, notwithstanding the public
Calamity; but being bred up at the proudest Court in the World, she minded that
far less than the Love of that People for their Sovereign. They showed it in
all their Actions; and what animated 'em very much was, the exemplary Piety of
that Young Prince, who, upon that score, might be called the Prodigy of the
Age. He would see neither Play nor Opera, nor allow of 'em about his Court: He
looked upon those Diversions, not only as unworthy of a Christian, but contrary
to the Duty of so Holy a Profession. He was the Son of a Father and Mother,
that, in their time, were patterns of Virtue; and 'twas plain that he
endeavored to make the best use of the Lessons they had given him. The Bishop
of Osnabrug, the Duke's Brother, arrived, at that time, at the Court of
Lorrain; upon his return from his Bishopric which he had obtained about five
or six months before, by the recommend^t on of the Emperor his Uncle. He is a
handsome Prince, and one that knows his Perfections very well. A Brother of the
Elector of Hannover's was formerly possessed of that Bishopric, which,
pursuant to the Treaty of Munster, ought to be filled by a Protestant and a
Roman Catholic, by turns.

As soon as the D. of Lorrain had taken Possession of his Countries, he gave
advice of it to all the Princes of Europe, pur^uant to the usual Custom. He
likewise notified his Marriage in the same manner. And in the mean time
endeavored by his good Conduct to repair the Disorders that the War had
occasioned in so long a space of time.

In the mean time the P. of Con^y gain'^ ^^s Suit before the High Court of
Parliament as well as before the Court of Requests. This solac'd him entirely
upon the loss of the Crown^: ^oland; though there was a great deal of difference
between the one and the other. The New K. of Poland did not (...) his Crown in
Tranquillity. Some of his Subjects charging him with a great many things, were
so bold as to send a fresh Message to Versailles, praying the King to assist
'em with Men and Money for the recovery of their Liberty, which, as they
alleged, was overrun by his Usurpation. They accused him of Sacrificing the
Nation to his private Interests; But His Majesty would not meddle in the matter.

The Emperor, as well as the D. of Lo^rain, had formed a design to procure
repose to his People, as soon as possibly he could. This he could not effect
without making Peace with the Turks, which at last he consented to, though they
were sensible they were upon the brink of Ruin. He accepted the Mediation of
the K. of England, and the States General; and the Turks having done the same,
an Interview was agreed upon at Carlowitz, in order to adjust the Difference
between the two Emperors. In the mean time, he gave notice of all to his
Allies, to the end that they having jointly carried on so successful a War,
might mutually concur in procuring a Peace equally advantageous to the one as
well as to the other.

At that time the K. of England went to Germany, in order to come nearer the
place where the Conferences were held. He stoped at the Court of Hannover,
which occasioned as much uneasiness to France, as France occasioned to the
Allies by the Camp they had formed. In the mean time Ambassadors repaired from
all quarter to Carlowitz. His Britannick Majesty desired this Peace very
passionately, in order to give some jealousy to France, and to see the
Emperor's growing Power at a stand: For he wished rather that the Emperor
should stand in need of his help, than he of the Emperor's. But the Year was
over before that great Work was concluded; as well as before the K. of the
Romans his Marriage with the Princess of Hannover was completed. It Is true,
that Marriage was concluded upon above two months before; but the young
Princess being th^n in Italy along with her Mother, who was gone to see the
Duchess of Modena, her Eldest Daughter, it was put off till the beginning of
the Year 1699. To conclude, it is not doubted, but these two things will quickly
be adjusted; which Time will ^^ew to all who have the happiness to live so ^^ng.

FINIS.
AN INDEX Of the Principal Matters.
Note that this Mark (p 2) signifies that the Number immediately preceding
relates to the Second Part.

A.
ABbot of Quality, accused of Corresponding with King William in Holland. The
History of this Abbot 217 p 2 Adventures, 89, 27, p 2. 101 p 2. 341 p 2 Agnan
(the Abbot) rises from a Cordelier to a Chemist Physician 152 p 2 Agnan (the
Duke) his Character. He sets up for a Judge among the Musicians 162 p 2
Albermarle (the Duke) promises K. William 's Picture to Mr. Harlai, and sent it
him 179 p 2. He is that Prince's Favorite 239 p 2 Almoners of the Army, their
Life. The History of one of them 155 p 2 Amat (Mr.) 80 p 2 Ambassadors of
France, Men of Military capacities 195 p 2 Ambois (the Cardinal) 122 Angle (the
Marchioness) 118 Antin (the Marquis) receives a Pension of 10000 Livres for a
New-Years-Gift 14 Antin (the Marquis) Brother to Mr. de Montespan, Killed in a
Duel 83 Argen^on (Mr.) His Character 62, Three words spoken to him by the first
President of the Parliament of Paris 63. The Sequel of his Character 99 p 2,
297 p 2, See, Scarcity, and Robbers. Armagnac (Madam) has her Coats pulled up
by a Footman upon her going out of the Tuilleries 164 p 2 Arnhoton (Mr.) made
Master of the Requests 36 p 2 Arpajou (the Duchess) displeased for not being
made a Lady of Honor to the Duchess of Burgundy 3 Arquien (the Marquis)
Father to the Queen of Poland 84. His Character. He entertained a Wh^re that
was only known by the Name of Louison d' Arquien 96 p 2 Affi Besieged by the
French 123 p 2 Avaux (Count de) the French Ambassador in Sweden 160 p 2 Ar^iant
(the Count) 21 p 2 Au^^court, a P^cardy Gentleman, his Actions against the
Family of Mr. de Louvois, (...) P^rt^f^uile he had carried, 33 34, and against
the Duke of E^^euf, 37, 38. Aumont ((...)) forsakes the Jesuits and joins in
with the Priests of the Oratory 75 p 2 A^meis (Madam) 118 p 2 Auvergne (the
Bailiff of that place) a troublesome lover 48. He fights the Chevalier de Kelus
49, 81. Auvergne (the Abbot) chosen Coadjutour of Cluni 83 Auvergne (the Count
of that Name) gives my Lord Portland (...) of his House 242 p 2. He has a
fli^ght dispute with ^^^de Lausun 262 p 2 A^en (the Count) married Madam
d'Aubigne. 252 p 2
B
BAnhevilliers (Mr.) 24 p 2 B^^en (Prince Leuis of (...) at the C^^^ of Poland
106 (...) (the Marquis) 34 151, p 2, His carriage to (...) 35 101 Barcelona 60
p 2, 83 p 2, 91 p 2, 125 p 2, 131 p 2 Barnebite, a (...) of the Convent of
Montargis, a Quieti^t 63 p 2 Bart (John) his adventure with a (...) of the
Order of the blue Ribband 142 p 2, he conducted the P. of Conty with a Squadron
to Poland. 169 p 2, 174 p 2. he stops some Vessels 184 p 2 Bartholomew, the
particulars of the Mass^^re committed on Bartholomew's day 55 Bartillac,
Lieutenant General of the French Army 17 p 2 Bastille, the Government of it
disputed for 265 p 2 Bavaria, the Electoral Prince 197 p 2 Baville, Intendant
of Languedock, what was said to him at Montpelier concerning the Duke of Nevers
43 Bauquemars, two Brethren Twins, that always had the some F^rtune 69 Baumont
(the Abbot) Nephew of the Archbishop of Cambrai, and Subpreceptor to the
Princes of France 72 p 2 Beavuilliers (the Duke) suspected of Quietism. His
Character 126, 65 p 2 Begnon, Intendant of Breast 53 p 2 Believre, the
President, what was said to him 68 Bellefonds the Marshal 4 p 2 Bellefonds the
Marchioness ibid Been, an Irishman, a Sea-Lieutenant. 53 p 2 Benier, a Man
whose memory was abhorred by the People 37 p 2 Bernu, Treasurer of the Casual
Reve^ues, and very curious in his household Furniture 133 Berthelot the powder
man 236 p 2 Besmaux, Governor of the Bastille 47 p 2, 264 p 2 Bethunes, the
Marchioness, Sister the Queen of Poland 99, 94, p 2 Bielke, the Count of that
Name, Arrested 160 p 2 Bignon, Intendant of Picardy 62 Bignon, Counselor of
State 64 Bignon, first President of the great Council 66 Bignon de Blansi,
Master of the Requests 35 p 2 Biron (Mr.) intertains Mr. de la Force after the
massacre of St. Bartholomew 's day 58 Blacksmith of Salon a Ghost appears to
him 146 p 2 Boufflers (the Marshal) 2, 4, 18, 20, His Offices 20, 123, 132 136,
166, 271, all in p 2 Bouillon (the Chevalier) suspected of having ^omp^n'd the
Ladies 17 Bouillon (the Cardinal) 82 84. He befriends the A. B. of Cambrai 71 p
2 Bordeaux, a Family of that Name 22 p 2 Bossuet (Abbot) sent to Rome against
the A. B. of Cambray 127, 71 p 2 Bourbon, the Waters 3 Bourgundy (Duke) is to
many the Princess of Savoy. 3. The marr^age concluded 187 Bournouville (the
Prince) has a process against the Prince of Epino^s 162 p 2 Brancas (Count)
Knight of honor to the Queen 44 p 2 115 p 2 Brandenburg (Elector) lends a
great deal of Money to the Elect^r of Sa^^ny 109 Briequemau (Marquis) 53
Brionne (Count) attached with a violent Appolexy, that made one of his Eyes
fall down to the middle of his Face 70 B^iord (Count) sent Ambassador to Tuvin
Buccancers dissatisfied with Points 49 p 2 B^^li, Young Lady 40 p 2 Bullion,
Superintendant of the Finances, his Children 77 and 78 p 2
C
CAdets a Company in France, in which we may see the very Footmen 274 p 2
Callieres Plenipotentiary of France 72, 74, 79, 111 p 2 Caius Garrulus, to whom
that Name was given 20 Cambray, (A. B.) declares for the Sentiments of Molinos
124. Causes to Print a Book in defense of Madam Guyen 124. The Bishop of Meaux,
and some other Prelates oppose him, His Character 125, 126. Is Named and
consecrated Archbishop 67 p 2. Is ordered to retire to his A. Bishopric 70 p
2. They endeavor in making Madam Guyon ridiculous to make the blow fall upon
that Arch B. 278 p 2 Camp of Campiegne, the Expenses made there 270, 271 p 2
Canillac (Marquis) 134 p 2 Carette, Physician has but one Remedy for all sorts
of Diseases 208 p 2 Cardinal Primat. See Poland, Saxony, and Conty Cardinals
Nephews pay nothing for their Bulls 163 p 2 Carignan Prince takes the right
hand of the Duke of Foix and Choiseul 8. 12 Carignan (Mademoiselle) reproved 47
sent into a Convent 210 p 2 Cartagena 45 p 2 Cascaye, Morquis, Ambassador of
Portugal at Paris, ^ang'd a Gamster 14 and 15 p 2 Catinat, Marshal, concluded a
Treaty between France and Savoy. 2. He besiege^ Ath 223 p 2 Ca^martin Intendant
of the Finances 65. His Expression upon the subject of the Tax upon Lights 59 p
2 Cavois, grand Marshal of the King's Household 12 and 13 p 2 Ceuta besieged by
the King of Morocco 246 p 2 Chambon a Chemist Physician 208 p 2 Chambonneau, a
Lady of that Name 48, 51. Her banishment to Rouan, and her death 51 Chamilli,
Count 108 p 2 Chancellors of France never go into mourning 41 p 2 Chandenier,
Marquis 92 Chapelle (Mr.) 111 Charles II. King of England his Mistresses enrich
themselves upon his Spoil 113, 116. He was not present at the Negotiation of
the Py^en^es 81 p 2 Charost, Count, 91, 65 p 2 Chateauneuf (Marquis) Secretary
of State for Religious Affairs 156 p 2 166 p 2 Chatearenau (Madam) 79 p 2 80 p
2 Chatillon, a Knight, at present a Marquis 114, 115, 116 Chatillon, the Duke,
11 p 2 Chatillon Coligni, a Family 80 19 p 2 Chaulieu, Abbot, 208 p 2 Chaulnes,
the Duke, his Death, 275 p 2 Chemeraut 128 p 2, 129 p 2, 131 p 2 Chevreuse, the
Duke, suspected of Quietism 126, 65 p 2 277 p 2 Choisi, the Abbot, draws up an
account of the Princess of Savoy's ^^yage. What was said of that performance.
6. He ^ses 50 Leuis to Madam de Fres^^^, and h^w ^e p^y^ her 7 Cir, Quietism
insinuates itsself into that Society 127, 71 p 2 Clancarty, my Lord, taken up
259 p 2 Clermont de Lodeve, the Counts of that Family lose the Title of the
King's Cosins 9 p 2, 10 p 2 Cleveland, the Duchess, King Charles 's Mistress
206 p 2 Cluni, an Abbey 83, 84 Coaches more numerous ^t Paris after the Peace by
2000, 190 p 2 Coadlet, the Abbot, the History of him 223 p 2 Coaslin, Abbot 113
p 2, 163 p 2 Coaslin, Duke, 114 p 2 Coaquin, Marquis, marries a Daughter of
Marshal de Noaillis 90, 91, complains, that he had a Dwarf for a Wife 93, 94.
He is concerned with the Princes of Poland 90, 97 Colbert 118 p 2, 252 p 2
Comedians, Italians, Their Theater shut up 121 p 2, 122 p 2 Conac, Young Lady
of that Name 111 p 2 Conde, Prince, he Canes the Prince of Harcourt. The
Archduke Leopold would have the right hand of him. The Author of that Prince's
History censured 10, 11, 12. His Revenues 101. How he amused himself at
Chantilli, and what he said of the Marquis of R^uville 82 p 2 Conti the late
Prince 103 Conti, Francis L^uis of Bourbon Prince, proposed for the Crown of
Poland 86. His pretentions upon the Estate of the Abbot of Orleans 102. Gains a
process against the Dutches^ of N^mours 104. Is in (...) 105. Diverts himself
10^. Sends Money so Poland 83 p 2. Is very indifferent of being chosen King 84
p 2. Is chosen 136 p 2. Is beloved 139 p. Goes to Poland 174 p 2. Puts into
Copenh^ en 184 p 2. The King returns to him the Money he had expended 207 p 2.
Has a difference with ^he Chevalier of Vendome 263 p 2. Gains his process 288 p
2 Conty (Princess) the Governor of Limas 's Son falls in Love with her by
seeing her Picture 50 p 2 Convent at Paris for Debauched Women 55 p 2 Converts
(new) taken up in the Neighborhood of Orange 255 p 2 Coulan^es 84 Courchamp 32
Cousin The King of France gives and takes away the Name sometimes 9 and 10 p 2
Courtin 78 Couture advocate 170 p 2. 171 p 2 Couvanges The Duke of Lorrain 's
Envoy at Paris 268 p 2 Creci Plenipotentiary of France at Ryswick 79 Crequi
Count Bernieule has a difference with the Count of Harcourt. What passed at
their Reconciliation. 9, 10 Crequi, Marshal, 18 p 2 Crequi, the Marsh, his Lady
231 p 2 Croissi 117 Cronwel 166 p 2 Cujavia Bishop of that place 107 89 p 2.
See Conty, Poland, Saxony Czar of Muscovy his Voyage 200 p 2
D
DAcquin the King's first Physician banished the Court 79 p 2 Dangeau (Marquis)
is made Knight of Honor to the Princess of Savoy. 4. Makes an establishment
for the Nobility 274 p 2 Dangeau (Abbot) his Character. Why he got no
Bishopric 275 p 2 Dannemark (King) Loves the Prince of Conty 184 p 2 Dantzik.
The Prince of Conty arrives before that Town 175 p 2. Makes reprisals upon the
French 184 p 2 Darmstad Prince 197 p 9 Dauphin he is good, is not much given to
Women, yet has had some intrigues 253 and 254 p 2 Dax, Bishop, was writing the
History of the King of France 81 p 2 Debauchery prevails amongst the Ladies and
Gentlemen of the Court of France 15, 19, 25, 16 p 2 Debuc Mademoiselle Herbert
36 p 2 Depinot Pontchartrain's Deputy 36 p 2 Des Chiens 37 p 2 Desgrez one of
my Lord Portland 's Chaplains taken up 240 p 2 Destouches, Madam Camus 14 p 2
Dislon an Irish Colonel. What happened to him 128 p 2 Distick against the
Jesuits 164 p 2 Donsi, Count, his Character. 42 Is sent to the Bastille. Comes
out of it 45 51 Dukes in Love with the Actresses upon the Theater 19, 23, 30.
The Dukes pretentions over the Princes 192 p 2 Damont one of the Dauphin's
masters of Horse. What Service that Prince has for him 253 p 2 Du^as, Duke,
Captain of the lifeguard. What he said of the Marshal of Salon 153 p 2
E
EGmont, Count, 111 p 2 Elbeuf, Duke, his difference with Augicourt 33 England
the King of that Country, was not present at the Negotiation of the Pyrenean
Treaty, and why 81 p 2. He kept Misses 206 p 2 England the King of that Country
stayed six Years in Ireland for want of a fair wind 184 p 2 English People,
their Character. 260 p 2 Epinois, Prince, commences a process against the
Prince of Bournonville 162 p 2 Epinois, Princess her Death 282 p 2 Etrees
Count, marries Marshal Noailles his Daughter 95 65 Etrees a Marshal, his Lady
111 p 2 Etrees Cardinal 276 p 2 Etrees Duke 279 p 2 Expenses extraordinary upon
the Duke of Burgundies marriage 188 p 2
F
FArmer of the Revenues restores to the King what he had robbed him of 149
Fenelon Abbot 64 p 2. See Cambray. Ferrete, Marquis, Ambassador of Savoy in
France 209 p 2 Ferriere 37 p 2 Ferte, Duke, his Witticism upon Taxing the Coats
of Arms 151 Ferte, Duchess 15 p 2 Feuillade, Marshal, his complement to Mr.
Courchamp 32 p 2 Finances well managed in France 65 Fire, Bon-fires for the
Peace made with reluctance in France 181 p 2 Foix one of the Hostages sent to
the Duke of Savoy until the conclusion of the Duke of Burgundy 's marriage with
the Princess of Savoy Font Pertius a Lady of that Name, win favored Monsieur
Arnolds Sentiments 75 p 2 Footboy, the Insolence of one of them 164 p 2 Force,
a Young Lady, Daughter to the Marquis of Castlemoron 53, 54. Genealogy of the
house of Force 54. The Hi^tory of the first Marshal le Force 55, 57.
Madem^selle de la Force is Granchild to that Marshal. Is sent by the Kings
order to a Convent 59 Fouquet, Abbot, 38 p 2 France in the late War had five
hundred Thousand Men by Sea and Land. 80. The Poverty of the people of that
Kingdom after the Peace 273 p 2 Fremont 137, 139, 144, 145, 146, 147 Frenchmen
have always an inclination for their Country 87 p 2 Fresnoi, Madem, gains 50
Louisdors from the Abbot of Choisy How she is p^y'd of them. 7. Her Character
15 p 2. Wife of a common Citizen's Son 27 p 2 Frette, a Gentleman of that Name
82 Furstemberg, Princess, caused to self the Bed and Tapistery of the Duchess
of Sully 114 p 2
G
GAnd, Vicecount, 152 p 2 Garnier a famous Farmer for the Revenues 43 p 2
Geniers Knight ^f S. his No^e was cut off 233 p 2 Gennez Captain of a Ship 267
p 2 Gentry among Citizens, what it is 120. It Is condemned in France 121 Gersej,
Count, 257 p 2 Ghost, Nostradamus 's Ghost 144 p 2 Girardin, Madam, 33 p 2
Gordes, Marquis, 115 p 2 Grammont, Count, 40 p 2 His Character 108 p 2 Grancei,
Madam, her quarrel with the Princess of Montauban 117 p 2 Grignan, Countess,
ill received by the Duchess of Orleans 163 p 2 Guise 45 p 2 Guyon, Madam, falls
into Quietism 124, 126, 64 p 2. Is sent to Vincennes 67 p 2. Is set at liberty
68 p 2
H
HArcourt, Princess, obtains permission for the Duchess of Lude to go to Marli
for 2000 Crowns 119 p 2. Is suspected of Quietism, what she says upon that
subject 131. Loses a suit of Law against Madam of Nemours 43 p 2. Her Character
44 p 2. 119 p 2. Has a difference with the Duchess of Sully 192 p 2 Harcourt,
Count, has a difference with the Count of Crequi. 9 The Prince of Conde Canes
him. 10 One of his Mistresses shut up 26 Harcourt Marquis 193 p 2 244 p 2
Harcourt Marchi^ness 248 p 2 Harli, Councellor of State Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary at Reswick 78, 11 p 2, 179 p 2 180 p 2, 181 p 2, 182 p 2, 221 p
2 Harlai, Madam, desires to see the Prince of Orange King of England 179 p 2
Harouis Mr. and Madam 36 p 2 Harrach, Count, 196 p 2, 246 p 2 Hilliere, Knight,
Governor of Rocroy his Death 17 p 2. Owns in his Testament, that he had robbed
the King 17 p 2 History of an Apparition to a Man of Salon 144 p 2 Hollanders
74 79 Hypocrisy amongst the Nobility of France 123 Hypocrites are the Devil's
Martyrs 124. Comply with the A. B. of Cambray 's Doctrine 124
I
JAgellon 85 Jai Jesuit 165 p 2 James, King, publishes a Manifesto 151, 152.
His Allies and the Pope mock at him 152. Will not go out of France after the
Peace of Reswick 152. His Manifesto has no effect 1 p 2. A secret Article for
the Dowery of his Queen 2 p 2. What Talbot says of him 26 p 2. How he resents
it 27 p 2, Passes his time indifferently upon the Negotiation of the Peace 134
p 2. Has more devotion than judgment 135 p 2. Was with the Ambassador of
England at a Review 257 p 2 James, Prince of Poland 87: Is hated by the Poles
126 p 2 Janson, Cardinal, 83 Jesuits their difference with the Archbishops of
Rouen and Rheims 128. Are reconciled with the Fathers of the Oratory. 72 p 2,
76 p 2, Change the Name of Jesus for that of King in the College of Lou^s le
Grand. 164 p 2. Jesuits whipped at Paris in the open Street by the Students 236
p 2 Joly Mr. de Fleury 136 Issi An Assembly held there concerning Madam Guyon
's Affairs 94 p 2
K
KAilus Knight 50. 81
L
LAdy a Court one married twice, but none of her husbands enjoyed her 30, 31
Ladies of honor mantain'd by the King at Epionnes house 117 Langlee, Mr. is
very magnificent 97, 98 Lampoons, scandalous, upon the Ladies of France 17, 18
Lanthorns a Tax upon them 59 p 2 Laparat Ingenier what he said to Mareshal
Boufflers after the taking of Namur 2 p 2 Larre, Marquis, 26 p 2 Lausun, Duke,
is married at the Age of sixty with the Mareshal of Lorges his Daughter who was
only sixteen 136. His precautions in regard of his Young Wife, to whom he had
given great advantages. Has a suit at Law 136, 137, 138, 142, 145. Loses his
Suit, and what follows thereupon 146, 147. Loses above 60000 Pistols in three
months 161 p 2. What the Count of Auvergne says of him 262 p 2 Lesdigiuers,
Late Duke. 32 Lionne, Abbot, sent into a Seminary 122 Lodeve, Bishop received a
blow in Languedoc 9 p 2, Count of Clermont of Lodeve ibid Longueville 100
Lorges, Marshal, See Lausun Lorrain, Duke, 110 p 2, Asks M^demoselle in
marriage 268 p 2. His marriage agreed upon, and the Conditions 270 p 2 285 p 2.
Carries his Lady to Nancy 287 p 2 Lorrain, Knight, 215 Lorrain, Duchess, Queen
of Poland, her Character 270 p 2 Louis XIV. corcludes a Treaty with the Duke of
Savoy. 1 Dissembles with the Duke of Sav^y. 13 Sends the Count deBriord to
Turin. 13 Is very much offended at wicked Lampoons made against the Ladies of
the Court, 16 He caused a great many Women and Girls to be sent into Convents
47 to 59. What he does with respect to the great Duchess 70 Sends the Sieur
Calliers into Holland to make propositions of a Peace 72. Sends four Millions
into Poland to secure the Crown of that Kingdom to the Prince of Conti 109.
Means to extinguish Quietism 127. See Madam de Guyon. Obliges the Jesuits to
give satisfaction to the Archbishop of Rheims 130. Buys Mr. Bertin 's Tapistry
134. Acquaints the Allies that he would own King William for lawful King 2 p 2.
Pays a Man who had cheated him a^ Game, before he chased him from Court 11 p
2. Causes Madam Guyon to be Arrested 65 p 2. Ordained the Arch-B. of Cambray to
retire to his A.-bishopric 70 p 2. Sends more money to Abbot Polignac into
Poland, than he demands 92 p 2. Gives 50000 Louis d' Ors to King James during
the War 135 p 2. Salutes the Prince and Princess of Conty as King and Queen of
Poland 139 p 2, Is given to Devotion, and held a Council of Consciences 154 p
2. His Witicism concerning the Duke of Orleans 166 p 2. Gives to the Prince of
Conti 2000000 in Bills of Exchange, and 10000 Louis d'Ors in Specie, for to go
to Poland 169 p 2. Returns to the Prince what he had expended of his own money
upon that Voyage 207 p 2. Sends 60000 Men to the Frontiers of Spain. 244 p 2.
Offers to His Catholic Majesty to send Succors to Ceuta. 247 p 2. Makes
rigorous Edicts against the new Converts 255 p 2 Distributes 500 Louis d'Ors in
Charity amongst the English and Irish in his Kingdom 256 p 2. Presents my L.
Portland with his Picture beset with Diamonds 256 p 2 Louison D'Arquien
Mistress to the Marquis of that Name 96 p 2 Louvois Marquis 108 p 2. 118 p 2
Lude Duchess 115 p 2. Lady of Honor to Mademoiselle of Savoy 192 p 2 Luxury
extraordinary at Paris 190 p 2 Luxemburg Marshal his Death 105. What the
Soldiers said of him 4 p 2. His Children 7 p 2 Luxemburg (Duke) 7 p 2. See
Montmorency.
M
MAdam The Duchess of Orleans had a fall 163 p 2 Maimburg Mistaken in his
History of Marshal de la Force 54 Maintenon (Madam) Angry that Quietism should
be introduced into St. Cir. 71 p 2. Has a Niece 250 p 2 Mamellus 85 Marat
(Madam) 118 p 2 Marocco, the K. besieges Ceuta 120 Marsan (the Count) the
youngest Brother of all the Princes of the house of Lorrain 42 p 2 Marriage of
the D. of Burgundy Solemnized with great magnificence 191 p 2. Clandestine
marriages usual in France 60 Mars (Mr. S.) 265 p 2 Martha ( the Dr. of St.
Martha) his Character 73 p 2. He is turned out from being General of his Order
by the intrigues of the Jesuits 75 p 2. He discovers that one of the Priests
betrays him 74 p 2. He is represented as a Jansenist 75 p 2 Martin (Madam de
S.) 48. Mr. S. Martin throws himself over a Precipice 171 p 2 Masquarades
prohibited by the A. B of Paris 54 p 2 Master of Horse in France, great Dukes
and Peers will not give him the precedence 8 Maurepas (Mr.) 268 p 2 Mazarin
(the Duke) 5 p 2 Mazarin (the Cardinal) a great Comedian 122 p 2 Meaux (the
Bishop) writes against the A. B. of Cambray his Book 125, 63 p 2. He writes a
Book in opposition to Madam Guyon 69 p 2 Medina Celi, the Duke, Viceroy of
Naples 198 p 2 Megrigny Ingeneer 3 p 2 Meilleraie (the Marshal) his Lady proud
of her Quality. Her notions of mercy 41 Melfort (my Lord) seemingly disgraced
by K. James. What is said of his Conduct 136 p 2 Melun (Madam) 249 p 2 Mere
(the Marchioness) 137 Miotte, gathers up great Magazines of Corn. What happens
to him 286 p 2 M^^elets 149 p 2 Molin^s 62 p 2 Money received in France 183 p 2
Montau^an (the Princess) her (...) Madam de Grancei 117 p 2. Her Character 120
p 2. Her difference with her Hu^band 121 p 2 (...) (the Duke) his Dispute with
the great Ma^^^ of Horse for France 8 Montbason (the Duke) shut up in a Convent
121 p 2 Montchamp Counselor of the Parliament of Bretanny, troubled for caning
another 230 p 2 Montchevreuil (the Marquis and Merchioness) 269 p 2
Montchevreuil (the Chevalier) 53 p 2 M^ntigny (the Marshal) the Marquis of
Arquien is de^cer^^^ of his Family 84 Montmorency (the Duke 4 p 2. He marries
the Marquis of Clerembaut 's Daughter 6 p 2 Mo^^^^, af^^n us Woman retaining to
the Opera 230 p 2 Motthe (the Count) is made Governor of the Bergues 70 Muscovy
(the grard Duke) sends ^is General to Vienna 2^0 p 2 M^^^^etaire in M^^^^erade
bea^^^ 89
N
NEmours (the Duchess 100, 1^3, 1^4, 105, 43 p 2 (...) English (...) ^ound
(...) I^d^a 53 p 2 Nevers (...) 42, 43, 45, 51 Neufchatel 102 Ninou Lendos 51
Noailles (the Marshal) Commands in Catalonia 91. His Family 92. He has many
Children 95 Nogent (the Count and Chevalier) 118 p 2 Noirmoitier (the Duke) his
Daughter 10 p 2 Nompart the Name of the Family de la Force 54 Normand a
Farmer-general at Lisle. His Difference with Mr. Creci and Harlai 80
Nostradamus 144 p 2 Novion, first President 37 p 2 Novion (Marquis) his share
in the Adventure of the Chevalier de S. Geniers 234 p 2 Noyon (the Bishop) an
Adventure of his 120 p 2 Nun, a Story of one 101 p 2
O
OBetere (Chevalier) Governor of Couilloure 112 p 2 Officer of the Army of the
Crown of Poland, goes to France to give intelligence 98 p 2 Oginski great
standard bearer of Lithuania 202 p 2 Olonne (the Count) 8 p 2, 10 p 2 Ombreval
Attorney General for the Court of Aids. His Son's Adventure with two Jesuits
236 p 2 Onneuil (Mr.) 137, 138 Oratory, the Fathers of that Society reconciled
to the Jesuitis 72 p 2, 75 p 2 Orleans, the Abbot bearing that Title 100, 101,
102. The Arguments made use of to prove that he was Compo^s mentis 103. The
Fooleries charged upon him 104 Orleans (the Bishop) his quarrel with the D. of
Rochefoucaut 113 p 2. He returns to Paris 162 p 2 Osnabruk (the Bishop of it)
287 p 2
P
PAlatines 86 Paris, the Archbishop of that Place 94, 59 p 2, 64 p 2. He
suppresses private Chapels 111 Passau, the Bishop 49 p 2 Paul, the Count of S.
Paul 101 Peace concluded 179 p 2 Pelle^ier (Mr.) retires 261 p 2 283 p 2
Perefixe (Mr.) Archbishop of Paris 75 p 2 Petit of Rochelle 46 p 2. He is put
in the Bastile 46 p 2, and conveys some Writings to Mr. Tourville 47 p 2
Phelipeaux (Mr.) 139 Phelipeaux (Mr.) de Her^aut 194 p 2 Philip, the Prince 41
Philip IV. King of Spain 41 Picture of the Princess of Conti found in a
shirmish 50 p 2 Plenipotentaries of France 78, 79. Arrive at Delft 81, and do
nothing for K. James, 1 and 2 p 2 Pointis (Mr.) in Love with President Ferrand
's Daughter 48 p 2. He Sails toward Carthagena 49 p 2. and sacks that City 51
p 2 Poland (the Queen of that Country) differs with France, and insults the
Marquis of de Vitri the French King's Ambassador 85. Sets up Prince James her
Son, as a Candidat for the Crown of Poland 87. Endeavors to prefer any one to
the Prince of Cont 108. Abbot Polignac Addresses to her 84 p 2, 85 p 2: She
becomes jealous of that Abbot 92 p 2, 94 p 2. Her marriage with Sobieski 94 p
2. Her Character 95 p 2 her desire to retire from Poland 205 p 2 Poland (the
Princes of it) lodge 8^0000 Crowns in the bank of Paris 88. Their Adventure at
a Ball 89. They depart France 97. Poland disturbed 168. p. 2. It engaged in a
League with the Emperor, Muscovy and the Republic of Venice, 200 p 2.
Polignac (the Abbot) the French Ambassador in Poland 87. He never discovers
the Duke of Saxony's Interest 99 p 2. He throws his M^^y about Plentifully, 83
p 2. He endeavors to lessen the Austrian Faction 85 p 2. 89 p 2. 99 p 2. 126 p
2. 172 p 2. He is much surprised at the Prince of Conti's departure from
Poland, and sets out for France 185 p 2. Pommereau, (Mr.) 134. Pomponne (Mr.)
261 p 2. Pontchartrain (Mr.) 64 139, 144, 148, 36 p 2. 43 p 2. 48 p 2, 194 p 2
Pope, his favor to Mr. Harlai 41 p 2 Port (the Chevalier at present a Count)
114. His bargain with his Wife 115. His marriage disannulled 116 Port, the
Marchioness 117. The Original of that Family 117 Portland (my Lord) his
Conferences with Marshal Boufflers 134 p 2, 136 p 2, 166 p 2. He is sent
Ambassador from England to France 239 p 2 is received with great marks of
honor 257 p 2, 258 p 2 Portsmouth, the Duchess 206 p 2 Prizes taken at Sea by
the French in the last War are inconceivable 133 p 2 Pussort (Mr) 132, 133
Q
QUality Persons of Quality in France preferred to those who live by a
Profession 119 Quarrel between Husband and Wife, upon a very triffling occasion
143 p 2 Quietism 124, 127, 62 p 2, 70 p 2, 278 p 2, See Cambray, Guyon, Meaux.
R
RAcapee (Madam) 60 Radziowski, Cardinal, Archbishop of Gnesne 83 p 2 Recollet
Almoner 155 p 2. Condemned to the Gallys 159 p 2 Reims, the Archbishop of that
place differs with the Jesuits 128 Reinie (Mr.) 62 Revel (the Marquis) the King
is misinformed of his Quality 119 Ribere (Mr.) 101 Richelieu (the Duchess) her
Death 282 p 2 Robbers in France 287 p 2 Rochefoucaut (the Duke) falls out with
the Bishop of Orleans, 112 ^ 2. means to marry the Prince of Marsillac his
Grandson to Madam Maintenon 's Niece 251 p 2 The King has respect f^r him 282 p
2 Rocheguvon, the Duke, his marriage to the M^^^s of Louvois his Daughter 187 p
2 Reux, the Count, Governor of Ath 213 p 2. What he said upon the surrender of
the place 124 p 2 Rohan, the young Lady 8 p 2 Rohan, the Chevalier 9 p 2. His
Character 10 p 2 Rohan, the Marchioness 10 p 2 Roquelaure, the Duchess,
proposes the Edicts upon Coats of Arms 151 Rouiller, the Abbot, sent to a
Seminary 123 Rouci, the Countess, one of the six Ladies of the Palais. 3. She
goes to meet the Princess of Savoy at Brauvoisin Bridge. 4. She is Covetous 140
Rouen, the Archbishop, falls out with the Jesuits 127, 123 Rouville, the
Marquis 82 p 2 Roye, the Count and Countess of that Name 139, 140 Rubantel
Lieutenant General receives Orders from Mr. Boufflers 20 p 2 Rue a small Town
in Piccardy 33 Ryswick the place appointed for the Conferences of Peace 78, 59
p 2, 110 p 2
S
SAlon a Town in Provence, where Nostrada^^s was b^^n 144 p 2 Sapieha 85 p 2,
86 p 2, 202 p 2 Saumers (Mr.) 268 p 2 Savoy (the Duke) concludes a Treaty with
France 1, 2, 3. His Daughter betrothed to the D. of Burgundy 3. She sets out
for Beauvoisin Bridge 4. She arrives at Lions and M^ntarges, where the King
meets her and is taken with her W^^. 5. One of the Dukes of Savoy disputed the
Precedence with the Prince of Conde in the time of Henry IV. 6. The Princess of
Savoy before her marriage, was called the Princess, and had the Precedence of
all the Princesses of the Blood 6. The D. of Savoy is somewhat dissatisfied and
causes an Inscription to be made that did not please the Court of France, 7. He
pretends that the Prince of Carignan should take the right hand of the Dukes of
Foix and Choiseul, and accordingly 'twas so. 8. That Prince's dissimulation. He
Sends these two Lords back to France 12. The presents made to the Princess of
Savoy 13. What the King resolved to do in case the D. of Burgundy had died
before the Consummation of his marriage with the Princess of Savoy 187 p 2, 209
p 2 Savoy. P. Eugene of that name proposed for Viceroy of Navarre 197 p 2
Saxony, the Elector, abjures Lutheranism 107. He borrows money to procure his
accession to the Crown of Poland 109. The measures he uses to compass his end
109. He is a War (...) Prince 87 p 2. He professes the Catholic Religion
publicly 89 p 2, 99 p 2. and is proclaimed King 137 p 2. What the World said
of the sincerity of his Profession 140 p 2. He makes himself master of the
Castle of Cracow 177 p 2, and marches German Troops into the Country 183 p 2.
He sends an Envoy to the Pope 186 p 2. and promises the Pope's Nuncio all that
he desired 201 p 2. He gives reception to the Cardinal Primate 205 p 2, and
sends a Minister to France 207 p 2 Scarcity of Provisions in France 285 p 2
Seignelay, the Marchioness 5 p 2 Serrau, the Count 60 Seraphin the Father,
Guardian of the Capuchins of Mendon Preaches freely before the King 412 p 2
Servon, a Gentleman 57 p 2 Sesane, the Marquis, 235 p 2 Sessac, the Marquis 9 p
2 Sharpers 190 p 2 Silleri, the Chevalier, accompapanies the P. of Conti to
Poland, and assumes the Title of a Count 173 p 2 Sobieski. John, K. of Poland.
His Character 85 99, 127 p 2, 204 p 2 Soissons (Mademoiselle) goes to the
Bastile in order to see Madam Chambonneau's Spark 46. She goes to Brussels 52.
The D. of Savoy desires the King to turn her out of France 209 p 2 Soissons
(Madam) the state she was reduced to. What the World said of her 52 Soissons
(the Chevalier) the Bastard of the late Count Soissons. Madam Nemours gives him
the Principality of Neufchatel, and gets him to be married to Marshal Luxemburg
's Daughter 105 Songs of a scandalous Nature 17 Spain the Queen demands Troops
of the Emperor, and for what 61 p 2 Spaniards are alarmed at the preparations
of France 109 p 2 Strangers in Paris 189 p 2 Students at Paris whip the Jesuits
in the Streets 236 p 2 Sturgeon taken for a Courier 129 p 2 Sweden, their King
is declared Major before the wo^ted time 160 p 2 Sulli (the Duchess) her Bed
and Hangings attached by the Princess of Furstemberg 114 p 2. The young
Duchess of Sulli has a quarrel with the Prince^^ of H^rcourt 192 p 2 Sulli
(the Chevalier) is robbed by a person of Quality at the solemnity of Burgundy
's marrage 190 p 2
T
TAlbet the Duke of Tyrconnel 's Natural Son, Brigadeer of the King's Armies in
Italy, and Colonel of a Regiment 25 p 2. Put in the Bastile 26 p 2, and l^ses
his Regiment and Pension 27 p 2 Talon (Mr.) Advocate General always read his
pleadings 135 Tambonneau, President 42 p 2 Tariff 194 p 2 Terms (the Marquis)
one of the Spies at Court 17 Tesse (the Count) Lieutenant General of the Kings
Armies. 2. Is made first Master of Horse to the Princess of Savoy. 4. His other
places 4. Thaumur (Madam) the Wife of me of the Captains of the Galleys of
Versailles is shut up in les Repenties 59 Ther^n (Mademoiselle 111 p 2 Thoisi
(Madam) 97 Toulouse (the Count) makes magnificent Presents to the Marquis of
An^in, and is made Governor of Bretany 277 p 2 Tilader, the Chevalier, 19 p 2
Tirconel 25 p 2, 26 p 2 Tour, the Priest, chosen General of the Fathers of the
Oratory 75 p 2 Tourville, the Marshal, sends his Lady to one of his Country
Seats 31 p 2 Trappe (the Abbot) writes two Letters against the A. B. of Cambray
127 Tremouille, the Abbot, is contemptuously spoken of 8 p 2 Trouson, Dr. of
the Sorbonne, his Character 66 p 2 Turks make a Peace with the Emperor 288 p 2
Turenne commended 18 p 2 He used to say, that God assisted great Squadrons 233
p 2 Valeri, the Marchioness of S. Valeri 77 p 2 Valliere, the Marchioness 249 p
2 Varennes, Mademoiselle, banished 39 p 2 Vaubrun, the Abbot, 280 p 2 Vaudemont
(Prince) Governor of the Milanese 197 p 2 Vauiour, the Duchy 249 p 2 Vaul, the
Count marry's a Daughter of Madam Guyon 's 124 Vendome, the Duke, proposed for
King of Poland 87. He commands in Catalon 60 p 2, and Besieges Barcelona 125 p
2, He is the Dauphin 's Favorite 207 p 2 Vendome, the Chevalier, grand Prior
of France falls out with the P. of Conti 263 p 2. He offers to draw u^o^ him
and is sent to the Bastille 264 p 2 ^ut is released 267 p 2 Venice 200 p 2
Venetian, Lady, undertakes a journey to France to see the King 104 p 2
Ventadour, the Duke 114 p 2 Verneuil, Counselor of the Requests of the Palais
20 p 2 Verneuil, the Duchess, mother to the Duchess of Lude 115 p 2
Verthamont, master of the Requests, keeps company with Women. An Adventure of
his 67 Verthamont, Mr. de Vellenom, his Character 57 p 2 Vertheueil, the Abbot
282 p 2 Vertus, the Countess, makes a Comical bargain with her Husband 114,
115, 116. Her marriage disannul'd 116 Vesins, the Marquis 118 Viceroy of
Catalonia, has a Stratagom put upon him by the Duke of Vendome 130 p 2
Vieuville (Mr.) 45 Vieuxburg; the Marquis 40 p 2 Villars, the Marquis,
Ambassador to Vienna from France 195 p 2 Villequier, the Marchioness, has her
Coats pulled up by a Footman at the Tuilleries-Gate 164 p 2 Villeroi, the
Marshal his Character 2 p 2, 3 p 2, 123 p 2 Villete Lieutenant General at Sea
46 p 2 Vitri, the Marquis, Ambassador from France to Poland is insolently used
85, 97 p 2 Usez the Family 116 p 2 Usher of the Chamber 212 p 2 Usson (Mr.) 131
p 2
W
WAles (Prince) had orders to enter into Conversation with the Earl of Portland
's Son 257 p 2 Wertheux 226 p 2 William III. King of England, forms a League
against France. 2 Lends vast sums to the Elector of Saxony 109, Is owned by
France 2 p 2. Offers his mediation for a Peace betwixt the Emperor and the
Sultan 199 p 2. Has good Armies 258 p 2. Goes to Germany 288 p 2
Z
ZAmet Sebastian 43 p 2

