Irish TALES: OR, Instructive HISTORIES for the happy Conduct of LIFE.

Containing the following Events. VIZ. I. The Captivated MONARCH. II. The
Banished PRINCE. III. The Power of BEAUTY. IV. The Distressed LOVERS. V. The
Perfidious GALLANT. VI. The Constant FAIR-ONE. VII. The Generous RIVAL. VIII
The Inhuman FATHER. IX. The Deposed USURPER. X. The Punishment of UNGENEROUS
LOVE.


By Mrs. SARAH BUTLER.

LONDON: Printed for E. Curll at the Dial and Bible, and J. Hook, at the
Flower-de-Luce, both against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1716.

Price 1 s. 6 d. Stitched, 2 s. Bound.

THE Epistle DEDICATORY, TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Earl of Lincoln.
My LORD,
THE Fair Authress of the following Sheets being Dead, and the Publication of
them falling into my Hands, I could not think of any PATRON, under whose
Protection, they might with that Advantage I desired, venture into the Public,
so properly as your Lordship's. For, where better could HEROIC LOVE, and all
the PATRIOT VIRTUES find a surer and more auspicious Refuge, than under that
Nobleman's Protection, whose distinguished Honor, and good Sense has rendered
him so eminently capable of the former; and whose steadfast Zeal for his
Country's Service in the most dubious, and difficult of Times has been so
conspicuous to all that know any thing of our public Affairs, as that of your
Lordship. Yes, my Lord, that Heroic Firmness and Resolution you discovered then
in your Conduct, has made you the peculiar Darling of all true BRITONS, of all
Lovers of the best of Kings, and Constitutions. Resolution, and Uncorruptible
Faith are not the common Growth of this Age, which makes every Consideration
yield to the poor an mean Prospects of immediate and Personal Advantages,
either in Wealth, or in Power and Dignities; and few, very few have been found,
whom neither the Malice and ungenerous Persecution of Potent and disappointed
Enemies could break, nor all the gilded Baits of Power, Riches, Flattery,
Pleasure, and the other cunning Arts of insinuating into the Minds of the young
and uncautious (in which vile Arts, those were no small Proficients, who had
then the Public Management of Affairs) could corrupt, or give the least shock
to; on whose Wiles, though many were deceived by them, your Lordship, supported
by a perfect Integrity, and just Understanding, looked down and despised.

IT is such a Public Spirit, such an Understanding, that qualifies a Nobleman
to be worthy of the Addresses of the MUSES. For whoever loves his Country, must
be pleased to see ARTS Flourish, which add to its Glory and its Felicity; since
that Country can only be estem'd truly Happy and Great, where ARTS as well as
Arms find public Encouragement. And of all ARTS, POETRY is perhaps the chief,
which deserves the peculiar Care of the Great and the Polite.

IF we may decide this by what we find in History, it is plain, that wherever
Heroic Fortitude, and Martial Glory have found a distinguishing Success, there
POETRY has met with the greatest Indulgence.

ATHENS, which polished Mankind by her POETS, was able by her single Valor,
under the Conduct of MILTIADES, with Ten Thousand Men, to defeat some Hundreds
of Thousands of Persians. ROME in her greatest Glory, and most established
Fortune, became a Rival of GREECE in that Noble Art, while VIRGIL, HORACE,
VARIUS, TUCCA and many more, found themselves the peculiar Favorites of the
ablest Statesman, and most illustrious Emperor that Nation ever knew.

IT would be no difficult Matter, my Lord, to carry on the Proof of this in a
less eminent degree through the several Kingdoms that arose out of the Ruins of
the Roman Empire, even from Italy, to Hungary; but that would be a Work of too
large an Extent for the narrow Compass of an Epistle. By hinting his here, I
only aim at stirring up, if possible, a generous Ambition in our Great Men, of
distinguishing themselves in a manner so worthy of Power and Dignity.

I have known a Nobleman, who (I know not by what means) got a popularity for
his Generosity, who yet could only justly pretend to an injudicious Profusion;
for he has given a Piper Three Hundred Guineas, when a MAN of LEARNING found
but a very mean Gratuity for a most valuable Performance. But several have,
indeed, been bountiful to Fiddlers, and the thrilling Throng, while we have
found very few SIDNEYS and SACKVILES, since we have pretended to Politeness;
and yet the many Excellent Products of Poetry, with little or no Encouragement,
are a Proof that it is the natural Growth of the Clime, and with a tolerable
Cultivation, might arrive at the greatest Perfection.

THE following Sheets, my Lord, are of this Kind; that is, they are allowed by
the Learned to be a useful sort of POETRY, though without the advantageous
Harmony of Verse. For as all POETRY is an IMITATION, as ARISTOTLE justly
observes, it is plain that all Fables are IMITATIONS of Actions, which is the
essence of both the DRAMATIC and EPIC POESY.

BUT this Prosaic Poetry is of as ancient a Date as the Milesian Tales, which
so charmed Antiquity it self. The Moderns since the Time of HELIODORUS, have
often varied their Form; some Years ago they swelled them into large Volumes,
but of late the general Taste runs for such as are comprised in a much narrower
Compass; from whence we derive so many Books of TALES, which have not yet
failed of Success. These that follow, in my Opinion, fall not in the least
short of the most excellent that have yet appeared; there being a Pathetic
Tenderness, that runs quite through them, supported by a Noble and Heroic
Fortitude.

THE Preface will show your Lordship that their Foundation is laid on true
History, and the Lady has so artfully Grafted the Fiction upon it, that the
whole bears the pleasing Appearance of Truth and Reality.

If they contribute to the Diversion of any Hour of your Lordship's more
elegant Leisure, I have my Aim. My Ambition to give this public Testimony of
my Esteem and Value for your Lordship's singular Virtues, would not suffer me
to lose the first Opportunity of doing it, unable to delay my Zeal 'till I had
something more solid to offer; though perhaps, in Justice, it is not the most
unmeritorious Endeavor to contribute to our Diversion; and I hope it will be
thus favorably received by your Lordship from,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, CHARLES GILDON.

THE PREFACE.
I HERE present the Reader with some few of those many Transactions which made
up the Lives of two of the most Potent Monarchs of the Milesian Race, in that
Ancient Kingdom of Ireland: And although I have clothed it with the Dress and
Title of a Novel; yet (so far I dare speak in my own behalf, that) I have erred
as little from the Truth of the History, as any perhaps who have undertaken any
thing of this Nature.

What I have added, is only the Love and Amorous Discourses of Murchoe and
Dooneflaith; whose Name I have presumed upon, since in the Chronicles and
Writings of all those, which I have read, who have Treated on that Subject,
make no mention of the Name of Maolseachelvin's Daughter; though none af them
hardly but take notice of the Story. And finding in Dr. Ketrius's Manuscript
that of Dooneflaith to be in use at that time, and (if I mistake not) to be the
Name of her Mother, I therefore was the more willing to imagine I should not err
so much from Truth, as if I had given her a feigned one, to give that to her
Daughter.

Some (upon what Grounds I know not) would needs have their manner and way of
making Love, which I have brought as near as I could to our modern Phrase, to
be too Passionate and Elegant for the Irish, and contrary to the Humors, they
allege, of so Rude and Illiterate a People; when all the while they do not
consider, that although they may seem so now, in the Circumstances they lie
under, (having born the heavy Yoke of Bondage for so many Years, and have been
Cowed down in their Spirits) yet that once Ireland was esteemed one of the
Principal Nations in Europe for Piety and Learning; having formerly been so
Holy, that it was termed The Island of Saints; and for Learning so Eminent, as
all their Chronicles make out, and some others who were not of that Nation, as Bede in his Hist. Anglic. lib. 3. cap. 4, 5, 19. and lib. 4. cap. 25.
Bid, and Camden Brittan. p. 730. Edit. Land. in fol. anno. 1607.
Camden do avouch for them.

It was so Famous for Breeding, that many from the adjacent Islands, and most
parts of the Continent of Europe came thither for it.

Insomuch as P. Walsh says in his Prospect of Ireland, that when any were
wanting from their own Country, it came to be a Proverb, He is gone to Ireland
to be bred.

And another in the Life of Sulgenus, has this Distich.

Exemplo patrum commotus amori legendi,
Ivit ad Hibernos Sophia mirabile daros.
And we find in their Chronicles, that there were Four Great Universities in
Ireland, viz. Ardmagh, Cashell, Dunda-Leathghlass, and Lismore, besides many
other Colleges of less Note elsewhere; and as Keting in his Manuscript has it,
in the Reign of Couchuvair Mac-Donochoe, that there were no less that 7000
Scholars at one time in one of those Universities, viz. Ardmagh; and that they
were the Irish in those Days who gave a beginning Abroad, as some Writers say,
to the Schools of Oxford. But it is most certain they did to those of Paris and
Pavia, and many other great Colleges of Learning in Foregn Parts.

And both Camden and Edmund Spenser in his View of Ireland, page 29. do
acknowledge, That our Ancestors in Great Britain learned the very form and
manner of framing their Character for Writing, from Ireland.

From what has been said, (though not a Tenth part of what might be on this very
account) I hoped I might have liberty to dress their words in as becoming a
Phrase as my weak Capacity could frame, or the time that I did it in would
allow.

As for the other part of the Story, it is all Historical, and treads only the
Path of the true Chronicle, if we may give Credit to my Authors, who are Bid,
Camden, Heylin, Spenser, Hanmor, Campion, Dr. Keting, Sir James Ware,
Flahertus, and P. Walsh. I have, I must confess, omitted several Remarkable
Passages, and Twenty four of the Twenty five Battles which Bryan Boraimh Fought
in his Reign and won; but yet I have not foisted in any thing, that might be
injurious to the Truth, in their Places, and have only made a Compendium of
Things as though done in four or five Years time, which perhaps were Transacting
half so many score.

I have constrained my self, contrary to the Custom of most who write these
sort of Essays, to make my Lovers die unmarried; since I could find no
Authority to the contrary. And I should indeed have been very willing to have
embraced the Opportunity (could I have found any color for it) of making them,
after so many Misfortunes, to have ended their Trouble in the Married Bed.

Lastly, since my Design in the beginning was to show the strange means by
which Ireland was once delivered from the Tyranny of Turgesius and the Danes,
by the Beauty of a Virgin; I thought it might not be impertinent to the Story,
to make the same Maid, though in a more virtuous way, be the Instrument of saving
it a second time, by infusing of Courage into her Lover, who, we'll suppose for
her sake, did things that Day, which almost surpass all belief; though at the
same time she had little or no part it may be in the Victory. This License I
presumed might lawfully be granted in a Novel.

Irish TALES.
LASTING and Terrible were the bloody Wars which the Ancient Irish sustained
against the powerful Danes; who, by their vast Numbers, and continual supplies
of fresh Men, who Recruited them daily, and were weekly landing at one Port or
other, came to their aid, they being then Masters of the Sea, so harassed and
tired the long defending Islanders, that at last they were forced to submit,
and their Provincial Kings become for some small space of Time, Tributaries to
the Dane.

Turgesius, the Danish Captain General, being a Soldier of invincible Courage,
and no less Ambitious, made himself be styled Monarch of Ireland, and with a
Splendid and Magnificent Train of hardy and resolute Warriors, whom Peace and
Idleness, the Seeds of Wickedness, and the Mildew of Virtue had rusted into
Courtiers, kept his Court in the center of the Country, at Lough-Ribh, near
that place, where now stands the Town of Athlone.

He was a Man so skilled and trained up in Arms, and Martial Fatigues, that had
he only followed the Business he professed, his Conquests and Victories might
have been an everlasting Theme for Ages to come; and had not his Lust like a
Canker eaten away the Inscriptions his Sword had engraven, his Victorious
Memory might to this day have been the enduring Song of Fame.

Turgesius having subdued the best part of the People of this Nation, nay,
indeed, we may say all, but a few who knew not how to bow their Necks in
subjection to any but a lawful Prince, or stoop to any thing beneath their free
Liberties, and Obedience to their own Kings, had betaken themselves to Boggs,
Woods, Mountains, Rocks, and inaccessible Places; whose Wisdom and Conduct
being backed with an inimitable Valor, in a few Weeks wrought out their own
Infranchizements, and broke the servile Bonds, in which their fellow Irish were
enslaved, notwithstanding the mighty Care and Circumspection Turgesius used to
the contrary; for there was not a Hole, or a Corner, much less a Town or a City
in the whole Realm, that was capable of it, in which he had not planted a
Garrison, made as he thought, secure by impregnable Fortifications.

All things being ordered in this manner, he began to partake of the Pleasures
of Peace, which his long Toil and indefatigable Labors had newly established.
Those cruel Wars which had opened the veins of this distempered sick Kingdom,
had not yet drained one drop of his ill Blood, which corrupting for want of
usual Exercise, made him degenerate from the noble Science of War, to practice
that of Love; and giving way to his unruly Passion, became in a short time
wholly Conquered by the fair Eyes of Dooneflaith, the Daughter of
Maolseachelvin King of Mead.

This Lady was one, on whom Nature had lavishly bestowed all the Graces and
Ornaments which could be, to make Humanity adorable; she was so nobly endowed,
and so incomparably Beautiful, that to see her, and not admire her, was
impossible; yet was she capable of all the soft sentiments Love could imprint;
and had already devoted her Heart to a Man, to whom without blame she might
warrantably do, being Prince Murchoe, Eldest Son to Bryan Boriamh, who was
afterward Elected King of all Ireland.

This Prince matchless in his gallant Exploits, was not less to be paralelled
in his Love; it is enough to tell you, he saw the beautiful Dooneflaith, and
consequently lost his Heart in the sight; but so much awe did her Virtue create
in him, that for some time he languish'd in the Torments of his Flame, without
daring to utter one word of his Love; and all the while the charming
Dooneflaith was subject to the same Malady.

Thus for a Time did these two secret Lovers live in Hopes that Fortune would
at some time or other, be propitious to their Amors; and although they were so
enamored of each other, yet dared not either of them show the least sign of
their Passion. For now Turgesius made it his business to win the Heart of this
Lady, and Maolseachelvin himself was not the last who discerned it; nor could
he any way forbid his Address, knowing how dangerous a thing it might prove, to
stand in competition with so mighty and powerful a King. Murchoe was not
insensible of it, and to his inexpressible Grief, was forced in silence to
bewail his Misfortunes, and see all the Joy of his Soul Caressed and Adored by
another: What Lamentations and Moans would he make when alone? And what Grief
would possess him, when he feared that his charming Dooneflaith might in time
consent to the Love of the Tyrant. He became so Melancholy and Troubled, that
the whole Court could not but take notice of it; and notwithstanding he used
all endeavors to stifle his Flame, yet he could not so closely conceal it, but
Turgesius (for no Eyes are sharper than those of the Jealous) perceived it; and
under pretense that he suspected him to be Ill inclined to his Government,
Banished him the Province, which was a far greater Punishment to the young
Prince, than had he instantly doomed him to Die.

Dooneflaith was soon made acquainted with the Misfortune of Murchoe, in which
she took such part, that she had much ado to refrain falling in a swoon before
the King, and was forced to feign an Excuse to get from his sight; she went
slenderly accompanied, having but two Maids who kept at a distance, into a
Garden, at the farther end of which was a Grove, whose melancholy shades seemed
fittest for her Condition; and in which obscurity she might have free Liberty
(thinking no body by) to vent her Complaints, while her Women, who seeing her
sit down on a Bank, retired to an Arbor hard by.

It was not without much trouble, and many endeavors that she could find
utterance for her words, her sighs and sobs still hindering her Speech; but at
length having by large streams of Tears, which ran down her Cheeks, almost
drained the Channels of her Eyes, she began to give ease to her Heart, which
without vent, must have certainly burst.

Oh! unfortunate and miserable Dooneflaith (says she) whither will thou fly
for ease, since Murchoe, the peace of thy Soul is banished thy sight, and whose
presence was the only stay of my Life; what avails Life, or Eyes to me, now
that dear Object's gone? Surely this Tyrant who usurps our Throne, has found I
love the Prince, and his Jealous Fears have drove him from the Court, that he
might also usurp a place in my Heart! Oh! Murchoe, Murchoe, could thou but
know my Soul; Oh! that my sighs could reach thy distant Ears, and make thee
sensible of what I suffer for thee. While she was thus complaining to her self,
e're she was aware Turgesius approached her, and found her in tears; just at
the same time as Murchoe, who behind an adjoining Hedge had overheard all she
had said, was going to throw himself at her feet; but seeing Turgesius arrive,
he lay still, as much pleased with what he had learnt from Dooneflaith's own
mouth, as troubled and afflicted at the coming of so Potent a Rival, who
hindered him from making known to his Mistress the sense that he had of her
Goodness, and the absolute Power she had gained over his Heart.

Dooneflaith was greatly surpised to see one so near her, whom she so much
feared, and had cause to hate; she would have risen and left the Place to the
King; but was prevented, by his taking her by the Hand, and throwing himself
down by her; she, not yet well awakened from the lulling Cogitations of her
dear Murchoe, her beautiful Face all covered with blushes, was forced to sit
down by Turgesius; who casting a look, which signified how much he was
concerned for her Trouble, desired her to tell him the cause of it; adding, if
it lay in his power to give her Redress, she had no more to do but command him.

Dooneflaith, at the present, was at a loss what Answer to make him; 'till
after several Demands, she spoke in this manner.

My Lord (said she) you urge me to do that, which I fear when performed, will
displease you. It Is not but that I know the Honor you are pleased to confer on
our Family in vouchsafeing to cast your Affections on me, who so little deserve
them; nor is it, but that I have confidence enough in your Kingly Word, that
makes me thus scrupulous; but so it is, unless with an Oath you confirm that
you will grant my Request, I shall still keep the cause of my Grief to my self.
Turgesius, was strangely perplexed in his Mind, to see one, whom he thought he
might have commanded, make Capitulations with him, and so much to distrust the
Word of a Monarch, that no less than an Oath would serve to confirm her, He
told her, That had she not gotten an absolute sway over his Heart, he would
never have condescended to a thing the most powerful Prince should never have
gained from him; in short, he swore to her By Heaven, and all his Pagan Gods,
that whatever she demanded if it lay in his power should be granted, upon
Condition that she would allow him to love her, and give him leave to hope,
that in time his Passion might be rewarded.

My Lord, (replied she) you pretend to grant my request, and tell me my Power
is absolute, and yet you confine me to that, which perhaps, of all things in
the World is opposite to my quiet; as for your loving me, it lies not in my
power to hinder; and as for your hopes that your Passion may be rewarded, is a
thing I can willingly suffer, so that you will not by your Power and Authority
urge me to Marry you against my consent, and with-all, that you would recall
the unhappy Murchoe, whom I know you have banished only for my sake. Turgesius
after a small pause, answered her Madam said he although your Father should
command you to marry me, nay, though my Life, and my future Eternal happiness
only depended upon it, yet will I allow you your own liberty, nor ever Wed you,
unless you freely consent to it. But as for Murchoe's repeal, it would indeed
show in me too much love, but too little discretion; for I know well, Madam,
(says he going on) the Prince's Thoughts are too aspiring, and that so long as
he lives in the Province, I must expect neither Peace in my Throne, nor my
Love, for I have more sufficient Proofs than bare report, that he Rivals me
both in your Heart and my Crown: How much cause have I therefore to to hate
him? especially now, since you are so much interested for him, I shall but take
into my Bosom a Snake, that when warmed again with my Favor, will sting me to
the Heart, and with his Venom rankle all my Peace and Tranquillity; however, to
show you that I pretend not to your Love by that power the Heavens have put
into my Hands, I freely consent that he stay still at home, nay even here in
our Court, and I shall admit him to use all his Art, and make his Addresses to
you, so that I likewise may be heard in my turn.

Turgesius remained some time silent, in expectation of her Answer, but the
blessing his Words had poured on her Heart, was too mighty for her Tongue, nor
knew she how to return him the Thanks which were due for so noble an Offer,
without betraying too much of her Love, but at last overcoming the conflict in
her Soul, she uttered these Words.

Most renowned Conqueror! your Generosity and Goodness have so far wrought on
my Heart, that I fear there is nothing in honor you can demand, that I shall
have the ability to deny you: And since it has pleased you to leave all to my
choice, I make a farther reference of it to Heaven, who I humbly implore to
direct all my Actions; and since so freely you have told me your mind, I will
be as liberal of mine, and here solemnly protest, that Murchoe has never so
much as opened his Mouth, or made known to me by any means whatsoever, the
things which you lay to his Charge. Turgesius was pleased at these Words, and
took his leave of her, with a promise immediately to recall Murchoe, whom he
told her he believed was not departed from Court, it being yet within the
limits of the time appointed for his Banishment. Dooneflaith returned him such
an answer, as the Nobleness of the Deed did require; she told him he had now
took the right course to succeed in his Love; but no sooner was he parted from
her, but she began to accuse her own Heart for what she had done, and although it
was only what her love for Murchoe had urged her to, yet she could not but
lightly condemn the way that she had taken to gain his Repeal; she was too
sensible there was no room in her Breast for any but Murchoe, and that
Turgesius, with all his endeavors could never supplant the esteem she had for
him; and withal, vowed in her heart, that if once Murchoe should mention his
Love, to give him such an answer as should not displease him.

Turgesius had no sooner left her, but at a small distance he espies
Dooneflaith's two Women, who at present he knew not, and his curiosity pressing
him to see who they were that were most melodiously singing to an Harp, which
they had brought with them into the Garden, Music being the chief thing that
did of late allay the melancholy humor of their Lady; he therefore retired
under the covert of an Hedge that was by and had but just laid himself down to
give attention to the Song, but he espied Murchoe with his Sword in his hand;
Turgesius called to his Guards, thinking he had some design on his Person; but
Murchoe dissipated those fears, by throwing Himself, and his Sword at the
Conquerors Feet, without so much as speaking one Word.

Turgesius, who was now in a greater surprise, to see his most mortal Enemy (as
he thought him) in so suppliant a posture, and not doubting but that Murchoe
had had some private Conference with his Mistress, was inflamed with such
Jealousy, that with a fierce and angry tone he pronounced aloud these Words,
which Dooneflaith plainly could hear.

Ha! Villain, (says he to Murchoe) what rash and inconsiderate Thing art thou,
whom Heaven has so far deserted, that thou sett'st thy Life at no higher a
rate, than thus to presume to approach one, whom so justly thou have made thy
Enemy, and thus dare to infringe those fatal Orders I have given; and thus by
intrenching on the liberty I have allowed thee, for thy two days stay to make
preparation for thy Banishment, and take the privilege to interrupt the
solitude of her, whom my heart adores, and thereby pull down thy sudden
Undoing. Murchoe heard these Threats with a Soul all inflamed with Revenge; but
fearing the prejudice of his Mistress, who now he began to hope, held not his
Life indifferent, stifled at present his resentment, and though at any other time
he had a mortal detestation of Flattery, yet now he thought it most expedient
for the working his interest with the divine Dooneflaith, answered him thus.

Most puissant, yet haughty Turgesius, that Title of Villain you gave me, I
renounce, and had you been ten times my Conqueror, would retort it back to thy
Face; had I not by accident, and not willingly heard how generously you intend
to proceed; it is not this miserable Life I fear to lose, nor is it that Heaven
has so far deserted me that makes me Bow at your Feet, nor is this posture I am
now in, so Suppliant as it is Thankful; I bow thus low to Turgesius, not that I
fear the worst he can do, but to return him my thanks for the freedom he gives
me in once more seeing Dooneflaith, and for the liberty he has granted to
permit me to make my humble Addresses to her. Now witness for me all ye Powers
above, my Life, my Honor, nay, what is more, my very Soul, I set at naught when
She ever stands in Competition. I must confess, and it is the first time I ever
taught my Tongue to say it, I Love! I Love, the fair, the charming, virtuous,
and all divine Dooneflaith; but to my everlasting Torment, I love, without
expectance of return; no, were my hopes as great and high as Sinners new
absolved, I should despair, since I have you for my Rival. What Power have I,
dejected banished I, when such a resistless Conqueror puts in his claim? A
Crown, a Crown, Turgesius, I fear will dazzle her fair Eyes, so glittering will
the mighty Glory shine, that she will look on no less light. Enough, Murchoe,
says Turgesius, and as I conquered thee in Arms, I Will Conquer in my Love;
henceforward I Will lay by my Crown, that shall be no title to gain her; nay
more, thus far I promise thee, that I will never demand her for my Wife, nor
seek her for my Bed on such a Price; Love only shall be current Coin, and that
I Will lavish to acquire my Ends; take then your Sword, take my Forgiveness, thy
own Liberty, and if thou can, take Dooneflaith, I Will condescend so low to
call thee Rival now; and since unurg'd thou ownest thou love her, thou will
have punishment enough for all thy Crimes, to see her circled by her own
consent within these Arms. By this time the Guards were come up, and Turgesius,
in the sight of them, and Dooneflaith, who also was come up when he called to
his Guards, took Murchoe from the Ground, and in the presence of them all,
pronounced his Pardon, and the freedom he allowed him to make his Addresses to
Dooneflaith.

Dooneflaith was so taken with his generous Proceeding, that she could not
withold from giving him a thousand Praises, which made him imagine he had no
small Interest in her Heart already; and were as so many stabs in the Breast of
Murchoe, who now began to think that her pleading for his repeal, was only out
of fear that in his absence, he might raise new Forces, and so once more bring
Turgesius's Life into hazard: After a walk or two in the Garden, Turgesius
making Murchoe take one of Dooneflaith's fair hands, while he held the other,
they went in all together; and now the whole Court was talking of nothing, but
the aspiring Love of Murchoe, and the noble Condescension of Turgesius.

Moalseachelvin was at that instant with Brian Boraimh, Murchoe's Father, in
consultation how they should shake off the tyrannous Yoke of this Usurper, when
this last adventure came to their Ears, Moalseachelvin from thence gathered
some hopes of accomplishing his ends; but Brian inwardly accused his Son of
disloyalty to his Country, who when he had the Tyrant alone, at his Mercy,
preferred the love of Maolseachelvin's Daughter, before that of his Honor, and
his enthralled Kingdom, wherefore they both parted at that time, without coming
to any result.

The next day Turgesius made his addresses to Dooneflaith, but found his
reception colder than he imagined; wherefore sending for her Father, he
discovered his Mind to him, and contrary to his Promise and Oath to
Dooneflaith, commanded him to use his utmost endeavors to reduce his Daughter
to accept his Love.

Murchoe taking the advantage of Turgesius's Permission, went also to
Dooneflaith, where he freely opened his Mind, and discovered to her all that he
had heard from her the day before in the Garden, she saw it was now no time any
longer to hide her affections, and to the unspeakable joy of Murchoe, confessed
that he had won so much on her heart, that would their Parents consent, she was
willing to accept him for her Husband; this was not so privately done, but a
Spy whom Turgesius had secretly placed there to that purpose, made him
acquainted with all that had passed, which raised such confusion in his Soul,
that he knew not how to be revenged on Murchoe, nor what punishment to inflict
on Dooneflaith; but after many tormenting Cogitations, was resolved, himself,
to be a private Spectator; and if that he found what he feared, (and was told
him) to be true, to end Murchoe's Life with his own hand.

Wherefore in a day or two after, seeing Dooneflaith was inexorable to all his
Entreaties, he seemed to give over his Suit, and now Murchoe had the greater
liberty of prosecuting his Amors. He had endured all the reproaches that an
incensed Father could make him, and had in vain solicited for his consent, and
although he found his Mistress, and also her Father no ways averse, but rather
desiring the Match, yet to his affliction and sorrow he could see no
probability of his happiness, since his own Father stood so much against it: No
Prayers, nor Entreaties could move him, and he had charged him no more to visit
Dooneflaith upon that account.

Murchoe, who had yet never known what Disobedience to his Father was, and had
never broke the least of his Commands, now saw himself in a miserable
condition, either he must loose the love of his Father, or that of his
Mistress, both equally destructive to him, he resolves, at last, to follow his
Duty, in hopes that in time his Love thereby would prove more happy; he failed
not however to pay her his visits, though with a Countenance less assured than
before; and she could not but observe the great alteration that was wrought in
his Heart; his Words bore not those soft and sweet accents they were wont, nor
did he put that joy on his Face as formerly he had: She could not see so mighty
a change, but asked to be informed of the cause, which with disjointed Words,
and heavy Sighs he at length told her.

O Madam! (says he, with his Eyes flowing over with Tears) how unhappy is the
wretched Murchoe, since even the Heavens conspire to his Misery! and, but that
I have reason to hope that I am not altogether indifferent to you, I should not
thus pine and waste to my Grave, but boldly at once leap over the battlements
of Life, and seek for a Death the nearest way. Dooneflaith hearing him talk of
Death, took him by the hand, and (with a thousand soft charms in her Eyes, though
half drowned in Tears, said to him) O my Lord! can any thing make your Life so
burdensome that you would quit it so long as I love you? can you thing of
wounding a Heart wherein I have an interest? For so nearly allied are all your
Sufferings to my self, that not one drop falls from your Eyes, but my Heart
answers with the like of Blood: Say then, my Murchoe, what has befallen? Has
Turgesius given you cause of Jealousy? or do you think because I allow of his
Visits (which Heaven knows is not in my power to prevent, or I would) that I
ever can consent to his Love? No, no, Murchoe, not all the Diadems in the
World, not all the Monarchs on Earth shall put you from my Heart; there you,
and none but you shall Reign, but play not the Tyrant there, and by Turgesius's
Example take delight to spoil and ransack what I so freely give, -- Here her
Sighs broke off her Speech, and raised our Lover from the Ecstasies her tender
Words had cast him into.

Dry up (oh! my Souls dear Treasure, says he) these precious Drops, the moiety
of which would largely expiate the Sins of all Mankind; I know thou love me,
and am prouder in that Title, than were I Monarch of the Universe; but my
Dearest, Charming Dooneflaith, thy Love alone but makes me miserable, since I
must only see there is an Heaven, but never be admitted to it. My -- Oh
Dooneflaith, my Cruel Father has commanded me to Love no more; no more to talk
and spend my happy Hours in thy blessed Company, no more to sit and gaze on that
dear Face, no more to change soft Looks, and Prattle with our Eyes the Secrets
of our Hearts; no more now must I wish for Night, that in my Dreams my
Dooneflaith may delight me, nor waking in the Morning rise to make me blessed
in my Visits to you. Turgesius is all merciful and good, his Heart more soft
and pliant than my Father's, or were it not, with this Sword I Would -- Here
Turgesius came from the Place in which he had over-hear'd all, and was so
transported with his Rage, that had not Dooneflaith interposed, Murchoe (ever
he could have turned in his own Defense) had been laid as a Sacrifice to his
Anger dead at his feet, nor had he the patience (so much was he blinded with
Passion) to stay till he had called his Guards; but entered alone unarmed all
but his Sword.

Murchoe was so lost in his Sorrow, that till he heard Dooneflaith shriek out,
he saw him not enter, and was ready to save Turgesius the pains, and have died
of himself, when he saw his Mistress hold his Rival in her Arms; then falling
on her Knees (still holding by his Robe) and profusely showring down floods of
Tears to save her Lovers Life. O Turgesius, my Lord, my King and Conqueror,
spare, O mighty Monarch, spare my Murchoe's Life, and in exchange I Will give you
this of mine; kill not a Man, the Gods themselves would mourn to lose, one whom
their utmost Skill can never parallel.

Turgesius by this time repented him of his entering alone, knowing by that
rashness, that he hazzarded a Life, his Love, and a Crown, against a Man most
stout, and much beneath him; wherefore going to retreat, he was prevented by
Murchoe, who by this time had got between him and the Door, and stood ready
with his Sword in his Hand to hinder his passage. Is this, (says he to him)
according to your Kingly Word? Do you esteem your Vows and Oaths so little?
Then Heaven refuse me, when I beg its Mercy, if I let slip this opportunity.
No, Faithless Tyrant, now I meet thee single, come from thy Buckler there, and
meet me fairly, now show thy Valor, and preserve thy Life, by taking mine; for
all the Powers above have joined consent, that one of us must fall.

Turgesius could no longer listen to his threats, but (disengaging himself from
Dooneflaith, he cried out) Good Gods, if Insolence like this, to me, who am thy
King, shall 'scape without its just Reward, and go away unpunished, let every
Schoolboy whip me with a Rod; and may the Women brand me, with the hated Name
of Coward! Die Traitor (goes he on making a stroke at him) since one of us must
fall, take a Death too glorious for so base a Villain from thy Monarch's Hands.

Here they both engaged in Fight, but Dooneflaith fearing the loss of her loved
Murchoe, catches hold of Turgesius's Arms, by which means she gave Murchoe
opportunity to get within him, and disarm him. Now, Sir (says Murchoe) but that
I scorn so poor and base Revenge, and would not use the advantage given me by a
Woman, I Would ease the Kingdom of its Thraldom, and free my self from a
perfidious Rival. It Is she alone, that virtuous lovely Lady, whose presence
charms my Hand from giving thee that Death which thou deservest. O Madam (says
he turning to Dooneflaith) how inglorious have you made my Name! that, had you
given me leave, might have resounded through the World, and born the Title of
its Countries Saver! Ireland should then have had its native Liberty again, and
I perhaps been chose their King, proud only in that Glory, to lay my Crown
beneath your Feet.

Turgesius (with a dauntless Front) told him how much he was indebted to
Dooneflaith, who had not only Repealed his Banishment, but had now given him
the advantage over him. He told him withal, how base and mean insulting was;
and bid him, since he was in his power, to use him as he pleased; but charged
him still to be mindful how he got the Victory so much he boasted of. Murchoe
could no longer endure the thoughts of making use of the Advantage given him
against a single Man, threw Turgesius his Sword, and bid him use it once more.
But Dooneflaith ran to him, and with Tears in her Eyes, besought him to desist;
but nothing could prevail; and had not some of the Courtiers and Guards (who by
this time were come to the place, hearing the clashing of Swords) prevented (by
disarming the valiant Murchoe) Turgesius had a second time fallen under his
Mercy; for just as they had seized on him, Turgesius's Sword broke short to his
Hand.

It was not without many commands that Turgesius himself could hinder the
enraged Soldiers from taking Murchoe's Life, and cutting him to pieces even
before his Mistresses Eyes, who now pleaded in his behalf so persuasively, that
she obtained of the Monarch his Liberty of Life, with Condition that he
forthwith left the Kingdom. Murchoe after what he had done, was glad at present
on any Conditions to get from the malice of the enraged Danes; wherefore
without so much as taking his Leave of Dooneflaith, he fled from the Court; but
not being willing to leave his Native Soil, by which he knew he should utterly
be deprived of all means of serving his Mistress; whose absence now ran more in
his Mind than all his other Misfortunes, his Life became in two or three Days
so cumbersom to him, that he was resolved either to lose it, or free it,
together with all Ireland of the Tyrannous Burden it bore. To which end, he
posts to Armagh, whereof Turgesius was quickly informed, and at four several
times in one Month, caused Fire to be set to that City, to drive him from
thence: Nor did he spare either Monastery or Church that stood in his way, lest
he should take Sanctuary in them. He likewise put to Death all their Priests,
and placed Heathen Lay-Abbots in every Cloister. Nor did his fury spare either
Sex or Age, whom he thought favored his Concealment.

The poor afflicted Dooneflaith spent all her Nights and Days in most cruel
condolement for the loss of her Murchoe; nor could all the fair Promises or
large Offers Turgesius could make, win her to bestow on him, even to his own
Face, any other than the Title of Tyrant; in hopes that thereby she might raise
his Cruelty to that pitch, as to give her a Death, which next to the Love of
her dear Murchoe, would now be most welcome unto her.

Turgesius's Love now became so fierce and unruly in his Breast, that nothing
but the Enjoyment of Dooneflaith could allay it, or give him one moment of
ease; he resolved in himself, nothing should impede his Desires; wherefore he
once more sends to her Father Maolseachelvin, to use his Authority with his
Daughter, and make her more pliant to his Love; or that all who belonged to
her, should feel the weight of his Anger, and know how fatal the Consequence
should be in case she refused, and did not come willingly into his Arms; he had
left off his Addresses to her, after having found her impregnable, and wait-a
while for an Answer from Maolseachelvin.

Some days passed, and the unfortunate Dooneflaith began to entertain hopes
that the Tyrant had quitted his Suit, and that her ill usage of him had
banished his Love; she had now time enough to bewail her Misfortunes, and
missed not a Day, in which she went not to the Grove in the Garden to ease her
sorrowful Heart by Complaints. One Day among the rest, she was got into an
Arbor, where having wearied her self with her Grief, soft slumbers sealed up
her Eyes, and laid her to Sleep, and in her Dreams she imagined she saw Murchoe
all bloody come into her Room, and give her a thousand Reproaches of being
unfaithful; then pulling a Sword from under his Robe, he would have pierced his
own Breast; at the sight whereof, Dooneflaith started out of her Sleep, in such
an Agony, that she was not her self in an hour or two after. But having well
considered 'twas only a Dream, and the Fancy of her Distempered Brain, she fell
to complaining again.

Oh! merciless Powers, said she, how long will you make me the Mark of your
Anger? why, O relentless Heavens! are you so Cruel! Oh ease me of my Misery, or
Life! For what unknown Offense do you afflict me thus? Thus Rack and Torture
one, who always to the utmost of her Power, has been Obedient to your holy
Wills! which even now, amidst this Mass of Woe, I willingly submit unto! All I
request, is but one farewell sight of him I love next to your selves; let him
but once more bless my Eyes, and I shall die contented. No sooner had she
uttered these words, but she saw at the entrance of the Arbor, one in a Woman's
Dress, who at first view she knew not; but recollecting her self, she perceived
to be Murchoe. Thanks, bounteous Heaven, said she, now my Prayers are heard,
this Charitable Act has cancelled all your former Cruelty; welcome my Love,
says she, running to take him in her Arms; but how was she surpised to see him
shun her soft Embraces! and stood gazing on her, as though he had never seen her
before. Ah! Murchoe, says the charming Maid, is it thus you requite all my
Sufferings? Can my Embraces be thought troublesome! or sure I do mistake, and
this is not my Love, but some illusion that does wear his Face, and come to
mock my Miseries.

Murchoe was so astonished at his sudden Happiness, that he could scarcely
believe what he heard, or saw; and Dooneflaith was so much altered with her
continual Pineing and Grief, that he scarce knew her: But his Senses assuming
their former strength, he ran to her, and fell at her feet, where he vented
such a flood of Tears, and so many Sighs, that he was not able for some time to
utter one word, while the passionate Dooneflaith, fearing he was grown unkind,
or jealous, fell down by him in a Trance.

Murchoe, not minding where he was, and what hazard he ran of discovering
himself, and consequently of losing his Life, called out for Help, naming
himself a thousand times over, to have been the unfortunate fatal Cause.

Oh! Murchoe, Murchoe, said he, what have thou done? Oh! I could stab my Heart,
tear all my Limbs, and gnaw my very Flesh, for being thus rash! Cursed be my
Life, and blasted be my Hopes, which thus have made me take on this Disguise, O
Dooneflaith, my lovely Dear, my charming Saint look up, look up, thy Murchoe
calls; more miserable now than are the wretched Damned! Oh ye Inhabitants
above, look down, and lend your aid; recall the parting Life of her whose Loss
will make this Kingdom Poor. Dooneflaith by this time coming to her self again,
gave him a Sign that she lived by a Groan. O blessed sound, said he, what
Music do thou make in my Heart! such a sad accent coming from my Love, at
any other time, would rend my very Soul; but now since it is the Messenger of
Life, it is more Melodious than the Songs of Angels are; repeat it once again,
and bless my Ears. -- Ha! says Dooneflaith, where am I? What super-Officious
Hand has brought me back to Life! What more than savage Beast, could be so
cruel to awake me from my long Eternal Sleep. But opening her Eyes and seeing
Murchoe, she altered her Note, and gave Heaven a thousand thanks for their
Kindness, and asked him forgiveness for what she had said.

He had yet no power to Answer, nor would his Kisses permit her to finish what
ever she began, and to their mutual Content and Satisfaction, they spent some
time in the silent Oratory of their Eyes, where each so feelingly did tell such
Stories, as Words could never express. Murchoe was the first who broke silence,
and returned her a million of Thanks for the interest she had taken in all that
he suffered, they made a thousand new Protestations of Loving till Death, and
gave each other firm assurances of future Fidelity. They were parting, with
Promises to see each other as often as they could when Maolseachelvin her
Father enters, taking Murchoe, (not minding his Face, which he took care to
conceal,) for one of his Daughters Women, let him pass by without the least
suspicion.

Maolseachelvin told Dooneflaith that she must prepare, for in three Days he
had promised Turgesius to send her unto him, accompanied with fifteen other
Virgins, as a Victim to allay the Fury, that her Obstinacy, and Murchoe's
Treachery had raised in his Breast. He stayed not to receive any Answer, but
went forwards to perfect the Walk he intended, and to think of the Project that
was working in his Brain.

No sooner was he out of sight, but the afflicted Dooneflaith betook her to the
Arbor again, and throwing her self on a Bank, she vented her Sorrow in this
manner. Oh Cruel, Barbarous Father, said she, and have you at length consented
to a separation 'twixt me, and my Murchoe, to become the Wife of Turgesius. But
that, I can easily hinder. Besides, he has Sworn he will never Request it, but
by my permission, which I will sooner grant to Furies to hurry me to Hell. No,
inhuman Parent, though you and all the World would grant me His! yet if none else
will, Death shall forbid the Banes. But if forgetful of his Oaths, he forces me
to Wed him, even in the Tyrant's sight, I Will Pierce my Heart, and spurt the
reaking stream full in his hated Face.

Murchoe having seen Maolseachelvin quit his Daughter, and observing her to
retire back into the Arbor, followed after her, to enquire what her Father had
said. But in what a Consternation was he? when, as he entered, he beheld her
tearing her lovely Hair, and imprinting the marks of her Rage on her beautiful
Face, and giving such strokes on her tender Breast, as were enough to force
Life from its seat. Murchoe ran to her, and put a stop to her Hands, which
surely else had ruined so much Beauty, as none but she could ever boast of. Oh!
unkind Dooneflaith, said he to her, what new afflicton has befallen my Love?
that thus she seeks to spoil the fairest Temple, Beauty ever framed. Oh
Murchoe, replies the despairing Dooneflaith, leave me to my self, my Griefs are
catching, and with its black Contagion will infect thy Soul; Heaven has not yet
left pouring down its Wrath, and what alone was meant for me, may fall on you;
the Gods above have marked me out a Subject for their utmost Cruelties! My
Father, -- Oh, I blush to call him so, forgetting me, forgetting Honor and
himself, has given me over into the Tyrant's Hands; but Three Days time I have
allowed to mourn the loss of thee my Love, and everlasting Happiness.

How short, says Murchoe, and fading are poor Lover's Joys? For but some
Moments since, I thought my self in Heaven, and whilst infolded in my
Dooneflaith's Arms, I thought no Misery could ever approach me! Then what a
Fall is here, flung down at once from that stupendous height, and dashed in
pieces in the lowest Hell. Oh Maolseachelvin, whither is all thy Glory fled?
How can thou condescend to give this Gem to one who knows not half the value
of it. While they were thus condoling their hard fortune, and saying all the
soft things Love could inspire them with, Moalseachelvin returns, and hearing
his Daughter's Voice in the Arbor, entered, and found our Lovers Arm in Arm,
in which posture they had resolved to end their Lives together, and never part,
but go Hand in Hand to Death: Which had not her Father entered, and snatched the
Dagger out of Murchoe's Hands, had been effected.

Murchoe seeing Maolseachelvin, could not forbear discovering himself to him,
and giving him a thousand Reproaches for yielding to the Tyrant's will.
Maolseachelvin was amazed to find him in Company with his Daughter, and in such
a Dress; but having resolved with himself what to do, he thought it but Wisdom
to conceal it till some fitter Season. Wherefore not minding what Murchoe said
to him, he asked his Daughter, if she had considered well of what he had told
her.

Most Honored Sir, replied the weeping Dooneflaith, can I admit such Thoughts
as those; your self, nay Heaven must Curse me if I do! What, Wed a Tyrant! one
whose wicked Hands have ransacked all our Holy Temples, demolished all our
Altars! burnt all our Churches, and razed our Monasteries, Ravished our Nuns,
slain our Pious Priests, and thrown the very Sacred Host it self to the Dogs;
whose Tyranny has Murdered our Nobles, and fired our Towns and Cities! Can such
an one be thought a Match for her, whom you with Pious Care have taught to
hate! Oh! rather, Sir, (upon my Knees I beg it) take back this wretched Life
you once bestowed me. No, Daughter, answers Maolseachelvin, it is not to be his
Wife (for that is a Name which blasts the Lover's Joys) he would have you only for
his Concubine, use you a while, and then return you back, you have taken Care
he never shall be your Husband, by the Oaths you have made him swear, and in
Revenge, he is resolved to have you -- his Mistress, replied Dooneflaith
hastily, "Oh! Heavens, my Father sure is Mad; his Reverend Heart o'er-laden
with its Fears, has banished Sense from thence! What, be the Tyrant's Mistress!
You cannot sure have such a thought as that! you say but this to try my
Resolution! O, have some pity on your wretched Daughter, add not more misery
unto my troubled Breast, already over-burden'd with my Woes. Maolseachelvin
could hardly refrain from Tears, to see the sad Condition his Daughter was in;
however he goes on, and laid before her the Power of Turgesius, and that if she
did not willingly consent, he would have her by force. Think, says he to her,
how you could endure to see a loving Father Murdered before your Face; for that
and more he swears to do, if you consent not to his Love; he vows when he has
had his Will, which all the Powers above he is resolved shall not hinder, he will
give your Body to the vilest Danes, and let the meanest Soldiers use you as
they please. Then think again, how happy thou may live, how High and
Glorious sit on Ireland's Throne, if by your Love you sooth this Mighty Monarch.

Murchoe who all this while stood Thunderstruck to hear these impious urgings
of her Father, could no longer forbear uttering his Mind, with Eyes sparkling
with Anger, he stepped up to him. And can Maolseachelvin, says he, then become so
base? Can he, whom Ireland's Hopes are fixed upon, degenerate from his Virtuous
Noble Ancestors, and from a Prince, become a Bawd! unheard of Wickedness, a
Pander to his Child! 'Twill cancel all my former thoughts of Virtue, and make
me think thou never did beget her; for surely such a pure untainted stream
could never rise from so impure a Spring! Or were you ten times over her
Father, if it were possible, she should not now obey; I with these Hands would
sooner give her Death my self.

No, Ambitious, Vainglorious Boy, answers Maolseachelvin, it is not in thy
Power to give her Death, or save thy Life -- So calling to two young Gentlemen,
who waited without, and whom he had won to his Purpose, and had promised in all
things to follow his Directions, he commanded them to lay hold on Murchoe, and
then went on. Now see rash Youth, says he, how Fatal it is to play with Thunder,
whose Bolt has fallen, and crushed thee to the Earth; I Will send thee bound in
Chains along with her, which Act will doubly gain Turgesius's Heart,

Dooneflaith seeing them seize on Murchoe, ran to him, and taking hold of his
Arms, would have stopped him; but her Father loosing her hold, she fell upon her
Knees, and, with a Torrent of Tears, besought him to save the Life of Murchoe.
Do with me, says she, what you please, give my unspotted Honor to the Tyrant's
Lust, Brand me with Infamy, but save this Noble Youth.

Yes, Mistress, answers her Father, your Honor is unspotted, when in your Arms
I found the lusty Lover; for thy sake only, it is he now shall die. O Good Gods!
(cries out Dooneflaith) where shall the Innocent fly for Refuge, if you neglect
protecting them? Am I the wretched Cause that he must bleed? Oh! Heavens, I
thought it was not in your Power to add, to what I felt before; but now my
misery is doubled on me. Oh! dearest Father have you quite forgot all pity,
abandoned all remorse? Can you suspect me guilty of so foul a Crime, and let me
breath? I that till now you always counted good! Witness ye all-knowing Powers
how guiltless I am of this blasting Calumny; by all that is Holy, Just and
Sacred No Lustful Heat ever warmed my Virgin Breast;
Bate but that Thought, and I Will forgive the rest.
Then look upon his Youth, his hopeful, Noble Youth, and pity his Misfortunes;
he knows no Sin, unless virtuous Love be such. O dearest Father, I conjure you
save his Life, by all the Charms which Honor can inspire; by my dear Mothers
Soul, by all your hopes of Ireland's Future Happiness, and by the Glory you
shall win by this good Deed, release him strait, let not me beg in vain, you
was not used to see me thus in Tears upon my Knees, and yet refuse to grant me
my Request. Murchoe seeing Maolseachelvin so obdurate to all her Entreaties,
fell likewise on his Knees. Behold, said he, with Tears, the humble Murchoe
suppliant at thy Feet, who begs not to preserve his Life, but your dear
Daughter's Honor, send her away, and lay the blame on me, I Will own 'twas I,
who bore her from his-Arms; then to appease his Wrath, let me be sent unto him,
I Will willingly endure his utmost rage, and count my Life well spent to save her
Virtue.

Oh! no, dear honored Sir, says Dooneflaith, first send me to his Arms, where
you will only lose a Woman's Life, my Virtue cannot suffer so long as there are
means to stop my breath; or when the Letcher comes all fired with Lust, I Will
cool his Veins, by letting forth his blood, or at the worst, I Will drown him in
my own. Maolseachelvin could no longer hold out; but running first to his
Daughter, then doing the like to Murchoe, he took them both into his Arms, and
wept a flood upon their Necks. Right virtuous Pair, said he, whom Heaven has
sent to make me happy in my latter days, my loving Children both; forgive the
Trial I have made; Now witness for me all ye blessed above, I hold ye equally
as dear as Life, as Honor, or my precious Soul; and since I find so well you
Love each other, cursed be that Man who would untie this Knot: Now wipe your
Tears away as I do mine, though sprung from different Causes; yours, from your
Sorrows, mine, from mighty Joy; stifle your Grief, as I conceal my Vengeance.
Make thee his Mistress -- Now Heaven forgive me, if I would not sooner damn
than harbor such a thought; I for my dear loved Daughter's honor, would set
at naught my sweet immortal Soul. No, Dooneflaith, no, Genereus Murchoe, I have
so contrived it, she shall be sent to him, and as he writes to me here (showing
them the Letter willingly,) has also commanded me to send him Fifteen young
Virgins of our Noblest Blood, to slake the burning lust of his Chief Officers,
I Will send them too. But since so well thy Woman's Dress becomes thee, thou shall
be one, and Fourteen Youths, as Bold and Valiant as thy self shall go, all clad
and dressed like thee, with each a Sword beneath their Gowns. I have sent to
those who have taken shelter in the Woods, Mountains, and Boggs, to be in
readiness, and have a Thousand Men, who at the Signal given, shall fall upon
his Guards. Letters already I have dispatched to every City in our Country, to
bid them Rise on such a Night.

When you are entered, and they all deep in Wine, frolic and gay, their Bloods
all boiling hot, secure each one his Officer by Death, I Will trust my Daughter
with the Tyrant's Fate; strike home my Girl, and dip thy Dagger to the Hilt,
then let him take his fill of Love, Caress and Court thee then. But now we must
disperse; and you, Murchoe till after to Morrow, which is the appointed Day,
shall lie concealed in my House; these Gentlemen who are my trusty Countrymen,
and well approved Friends, shall forthwith to the scattered Irish, and get 'em
to an Head, then lead them like a Torrent on our Foes. They all swore Secrecy,
and departed, only Dooneflaith and Murchoe were not separated till it was late,
but went together into her Chamber, where, to their inexpressible satisfaction
and mutual joy, they Supped together, and passed away the hours till Bedtime,
then Murchoe was Conducted into an Apartment by himself, where he spent that
Night on the thoughts of the past Days Adventures, and the important Affairs
they were to perform in a short time after.

The next Morning Maolseachelvin sent a Messenger to Turgesius, promising
according to his Commands, that he had won on his Daughter to obey him; and
that as he hoped for his Kingly Favor hereafter, he would not fail upon the
Morrow Night to send her, accompanied with Fifteen Virgins more, who were also
willing to run the same Fate, and participate of the Joys their Mistress should
receive in so splendid an Entertainment.

Turgesius was almost ravished with this News, for certainly no Man ever loved,
or rather lusted to the degree he did; he was resolved to have lost the whole
Kingdom but he would enjoy her; his eager Joy sat heavy on his Heart, for Love
is most impatient on Crowned Heads. But finding her come thus easily, he spared
not for any thing that might make her Reception Magnificent. He sent for
Fifteen of his Chiefest Commanders, and told them what a Treatment he had for
them. In short, the whole Court was almost new modeled, the Rooms adorned with
Rich Beds, and the most Costly Hangings.

Never was Palace so galantly set out with Gold, Jewels, and Tapestry as this,
not any thing below the Dignity of Silver, and that curiously wrought and
Massive, was used in any of the Chambers; Cloth of Tissue was the meanest
Furniture they had; the Candlesticks were Gold; so that all the Wealth those
Sacrilegious Danish Heathens had despoiled the Churches and Monasteries of,
with all the Plunder they had taken at Sacking of Towns, and King's Courts,
were all now brought to this Palace; so that it might be said, That one Spot of
Ground, held more Wealth than all Ireland besides.

Nor were the Wines but of the Richest, and all the variety of Viands which
could be procured, were sent for to this Place, and every one was employed in
some Office or other; and the King, with his Commanders almost Mad for the
arrival of the happy Night, their longing impatience thought that almost an
Age, which was only but twenty four Hours.

The Hour at length arrived, and Dooneflaith set out with a Noble Train of
supposed young Virgins, whereof Fifteen of them were of the most Handsome, and
yet most Stout and Resolute Youths of Ireland, as well and gloriously Dressed
as Hands, Jewels, and Art could effect it; each having one or two others to
attend him as his Servant, or Waiting Woman, in the same Female Apparel, and
each a short Sword under his Gown.

Turgesius went about a Mile out of his Court to meet them, as soon as he had
news of their approach, accompanied with Fifteen of his Choicest Commanders,
some whereof he had sent for out of strong Cities wherein they Commanded, who
also had with them an equal Train of Attendants.

The first interview of the two Parties, was such a Sight as might have
equaled, if not exceeded, that of Alexander, when he met Thalestris and her
Amazons upon the Banks of the Euphrates.

It seemed as though Mars himself had led the Van of all the other Gods, to meet
with Venus and the Female Deities.

Turgesius, and all who followed him, quite forgetting their Grandeur, and
Martial Habitude, descended from their shining Gilded Chariots, and went to
those of the Ladies. Nor had Maolseachelvin spared Cost to make his Daughters
Equipage more Magnificent and Glorious than any that Ireland had seen before,
especially that of the Charming Dooneflaith, which was so Richly Furnished,
that at a distance in the glittering Sunbeams it was too Glorious to be looked
upon, and struck a sort of Blindness in the Spectator's Eyes who beheld it. She
was drawn by six milk white Horses, Caparison'd with Trappings of Gold, an the
Chariot wherein she rode was open, having Rich Embroidered Curtains held up by
young Cupids, who seemed well pleased, and smiling at the Deity that they
attended; nor were the others much less sumptuous.

In short, who e're had been to see the first Greeting, could not but have been
astonished at so Noble a Sight. Turgesius, (as though he had long practiced the
Art of Love) so behaved himself, that even Dooneflaith was moved with
Compassion, at the great Action she was to perform. However, she seemed as
eager to reveive his Caresses, as if she had met with the Man whom her Soul
adored. After some few Compliments had passed on either side, (the Women having
by this time alighted to meet the Men) they all mounted again, the Monarch
taking Dooneflaith into his own Chariot, and the other Commanders following his
Example, did the like with those who came with her.

And now being Paired, they set forward for the Court; all the way that they
rode, they were diverted by Trumpets and Wind-Musick, which in their turns made
a Seraphick Harmony. But that which most of all Charmed the Ears of the
Warriors, were the soft and melting Expressions the counterfeit Ladies did
use; which were so ravishing, and tender, that not one of Turgesius's Train but
could willingly have wished to have passed by the Ceremony of Supping, and have
gone immediately to their Chambers; even Turgesius himself thought the time,
though spent in his Mistresses Company but irksom and long, so eager was he to
have the sweet Charmer in his Embraces.

But Supper being ended, the description whereof, would but delay the recital
of things more material, they prepared for their Beds, and Dooneflaith was led
up by the supposed Maidens who came with her to the Chamber that was assigned
for the Monarch; He being impatient for the dear happiness his Soul so much
longed for, thought them too tedious in undressing her, and putting her to Bed;
being no longer able to defer the happy moment, disarmed himself below, as all
the rest of the Commaners did, laying their Arms on a Table in the great Hall,
went each to his Chamber, expecting the coming of Her he had chose. But
Turgesius no sooner entered his Room, for he came alone, than he was seized on,
and immediately gagged, that no outcry might be made; they had certainly
killed him, had not Murchoe interceeded; who told him he now paid him back a
Debt that he owed him, ever since he was so generous to save his Life formerly
from the outrage of his Soldiers and Guards, who were ready to have cut him in
pieces, when he fought with him in Dooneflaith's Apartment; in retaliation of
which, he would now save his Life from the threatening Swords of those who
justly thirsted for his Blood.

Turgesius was not a little surpised at the unlooked for Adventure; but above
all, at the gallant Generosity of his Noble Enemy, and incensed Rival, he would
have made him such an Answer as suited the greatness of the Act, had he had the
liberty of speaking. But now his Heart was so troubled at the loss of
Dooneflaith, and all his ravishing hopes were so blasted, that Life to him was
but an unnecessary thing; he began though too late, to think how dearly he must
pay for his Lust, and how pompous the Solemnity had been made for the bringing
on his utter Destruction.

The thoughts of the loss of a Crown, came crowding upon him, and he could not
but be sensible what a lasting Infamy this Action must lay on his blind and
inconsiderate Credulity. How would he, in his Mind, Curse the time that he
first saw that Charming Seducer, and now beheld her with more Detestation and
Horror, than heretofore he had done with Love and Pleasure.

But we must leave him to himself, and return to the rest, who (after the
seizing Turgesius) had no better success than their King, unless ending a
miserable Life might be accounted some mitigation of their Misfortunes. The
Signal was presently given out of the Court Windows to the small Army that
Maolseachelvin had brought to the Gates, and all those Attendants and Servants
who came with his Daughter, were in a readiness to give the Onset to those in
the Palace.

Turgesius and his Train no sooner rose from the Table, but the inferior
Commanders and Officers were set down to it; each with one of those under Women
who came with Dooneflaith; the Bowls of Wine were going merrily about, and the
Danes (who are potent in Bacchus's Battles) were too busy, and the Music too
loud to let them hear Maolseachelvin, when with his Armed Men he forced his way
into the Palace; and they were greatly surpised when they saw a whole Band of
stout Irish-men well Armed enter the Hall. It was now no time to demand what
they meant; for ever they could scarce turn about to see who they were, they
met with their Fate,

A greater Confusion was never seen, the Tables were all overthrown, and the
Blood of the Danes, with that of the Grape, promiscuously mingled, made a
purple Deluge on the Floor; nor was there a Dane that Night in the Court, who
found not his Death, except Turgesius the Tyrant, who was reserved for a more
ignominious and miserable End.

Nor had this Great Undertaking any worse success in the other parts of
Ireland; for those Towns and Cities whose Governors were slain at the Feast
(more bloody than that of the Centaurs) hearing of the loss of their Commanders
and their King, lost with them their Courage, and yielded an easy Victory to
the brave Irish, who in a short time after, released the whole Kingdom from the
slavish Tyranny of the Danes, to their Lawful Subjection under a Monarch of
their own, which was by the consent of the Nobles placed on Maolseachelvin, for
the gallant Exploit he had done, for then their Monarchs were Elective, and
with good reason the Choice fell on him.

Now the Irish had thrown off the Danish Yoke, and were again at Liberty, each
enjoying the benefit of Peace, which was introduced by a most bloody and
furious War. Nor was there a Dane left in the whole Country, but such who they
used as their Slaves, and put to mean Offices; and those who were before so
busy in demolishing and burning of Churches and Monasteries, were now employed
either as Smiths, Carpenters, or Masons, in their Re-building, and the
Church Lands were all restored to their proper uses. The Lay-Abbots whom the
Danes had placed there, were cast out of the Cloisters and slain, and the whole
Kingdom began once more to Flourish in Christianty, and was established in the
true Worship of God.

It is necessary, ever we proceed any farther, to give a step back, and see
what became of our Lovers, and the deposed Usurper; who, some time after his
Defeat, was led about the Streets, through which so often he had rode in Splendour
and Triumph, now Manacled, and laden with Chains, and became a scoff and
derision to those, over whom so lately he Triumphed, and in this Condition
(with a shouting throng of the Vulgar) was he conducted to the River
Laugh-Ainme, into which he was cast, and finished a burthensom Life, by being
their drowned.

Our two Lovers, had now, as they thought, no other Obstacle, but the consent
of Bryan Boriamhe Father to Murchoe, who they hoped would agree to their
Marriage. The Valiant Murchoe in that Night's great Action, having shifted his
Woman's Apparel, put on the more becoming one of Arms, and flew like Lightning
to assist his Countrymen, leaving the care and safeguard of Dooneflaith to her
Father, and it was some days ever he returned, but to his great misery; for now
Maolseachelvin having the prospect of a Crown in his sight, and having
stomach'd Bryan's denial of their Marriage before, was firmly resolved that
interest should not bring him to consent to it now. Wherefore going to his
Daughter, and taking her into his Closet, he Commanded her on her Duty, no
longer to think of her Lover; but when Murchoe returned, to use him as one who
was most indifferent to her.

Oh! dearest Sir, says Dooneflaith, can what you say be true? Can he who saved
my Honor, and redeemed his mourning Country be thus hardly used by me! He save
thy Honor, and redeem his Country (replies her Father in an angry tone) did
you your self, did I, and all the rest of the brave Princes of this Land, do
nothing? Hear what I say, and for your life obey me, for what I have designed,
no Prayers, or Charms, though dressed in the best Garb of Eloquence, adorned with
all the Tears and taking Looks thy Beauty can put on, though on thy Knees thou
follow'st me about, thou shall not shake or move my fixed resolve. If when
Murchoe shall return, with eager Joys to run into thine Arms, with frowns and
scorns avoid his soft Embraces, give him no Answer, but disdainful Looks, or
here I swear I Will stab him before thy Face. Oh! Reverend Sir, says Dooneflaith,
recall that cruel Oath; how can you think this Heart, that is all Love, all soft
and tender to the noble Murchoe, can teach my Face to put on such disguise!
Could I consent, to show my Filial Duty, and obey, my Eyes would soon betray my
Heart; and though my words were cold and all unkind, yet they would shoot such
fiery Darts, as would declare they were but counterfeit; my very Eyes, spite
of my best efforts, would talk and tell the tenders of my Soul; each
interrupting sigh I give, will bear no consort with my Tongue. By Heaven (says
her Father) do as I command, show but one amorous glance, one heave, one pant,
or sigh, and I will blind those tell-tale Eyes of thine, and give thee truly
cause to sigh, by giving him his Death. Sure, Sir (replies the weeping
Dooneflaith) you cannot mean the thing you speak! You say it but to try my Love
a second time; which by the Gods is still the same it was, when in the Garden
you made the former Test. No, Minion, says Maolseachelvin, I do it not to try
thy Love, which I Am too sensible is true; I do it to revenge his Father's
Scorn, who would not give consent that he should Wed thee when I was a private
Man, nor shall he now I Am King; therefore once more observe what I command. And
must the innocent Murchoe, says she, who always dearly loved me, and sought not
Heaven with more earnest Prayers than he sought me, be punished thus for his
unkind Father's Fault? Oh! Sir, reverse your cruel Doom, if not for his sake,
yet for mine, nay for your own; for if I share an interest in your Heart,
'twill grieve you sure to see your only Daughter die, when with one word you
may preserve her Life. What! quit my Love, now after this Misery and Trouble we
have passed through for it! now grow unkind, when he most merits Love! and
after all those Sacred Oaths and Vows, those thousand Protestations, which even
in your hearing, I have made to Love him ever, now to re-call that sacred
Breath, and hurl damnation on my perjured Soul. I ask you not, says he, to
break your Vows; but meet him as I now command you, that his proud Father may
be humbled, and fall a low Petitioner for the Love he once rejected. A thousand
Blessings sit upon your Head, says she, and make your Crown more glorious than
all your Predecessors were, those healing words have cured my bleeding heart;
now I will call you dear and loving Father, kneel and adore the very ground you
go on; use what severity you please against his Father, but let my Murchoe not
be put in pain; let me not see him rather, till his suppliant Father begs your
pardon; for certainly to see him as you bid me, will prove so fatal, that twill
break his Heart. Trifle no more (replies Maolseachelvin) but punctually obey my
will, I see them yonder entering the Court; and once more swear, if that you
fail in any Point I have enjoined you, you never shall meet him more, but in
the Grave. After this he left her, and went to his own Chamber; no sooner was
he parted, but Dooneflaith looking out at the Window, beheld her dear Murchoe,
with his Father just entering the Palace; and not being able to think on the
severe Injunctions her Father had laid on her, without a torrent of Tears, and
a thousand imprecations on her unkind Stars. O barbarous Father, said she to
her self, more Tyrannous and Cruel to thy Child, than Savage Monsters are to
those they hate; not see my Love, but with disdainful looks! not give him one
kind glance for all his Love! not one kind word of thanks for all his pains!
this Cruelty exceeds all precedent! my unkind Speech or Eyes will do the fatal
Work, and leave no business for my Father's Sword! O that some Angel would
instruct my Love, and tell him that my Eyes and Tongue are Liars, that my poor
Heart bears no consent to what they say; tell him I am all over Love, and that
my Murchoe is more precious to my Soul than all the World besides.

Murchoe, and his Father, with several of his Friends were now come into the
outward Court of the Palace, and casting his Eyes up to the Window, he beheld
his adorable Mistress; who no sooner saw him, but withdrew from the Place,
which Murchoe thought was done to haste to him. Oh! Father (says he, almost
Extasied) look how the Treasure of my Soul does fly to meet my longing Arms;
now all the Blood I Have lost in Ireland's Wars, will largely be Rewarded.

Bryan took such part in his Sons Transports, that he could hardly forbear
shedding Tears of Joy. But Murchoe lest he should be outdone in kindness, made
what have he could into the House, and at the end of the Hall beheld his fair
Dooneflaith, whom he ran unto with all the speed his Love could make. Oh! thou
charming, soft and lovely Maid, said the transported Murchoe, let me upon thy
tender Breast breath the soft languishments of my over flowing Joy! But how did
he start, and look amazed, when he not only saw she met him not half way, but
shunned his Arms; and after a small pause, with gazing Eyes he thus went on.

What, my Dooneflaith, says he, are my Embraces loathsome grown! What, do thou
turn away the warming Sunshine of thine Eyes; not one kind look to crown thy
Murchoe's Victory, not one soft word to bid him welcome home! Dooneflaith
could no longer turn away her Head, yet was afraid of her Father, who through a
secret place looked into the Hall, and beheld her with frowns; and fearing she
should not perform what he bid her, her Love and she must part for ever; cast
so disdainful and scornful a look upon Murchoe, that he clapping his Hand to
his Heart, cried out, O Gods! those cruel piercing Eyes have stabbed my Soul,
and given me a death my boldest Enemies could never do. Then after a little
stop, he went up to her, and would have taken her by the Hand, but she refused
it him; telling him the unkindness of her Father had destroyed their Loves, and
that now he had fallen from his Promise, and had commanded her no more to look
on him with Amorous Eyes; in pursuance to whose will, she did from thence
forward forbid him to visit her.

Murchoe, during her talk stood like one without Motion, nor had he the power
to utter one word, till he saw her departing the Hall; but then running 'twixt
her and the Door, he fell on his Knees, and begged her for her former Love to
hear his latest words; but she overcome with the pitiful sight, being no longer
able to look on one in that woeful Condition, and one whom contrary to her will,
she her self had made so, returned him no Answer; but snatching her Hand out of
his, which ever she was aware he had seized, without so much as looking back,
she went out of the Hall, and left the Disconsolate Murchoe on his Knees.

He continued in that posture till she was gone out of sight; then rising on
his Legs again, he drew forth his Sword, and had ended his Life on its Point,
had not his Father, and Friends (who expected no less) stepped in and prevented
him. Oh! Cruel Father, say he to Bryan, this last unkindness, out-does all you
you have done to me before; why would you have me live, when Life's so great a
burden? Were it not better I at once gave up my breath, than live in lingering
pain, and deal it out by sighs! O Faithless Woman, says he a little after, thou
abstract of Inconstancy, where is now that charming Voice which with kind
Protestations swore, Murchoe should ever be her Souls delight; farewell, a long
and last farewell, for with your cold disdain you have blasted all my Hopes, and
now no remedy is left but Death.

With much ado at last, they got him home to his Chamber, but it was not in their
power to get him to Eat, or take the least refreshment; and it was a long time
before his Father could get him to promise to use no violence on himself; to
which he would never have consented, had not Bryan told him, he would use all
his Endeavor to alter Maolseachelvin's Resolutions.

No sooner was his Father gone out of the Room, but he commanded all who were
with him to do the like; and after two or three hasty turns in the Chamber, he
flung himself on his Bed, where he poured out such Tears, such Sighs, and
Complaints, that he drew moisture from the Eyes of all who looked in at the
Keyhole of the Door to see what he did. But now let us return again to our
History.

Soon after all things were settled in Peace, the Victorious Maolseachelvin,
was as is said before, by the Election of the Princes and Nobility of Ireland,
deservedly made King of Mead, and then Monarch of the whole Country; when
there arrived three Brothers out of Norway, viz. Amelanus, Cytaracus, and
Ivorus, with their Families, and great Trains, who (in a most Amicable and
Peaceable manner) pretending to be Merchants, obtained leave for the better
carrying on their Traffic and Trade, to build three Cities near the Sea side;
which was permitted them, upon Condition, that they paid Tribute for them.
Articles of Agreement being consented too, on both sides, they fell to Work,
and erected the three Cities, now called Dublin, Waterford, and Limrick; which
they had no sooner finished, and had made almost impregnable by strong
Fortifications, but the Irish began to see their Error, and now it was that
they felt the Power of an Enemy, no less prejudicial in all appearance, than
that they had lately subdued.

These Seaport Towns giving entrance to fresh and numerous Fleets of
Norwegians, Danes, and Oostmans; insomuch that the Irish were forced once more
to have recourse to their Arms. And here it was that Maolseachelvin's Heart
became mollified, and once more gave consent (when the Kingdom should be freed
of its Foes) that Murchoe should Marry his Daughter.

The two Lovers had now admittance to see each other, and with a bleeding Heart
the Charming Dooneflaith made known to her dear Murchoe the reason why she used
that severity to him at his return from the former Battle: Murchoe loved too
well to think any of the fault was on her side, and was now the most happy Man
in the World. Her Father, the King, made him his General, but the Occasion was
urgent, and he was hasted away, having scarce time to take his Leave.

However, he had with a thousand soft and passionate Speeches already parted
with Dooneflaith, and was now come to Maolseachelvin, who received him with all
the expressions of tenderness that could be. Go Valiant Youth, says the King to
him, go, and return Crowned with Laurels of Victory; revenge the hard Usage you
have suffered, on those barbarous Infidels; forgive my Rashness, and believe I
now set no difference betwixt thee and my own Child. No, my dear Son, for so
henceforth I will call thee, and though your Father shun all my Advancements, I
thus will embrace his Son. Go then, Victorious Murchoe, Head our Men; my
cheerful Soldiers long to see their Chief, they think the time you lose in my
embraces, an Age, in their impatience.

Now mighty Monarch, says Murchoe to him, you shower such Blessings on my Head,
give me such Courage, and such Hopes, that if I Conquer not, let me hereafter
bear the Coward brand; the Power you give me, united with the thoughts of my
Dooneflaith, shall make me Conqueror where ever I go, and sweep your numerous
Enemies from off the Earth. After many endearing Discourses, Murchoe took
Horse, and went to the Army, who wellcom'd him with loud shouts of Joy; and
where he found such Stout and Resolute Irish-men, that wherever he came, he
carried Victory on his Sword's Point; while his Father Bryan no less fearing
the loss of the Kingdom again, in the Southern parts of the Country did such
things as would almost seem incredible, and in a short time was Crowned King of
Munster, still Conquering where ever he went, and soon after subdued one half
of the Nation. Nor did he put a stop to his irresistible Force, till he was
publicly Elected, and made Monarch of all Ireland, the Nobility and Princes
deposing Maolseachelvin, to make way for Bryan, giving him leave to live, which
is the greatest misery that can befall a Monarch after the loss of a Diadem.

Bryan now being King of all Ireland, thought himself sufficiently revenged for
the slights which Maolseachelvin had put on his Son, and commanded Murchoe to
come home to his Palace, which then he kept at Tomond, to the unspeakable
trouble and affliction of the two Lovers, who now were taking, as they feared,
their last leaves of each other.

Oh! my adorable Saint, says the afflicted Murchoe to Dooneflaith, how
unfortunate have all my Undertakings been! How Cruel is my Fate; that now, when
I thought my Happiness beyond the reach of any Misfortune, I find it dashed, by
that which I hoped would have been its chief stay. Now my Dooneflaith, my
miseries come rolling upon me, and soon will overwhelm me! Oh! insupportable
Cruelty, I must leave my Love! leave her, (good Heavens defend,) I fear for
ever; But witness Gods, and all you Saints above, though absent from my sight
I Will never forget thee; Hopes, (once to bless me with thy sight again,) shall
buoy me up through all my Sea of Sorrows, if my dear Love but promise to be
constant. -- Dooneflaith could not hear him make such a scruple, without
showing how much it touched her Heart. Oh, cruel Murchoe! said she, do you take
part against me! And if I will be constant! Barbarous doubt! have you thus long
beheld me stand the shock of all Misfortunes, even when Ambition, and a
Monarch's Crown. would have shook the most firm and constant of our Sex; and
can you make that scruple now? If I Will be constant! Oh Heaven! that If, will
stab me to the Soul! you have found the only means, next to your hating me, that
could undo my peace, you almost tear my Heart up by the roots; what! doubt an
Heart like mine, that is made up of nothing else but Love and Constancy! But I
forgive Thee Murchoe, I know 'twas but the overflowings of thy tender fear, and
the excess of a too powerful Passion; and to confirm my dearest Murchoe's Mind,
bear Witness for me now, Oh all ye Gods, and shower upon me all your dreadful
Vengeance, if what I say be not sincere and true, when in your absence I forgot
my Faith, either in thought or deed; either for Threats, or all the Proffers in
the World; if from this Heart Murchoe be ever absent, then let the Furies tear
me Limb by Limb, and Dogs and Wolves devour my scattered Carcass.

No more, says Murchoe, I believe my Saint, and ever shall retain these
precious words in the chief Records of my memory. They were forced soon after
this to part; but with such languishing and dying looks, as if they never
should meet again: how many times did Murchoe go to the Door, and then return
again, loath to depart, printing his soft Lips on her fair Hand, and she as
often wished they might dwell there for ever; they sighed, and wept, then wiped
their watery Cheeks, making exchange of Hearts at eithers Eyes; at last, as
though both their words had been prompted by one Soul, they together cried, the
Gods preserve, and ever be your Comfort.

Murchoe having taken his leave, went directly, but most heavily, toward his
Fathers Palace in Tomond, called Cean-Choradh, where he was welcomed by Bryan,
and the whole Court; but what were all the welcomes in the World to him, since
his Dooneflaith's Voice was wanting in the Consort, the Music was not sweet or
charming, he wholly bent his Thoughts on her, and Day or Night, she was the
subject of his Mind; though he was ever accounted Devout, yet now the welfare and
happiness of his afflicted Mistress, threw him on his Knees almost each hour.

His Father, and the whole Court could not but greatly wonder at this mighty
Change; he grew Pale, neglected Meat, and Sleep, walked all the Day in
melancholy places, seeking recesses, where the hunted Beasts scarce dared to
enter, they were so dark and dismal; where, with his folded Arms across his
troubled Breast, he would vent the Griefs which rankled at his Heart.

Into one of these Places was it, that his Father one day followed him, and
having privately listened to his usual Complaints, when the poor Prince had
thrown himself down, extended on a rugged Rock, his Eyes (like Rivers which had
broke their Banks) poured forth a flood of Tears, with Groans and Sighs, which
almost rent the Vault.

How Happy, said he to himself, had Murchoe been, had Heaven been pleased he
should have perished in his Countries Service, his loss perhaps would then have
touched his Fathers hardened Heart; he would have then perhaps shed one Tear,
and with a sigh, have pitty'd his untimely End: But now he thinks I breath, he
thinks I live; when as, alas! these signs I give of Life, are but the Tokens of
uneasy Death; for I am Dead to all the World, insensible of every thing, but
Love; and though I move, and sometimes walk about, it is but my more substantial
Ghost. -- He was going on, when Bryan interrupted him: What Murchoe, said he,
is the Cause that thus thou spendest thy Youthful time in Cells? Thus pine, and
like a Woman drown thy self in Tears? Thus leave the mighty Business of the
World, and bend thy Thoughts on a fantastic Trifle? Thus shun thy Friends, and
seek these solitary Shades? Rouse up, for shame, awake thee from these Idle
Dreams; thy Father bids thee, and a King Commands, thy bleeding Country wants
thy aid: Ambition should methinks inflame thy Heart, and banish Love from that
too noble Seat. Make thy self worthy to be my Successor; what? can the
sprightly Murchoe lie dissolving in Tears, when all the Land is almost drowned
in Blood? Think on a Crown, think of a Monarch's Power, and see how poorly Love
will show to these; or were those out of reach, and that thy Hopes stood not so
fair as now they do, think on thy Honor, and thy future Fame.

O sacred Sir, replies the Prince, can you behold these ruins of your Son?
Look on, and see him sink in sorrow, and not extend a Parent's Hand to help
him? O Sir, remember you your self was young, Loved and Adored, and knew no
happiness but in my Mothers sight: I do but tread your steps, walk in that Path
which all the World goes once; say but Dooneflaith shall be mine, and you will
raise me unto Life again; without Her, Honor, Titles, Power, nay even a Crown
it self, have nothing Charming in them. Bryan could no longer hear him sue in
vain; but told him, if he would take Arms, and show himself once more in the
Field, and, according to his wonted Custom, come home laden with Victory, he
would so much indulge his Love, that, if after this, he still continued in that
Humor, he would use his utmost Power to make him Happy.

The Prince overjoyed with this Promise, went home with his Father, and in a
few days after, Headed a brave Army against his Country's Enemies; Victory
still followed wheresoe'er he fought, and his Courage and Conduct were not a
small cause of the Renown and Glory that accru'd to his Father: For it is
Remarkable, that Bryan Boraimh defeated the Danes and their Confederates in
Twenty five bloody pitched Battles; he was accounted one of the most Puissant
and Noble Monarchs of the Milesian Race; and though he lived not to see these
Invaders quite expelled the Kingdom, yet he fought in the last Battle, that
gave them their Overthrow; having in his Life time reduced the Kingdom
(especially toward the latter end of his Reign) to so tranquil and quiet a
State, that Ireland was become all peaceable and flourishing. Nor were there to
be seen any Danes, but such who lived quietly under his Government, and were
either Merchants, Handycrafts-men, or Artificers, who had their chief Residence
in Dublin, Weixford, Waterford, Cork, or Limerick; and though they were a
considerable Number of them, yet not so many, nor so Potent, but that he
thought should they at any time Rebel, he could Master them at his Pleasure.

Murchoe seeing no Comfort accrue to him in all this general Joy, for he alone
was excluded the benefit of Tranquillity the whole Nation pertook, the Conquests
and Honor he won, added more Trouble to his Soul, since he could not yet
obtain his Father's Consent, he avoided as much as he could the Pleasures of
the Court, and betook himself wholly to the Country, where, in unspeakable
Torments, he wasted his time in Complaints. But being one day near the House of
Maolmordh Mac Murchoe his Uncle, whose Sister by name Garmlaigh, Bryan his
Father had Married, he thought to pass some time in a Visit to him, and was
very kindly received.

But Bryan having an occasion for Timber for the finishing some Ships he had
begun, especially some Masts, he sent to his Brother-in-law Maolmordh to
furnish him with them, to which he consented, partly out of fear to deny him,
and partly for Kindred sake, he went himself to see them cut down, and assisted
with his Men, those who were sent for them, in the getting them over a
Mountain; to which they say (some difference happening amongst the People) he
put his Hand to himself, and in the action broke off the Gold Clasps that
fastened a rich fringed Mantle of Silk which Bryan had sent him. At length, he
with his Nephew Murchoe, came to Cean-Choradh.

But no sooner did he arrive at Tomad, and had gone to his Sister Garmlaigh's
Apartment to give her a Visit, and acquainted her how he came to break off his
Clasps, which he desired her to get mended again for him; but in a rage she
threw the whole Mantle into the fire and burnt it, reproaching him with
meanness of Spirit, in so unworthily subjecting himself, and his People of
Linster, whereof he was King, to ' Bryan, although he was her own Husband.

How basely, said she, becomes it the Blood which thou sharest with me, to fear
the displeasure of any, much less one who has made himself my equal by taking
me to his Wife? How much below the Honor and Dignity of the King of Linster is
it, thus like a Bondsman or Slave, to lend thy assistance, and like a Coward,
grant whatever he demands from thee. These words, (though at present he made her
no reply) sunk deep in his Heart, so taking his leave of her, he went into the
Presence, where he found a Nobleman and Murchoe playing a Game at Chess, (
Maolmordh being touched to the quick with the Reproof that his Sister had given
him, and no longer able to stifle the sense he had of his Fault) advised him
who was playing with Murchoe on some Draught, which lost his Nephew the Game.

Murchoe, who had not been used to receive such Indignities, (for it was done
in so palpable a manner, as he could take it for no less) being highly
displeased, told his Uncle Maolmordh King of Linster, in a deriding manner,
That if the Advice he had formerly given to the Rebel Danes been no worse, they
had not so easily lost the Battle at Gleaun Mama; yet notwithstanding his
mighty Policy, he could not win them the Field.

Maolmordh, being stung with this jear, in a fury replied, However my Advice
succeeded at that time, the next that perhaps I shall give to the Danes, shall
prove better to your Cost. So in a discontented Humor was departing; when the
Prince Murchoe told him; It should never break one moment of his Rest to
countermine what ever Projects he could design; and withal told him he defied
him.

Whereupon the King of Linster retired to his Chamber, and would not (although
he was sent for by Bryan) come down to his Supper; but flinging himself on his
Bed, passed all that Night in the extremest anxiety of Spirit, that could be
imagined; and early the next Morning, before any of the Court were stirring,
takes Horse, and posts away for Linster, where his Heart was so full (what with
the rebukes his Sister had made him, and the defiance his Nephew had given him)
that he had no way to ease it, but by giving, if he could, a stint to their
Insolence, by making them to know, that they had roused a sleeping Lion, whose
Fury and Rage should not be allayed by any thing but their utter destruction.

The next day he assembles the Chief of his Nobles, and the Gentry, and
represents to them the Indignity that had been put upon them in the Person of
their King; and so aggravates the Matter, that he drew them all to his side,
and made them all on fire to revenge it; by throwing off their Allegiance and
Fidelity to Bryan, and joining their Power to that of the Danes, and in return
to the the Challenge that Murchoe had made him, to send him another.

Having gained his Designs at Home, he flies with all speed to Dublin, and
there engages the chief of the Danes, to send away instantly to their Master,
the King of Denmark, for a strong and powerful Supply to pull down the Grandeur
and haughty Pride of Bryan, and to destroy their, and his most mortal Enemies;
which on the word of a King, he promised to perform, would they be assistant.

While Messengers were sent over into Denmark, he returns Home again; where
(with all the have he could use, and most indefatigable pains) he prepares for
a War; nor was it long ever he goes to Dublin again; where, at his arrival, two
of the King of Denmark's Sons ( Carolus Knutus, and Andreas his Brother)
Landed, at the Head of twelve thousand Danes, which they had brought along with
them, whom (after he had kindly received, and refreshed them well) he
forthwith, knowing delays in such Cases would be dangerous, and give his
Enemies too much time to Unite) by an Herald sends Bryan a bold Defiance,
daring him to meet him in a spacious Field at Clantarf, within two Miles of
Dublin.

Bryan had no sooner received this Challenge; but (making what speed he was
able) joined together all the Forces of Munster, Connaught, and Mead, for
those of Ulster, he sent not to them, being unwilling to stay till they should
come up; and believing he had Power enough out of those other three Provinces
to encounter the Enemy.

The Prince Murchoe his Son was sent to those in Mead, where he once more got
a sight of his charming Dooneflaith, and whom (after the success of the Battle)
he had a Promise from Bryan his Father, that he should Marry.

Never did two faithful Lovers meet with such Joy, and Dooneflaith even blessed
the Causers of this War, which had made her so happy with the presence of her
dear Murchoe. Maolseachelvin, though deposed from the Monarchy, had great
Interest in the Province of Mead, and soon raised such Forces, as perchance
none else could have done; which Bryan understanding, made him General of that
part of the Army, and sent for his Son back to himself.

But if the Meeting of this Amorous Pair was so full of Joy and Content, yet
their Parting was such as is not to be expressed; they took their leaves of
each other, with such unwillingness, and regret, that their Separation seemed
to have rent their Hearts asunder.

Murchoe was not altogether so overwhelmed as he had formerly been, since his
Hopes now stood fair, in a few days, to Crown all his Sufferings with the
enjoyment of his Charming Dooneflaith: But the disconsolate Fair-One, felt such
Pangs, at his taking his leave, as gave those who stood by (especially her
Father) cause to suspect they were but too fatal Omens. And he being willing
they should have all the liberty the little time he had too see her, to say
what they pleased privately together, he withdrew, and left them to themselves.

Now it was that Dooneflaith vented the tenders of her Soul in such a manner,
that Murchoe himself could hardly stay with her, to hear the Complaints which
she made of her hard Destiny. Oh Murchoe, said she, you are going to leave me
for ever; I have something here at my Heart, that prompts my Soul to think
Murchoe will never return to his Dooneflaith again, my presaging Heart
fore-bodes, that the Victory which you are going to win, will be cause of Joy
to all Ireland, but my unfortunate self.

Murchoe used all Arguments that could be thought of, to dissipate her Fears;
And told her, that his Courage, guarded by the hopes of her Love, would make
him do things that should fill the Trumpet of Fame to the end of the World. I
go, my Charming Dooneflaith, says he, to set this Kingdom in Peace, that so I
with the more freedom may quietly enjoy the Blessing the Gods would bestow at
the end of the Conquest; and that Ireland might be so settled, that he no more
might have cause to quit her soft Arms to follow the Wars.

Go Murchoe, (replied she, with such languishing looks, and so dying a tone as
almost made him alter his firm Resolution;) Go and fight for thy Country, Go
and Conquer, Go and -- (I would fain say) return again to my Arms: But -- Oh!
something here at my Heart will not let me believe the Heavens will make me so
Happy. No, my Murchoe, these Eyes will never behold thee again; and the next
Embrace thou have, will be that cold one of Death. Methinks I see my dearest
Murchoe, all pale and cold, stuck through with a thousand Darts and Arrows; his
breathless Corpse spurting fresh streams of Blood; when I, unhappy I, come by,
who am his Murderer. No more my Charmer, says Murchoe to her, drive these idle
Thoughts away, they are but Dreams which will disturb thy Rest; I shall return,
I know it by my Heart; (Oh! that I did, said he to himself,) Or say I died, I
paid but Nature's Debt, what you and I, and all must do at last; my Fall shall
not be mean, and thousands braver Men shall bear me Company. Oh! Dooneflaith,
what Comfort will it be, how will it soften Death, and blunt its sharpest Dart,
to think I die beloved by thee! While they were Embracing, in order to Part,
Maolseachelvin came in, and told him he must make all have possible with his
Forces, for all the others which they expected were come in but his.

The Prince, as eager as he was to meet his proud Challenger, and not think of
leaving his Mistress behind; wherefore, by her Consent, and joint entreaty,
Maolseachelvin promised to bring her with him; this at last something appeased
the Sorrow of both; and Murchoe, after a thousand soft Kisses, and Embraces,
and as many Sighs, and Tears on both sides, took Horse, and posted before to
his Father, and the next day after Maolseachelvin followed with his Army; and
at the Rear of that, the beautiful Dooneflaith.

In a few days after, the Armies of the three Provinces joined all together,
and marched in good order to the Place appointed, being a spacious Field near
Clantarfe, called Magnealta, where they beheld Maolmordh at the Head of a vast
Army; being sixteen Thousand Danes, together with all the Forces he could raise
in Leinster, which was divided into three Battalions; that of the Right Wing
Commanded by Carolus Knutus, that on the Left by his Brother Andreas, (the two
Sons of the Danish King) and the Main Body Maolmordh took care of himself.

Bryan drew up his Army much after the same Order, committing the Right Wing
thereof to Maolseachelvin, the Left he Commanded himself; and (at the entreaty
of his Son Murchoe, that he might oppose Maolmordh himself, who had given him a
Challenge) the main Body was under his Conduct.

Early next Morning (it being Good Friday) both Armies drew near, and after a
short time the fatal Signal was given on both sides, never did two Armies
encounter more fiercely; the shouts and cries, with the Thundering noise of the
Drums and, sound of Trumpets, were enough to rend the very Roof of Heaven. Nor
for half the Day could it be decided upon which side hovering Victory would
light; and had Maolseachelvin (who Headed the Army of Mead) came up, they had
soon turned the Scale. But he, remembering the Affront of Bryan, who made him be
Deposed, to make way for himself, as soon as the Signal was given, stood off
with his Men, and was only a Spectator of the most bloody and terrible Fight
that ever was Acted on the Tragic Theater of Irish Ground. Nay, though at one
time he saw his own Countrymen begin to give way, and the Danes in a
probability of winning the Day, yet did he stand unmoved.

Bryan who Headed the Left Wing of the Army, being Old (for he was now above
fourscore and eight) having to do with Carolus, who was both Valiant and Young,
was in the Battle struck from his Horse, and had not Prince Murchoe come timely
to his Rescue, he had been trod to pieces by the Enemy; which nevertheless so
bruised and wounded him, that he was forced to be carried to his Tent, leaving
the Charge of his Army to Prince Murchoe.

Now was the time that he had the whole Fate of Ireland depending upon his
Sword, he did such wondrous Actions as surpassed all belief, and so bravely
behaved himself, as though he had been some God sent down from above. He (spite
of all their Forces, thinking of the Liberty of his Country, and Love of his
dear Dooneflaith) made such breaches in their Main Body, that notwithstanding
they had all the Inspiration of Courage, that Martial-Conduct, Ambition, Glory,
Revenge, and Despair could afford them, yet so great was Murchoe's Courage, and
Conduct so happy, that the Danish and Leinster Forces could no longer withstand
him; having with his own Hand first slain Maolmordh, who was the first occasion
of this War; and then at two several times the two Sons of the King of Denmark;
whose Loss so disheartened the Enemy, that they gave way, to an easy, though
dear-bought Victory; for Murchoe being too far engaged among the Danish Horse,
though overpowered with Number, fought 'till he had made a Rampart of dead
Bodies about him, which for some time secured him from Fate; but an unlucky
accidental Arrow laid him dead upon a Pyramid of his fallen Enemies.

Yet for all this, did not the resolute Irish loose one foot of Ground, or one
bit of their Courage; but rather, spurred on by Revenge, made the Danes pay dear
for his Loss, and in a short time became sole Masters of the Field. Thus
without the assistance of Maolseachelvin, were the Danes overcome; one whereof,
whose Name was Bruador, being Commander of a Danish Party, and who with his Men
flying in the General Rout, was forced to take that way where Bryan the
Monarch's Pavilion was pitched; into which (as he was passing by) he entered;
and seeing the King, whom he had formerly known, Bryan suspecting no such
thing, having totally gained the Battle, basely Murdered him as he lay wounded
in his Bed: But he soon had the Reward due to so Treacherous an Act; for he,
and all who followed him, were by his Guards, and the Pursuers, cut all to
pieces.

Maolseachelvin after this, put in for his Share, and made himself once more
Monarch of Ireland. Though his Daughter no sooner heard the Death of her Lover,
but as though she had lain down to Sleep, flung her self on her Bed, and
without so much as one Groan, Sigh, or Murmur, she cried, My Murchoe calls me,
and I must go to him; so died in the presence of her Father, and the rest of
the Nobility, who had escaped in the Battle, for there were but few left alive:
and on the Monarch's Side, besides Bryan himself, and the Renowned Prince
Murchoe his Son, were killed in this Battle, Seven petty Kings, most of the
Princes and Nobility of Munster and Conaught, and four Thousand of meaner
Degree.

But on the other side, viz. that of the Danes and Leinster Party, were Slain
Maolmordh Mac-Murchoe, the King of Leinster, who was the Original Cause of this
Slaughter, with all his Principal Nobles, and three Thousand Common Soldiers;
together with Knutus, and Andreas, the two Sons of the King of Denmark, and all
their Great Commanders, with six Thousand seven Hundred of the New-come Forces
from Denmark, that they had brought over with them, and four Thousand of the
old Danes, who were, before their coming, in Ireland. In all the Slaughter on
both Sides, that Day, amounted to seven Thousand seven Hundred Men, besides
Kings, Princes, Commanders, and other Noblemen.

Some time after this Battle, Maolseachelvin, (who now the second time sat on
the Monarchical Throne of Ireland, and was the last Monarch of the Milesian
Race) took Dublin, Sacked it, Burnt it, and Slew in it all those Danes who had
made their escape thither from the Battle of Clantarfe.

The next Year, in the said Maolseachelvin's Reign, Huaghaire Mac-Duniling
Mac-Tuatil, another King of Leinster, who succeeded Maolmordh, though of a more
Noble Race, and better Interested for the Good of his Country, gave a mighty
overthrow, (which was the last that was given) to Stetirick the Son of
Aomlaibh, and the Danes of Dublin, who after the Battle of Clantarfe, and the
Burning of Dublin by Maolseachelvin, had once more Recruited from the Isle of
Man, and other Islands, which were yet in Possession of the Danes, but were now
totally destroyed throughout all Ireland.

Thus did that Warlike and Ancient Kingdom free it self from the Tyranny of its
mortal Enemy the Danes.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Published.
EXILIUS: Or, The Banished Roman. A New entertaining ROMANCE. Written (after
the manner of Telemachus) for the Instruction of some young Ladies of Quality.
By Mrs. Jane Barker. containing the following Histories, viz. I. Clelia and
Marcellus: Or, The Constant Lovers. II. The Reward of Virtue: Or, The
Adventures of Clarinthia and Lysander. III. The Lucky Escape: Or, The Fate of
Ismenus. IV. Clodius and Scipiana: Or, The Beautiful Captive. V. Piso: Or, The
Lewd Courtier. VI. The Happy Recluse: Or, The Charms of Liberty. VII. The
Transformation: Or, The Amors of Cordiala. VIII. The Fair Widow: Or, False
Friend. To which is added, The Scene of Pleasure; being the Description of a
Complete Garden. Price 3 s.


The Sincere VIRGIN: Or, The Amors of Bosvil and Galesia. A NOVEL. By Mrs.
Barker. Price 1 s. Stitched, 1 s. 6 d. Bound.

HANOVER Tales: Or, The History of Count Fradonia and the Unfortunate Baritia.
Done out of French. Price 1 s. 6 d. Stitched, 2 s. Bound.

POEMS upon Several Occasions. By the late Reverend Mr. POMFRET, Author of the
Choice. Price 2 s.

The Adventures of RIVELLA: Or, The History of the Author of the Atalantis;
with Secret Memoirs and Manners of several Considerable Persons Her
Cotemporaries. With a Complete Key. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The PETTICOAT: An Heroi-Comical Poem in Two Books. By Mr. GAY, Jun, Price 1 s.

Printed for E. Curll at the Dial and Bible, and J. Hook at the
Flower-de-Luce, both against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. Where
Gentlemen and Ladies may be Furnished with all the New Books, Plays, and
Pamphlets that come out.


