AN ESSAY FOR Reforming the Modern Way of Practicing MEDICINE IN EDINBURGH:

Wherein it is proved, That the Foreign Method of paying Physicians with small
FEES at a Time, would be of great Benefit to the NATION, if it were followed in
EDINBURGH, and in the other Royal Burghs in SCOTLAND, and do no Hurt to
Physicians themselves.

EDINBURGH, Printed. Sold by Mr. James Davidson, Mr. Thomas Heriot, and Mr.
Alexander Symmers, Booksellers in Edinburgh. 1727. (Price Six Pence.)

An ESSAY, etc.
IT is the unavoidable Fate of every Thing that makes its Appearance new in the
World, to be attended with Misrepresentations: The malicious Genius of some
People naturally leads them to Censure and Detraction, especially where they
have such an agreeable Opportunity of exerting their beloved Talents, as is
afforded to them by any Proposal, however just in it self, that has not been
approved of by the Practice of former Times, in the very Place where they
happen to live, nor supported by the Authority of a Multitude there. Others
imagine, that they have an Interest to oppose any new Scheme, and therefore are
very Sanguine against it, although they are often found to be miserably mistaken
in their Opinion, even as to their own particular Concerns. A third Sort, which
make up indeed by far the most numerous Class of Detractors, are those who go
blindly in to what they hear others say, without giving themselves the least
Trouble to examine the Case; they are pleased with the Slander, and catch the
Laugh, for what Reason they cannot tell, and think of the Matter they don't
know how, but just as they are put upon, and directed by the Hints suggested to
them by ill natured or designing Persons. Every new Project then must appear
with great Disadvantages; especially in a narrow Place, and where the Judgments
of Men are too apt to be guided by the Opinions or Examples of others, and
where Reason is seldom allowed to lead any Man out of the common Road, how far
soever that may happen to be wrong in it self. An Innovation in any of the
liberal Arts or Sciences, or in the Method of exercising them, and rendering
them useful to Mankind, since it cannot expect to be the Darling of any one
Party of Men more than of another, and consequently can look for no Patrons out
of any Party-Views, which are the Master-Springs of all our Actions at present
in this unhappy Country; so it must necessarily meet with extraordinary
Discouragement. Yet certain it is, that there are so many Errors committed in
the Exercise of the learned Professions, that the World reaps but a small Part
of the Advantages that naturally ought to arise from them. This then, if it be
true, (as unquestionably it is) must needs give some Satisfaction to the Mind
of any Person, who, in his own Faculty, would endeavor to remove those
Obstacles which stand in the Way of his Profession, and in a great Measure
prevent the usefulness of it; notwithstanding of the forbidding Circumstances
which the Novelty of the Thing may bring along with it: And if the Project laid
down by such a Person, is of it self reasonable, it is the Proposer's Duty to
let the World know that it is so. And if he be able to satisfy the judicious
Part of Mankind, who don't judge of Matters before they consider them; and the
Candid, who judge with impartiality, he may safely treat the Opinion of all
others with the utmost Contempt.

THE Knowledge of Medicine, which we at present only consider, is undoubtedly
one of the most valuable Blessings ever Heaven bestowed upon this lower World:
But as it is now exercised, it may safely be asserted, and can be proved, that
the Benefit of it is but small to this Nation, and especially to this City of
Edinburgh; and that plainly from two Reasons: The First is, the Ignorance of
many of the Professors of it, that is, of such as actually practice it; and the
Second, which has as bad Effects, is the Difficulty that most Part of People
find to have the Advice of those who are to be presumed the best qualified, on
Account, that their Fees are too considerable for the Sick Person's Pocket. Now
the Rich amongst us, bear but a small Proportion to the poorer Sort. If many
then must be without the Benefit of Medicine regularly applied, whilst a few
only can purchase it, certainly the Service it does to the Community is but
inconsiderable.

THE natural Way to put the Practice of this Art into the most proper Hands,
and so to exclude the more ignorant from it, (which was the Royal Design of the
Sovereign, in erecting a College of Physicians in this Place, although that
Design has not hitherto succeeded) would certainly be, for the Physicians to
make such a Regulation with Respect to their Fees, that every Person, when
indisposed, might be able to call them: If they would, for Example, accept of
such a small Thing, at a Time, as Half a Crown, and be paid for each Visit at
the same Rate. And lest it should be alleged, that this were either
prostituting the Art, or sacrificing their own Interest to the Good of the
Public (a Thing which, although noble, is not always convenient) let them
consider the following Particulars, and it is highly probable they will change
their Opinion; and perhaps be convinced, that they have no Manner of Interest
to oppose such a Scheme.

IT can be proved in the first Place, that a small Fee, at a Time, to a
Physician for his Advice, satisfies the most Learned and Knowing Practitioners
of most Part of Europe.

2do, THAT, were it the general Practice here to take such Fees, Physicians
would be more universally employed than they are, acquire more Honor, and do
infinitely more Service to the Lieges.

3tio, THAT the well employed of the Faculty could lose nothing by this Method,
but rather gain; and that the less employed would gain vastly, by some Part of
the Business necessarily falling into their Hands.

4to, THAT the Surgeon Apothecaries, whom it would seem mostly to affect,
could lose nothing, but would gain upon several Accounts.

5to, THAT from the foregoing Considerations, it would be highly beneficial to
the Country, that this Method were introduced, and that it would do Prejudice
to no one Person.

As to the first Particular; Those who know how Physicians are paid in Holland,
where it is confessed by every Body, there are Men of as great Learning in that
Profession as any where else at present; how they are paid all over Germany,
Elanders, France it self, and every where but in Great Britain, will not dispute,
That the best Physicians are contented with small Fees, and consequently must
think it no Disgrace for any one of the Faculty to be satisfied with the same.

THE second Particular is as little doubtful; For if one could have the best
Advice about their Health for a small Acknowledgment, no doubt they would call
for that Advice, rather than for any other; and the least Disorder would
willingly make them part with Half a Crown, when perhaps, to save a Guinea, the
Distemper is allowed to go on, without calling any Assistance, or at least, not
that of One whose Business it is to understand Distempers: Besides, many a one
is able to pay a small Fee, who has not the Ability to pay a great one, and
therefore must take up with what Advice he can best purchase. These
Considerations make it appear, That a more universal Practice must necessarily
attend the lowering of the Fees.

BUT next, Physicians would acquire more Honor, and do more Good; because by
this Means they would have it in their Power, to observe Diseases from their
first Appearances, and by putting the Patient, from the Beginning, under a
right Management, would, very often, effectually make a Cure; when at present
we know, they are seldom called (except perhaps by the richer Sort, and that
not always) 'till there is imminent Danger apprehended: And then the Doctor's
Business commonly is, to skreen every Body else from any Reflections about the
sick Person's Death, and be a Witness of his Exit; when he himself knows very
well, if he be a Person of Ingenuity and Learning, That he now can neither
understand nor cure the Distemper, since the Course of it is already perverted
by a bad Management, or at least not rectified in Time by a good one. It is a
certain Fact, That Physicians, being commonly called in the End of a Disease,
or after it has made a considerable Progress, seldom see any one, as God and
Nature sent it; but as it is disguised and changed by Applications made in the
Beginning: And for this Reason they are able to do their Patients little or no
Service, which has rendered the Art contemptible to some, and suspected to be
of no great Use, even by the most knowing. It would then appear to be the
Business of every true Physician, to endeavor to retrieve the Honor of his
own Art, by doing what he can, to bring the Practice into the Hands of the real
Professors of it; which can never be done 'till the Fees are made low. And is
it not the utmost Barbarity, to deny an Advice to all who have not Ability to
pay Gold, and too much Modesty to ask it for nothing?

WHAT was in the third Place asserted, That the well employed of the Faculty
could lose nothing, appears by considering, that did they keep a List of every
Visit, and were paid at a certain Rate for it, it would often come to more
Account than their Payments do at present. People would know exactly what they
expected for their Trouble, and desire their Attendance accordingly. The
Richer, who at present give Gold, for their own greater Satisfaction, would
call them every Day, or oftener, during the Course of a Distemper. Others would
call them now and then, and so have the Benefit of good Directions, who at
present languish without them. And from this last Consideration it plainly
appears, That there would be an Addition to the Gain, even of such as have
their Reputation the best established: And as to the less employed, and younger
Part of the Faculty, they must necessarily be often in Business, whereas at
present they are idle, if Poor as well as Rich constantly should call
Physicians; because in that Case, a few Persons could not be sufficient to
attend the whole who were willing to employ them.

IT may here be objected, That this is but a pretended lowering of the Fees,
and that Half a Crown a Visit lands in the same Thing as a Guinea now and then.
But by what is said above it appears, that though in some Cases, with Respect to
the richer Sort, the Thing be really true, yet with Respect to the Generality
it is not so, since very often one Visit or two may be sufficient to give the
Patient, or perhaps his Apothecary, such Directions as being well observed,
will be of great Use to him: And even the Rich will have this Advantage by it,
that they will sooner incline to call a Physician to a slight Illness, than
they do at present; and by so doing, often prevent the ensuing of a very severe
One: For the first Attacks of a Disease are many Times deceitful. Besides, this
will be an Inducement to them to call severals at a Time, where now One serves;
and so they shall have the joint Advice of many at a very easy Purchase.

WHAT was proposed in the fourth Place, viz. That the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries
would lose nothing, seems liable to more Objections, because the Scheme it self
appears contrived with a Design to take the whole Practice of Medicine out of
their Hands; whereas at present it is notourly known, that they are the Persons
who practice the most of it in this Place; and therefore, that if this Project
should go on, it would in a Manner ruin their Business. But the thinking Part
of the Gentlemen of that Incorporation (it might almost be asserted, the whole
of them) are well satisfied, that a quite contrary Effect would ensue. For in
the first Place, the Affair of Surgery might be put under Regulations, as well
as that of Medicine, with Respect to the Fees; and then, when ever an external
Malady required Advice, or Attendance and Applications, either by the Surgeon
or his Servants, a stated Rule for his Payment would be found very convenient,
both for the Surgeon and the Patient: Which may easily be deduced from what was
said above with Regard to Medicine, and what is clearly demonstrated by the
constant Custom in foreign Parts.

WITH Respect to Pharmacy, the Surgeon-Apothecaries, who at present, by the
Laws of this Place, have the sole Privilege of exercising that Art, seldom make
any Profit but by the selling of their Medicines to their Patients; and if ever
they are paid for Attendance, it is commonly by the more generous Sort, who
even at present never fail to call a Physician, as well as the Surgeon, to any
internal Case. As to these then, the new Proposal makes no Odds; neither does
it as to the others, since, whether they have a Physician or not, the Account
of Medicines must always be paid. Thus far as to the Negative Position, That
those Gentlemen could not lose: Let us next observe their Advantages. The most
of them are of such Candor, that they are often grieved when dealing with the
poorer Sort, that the extravagant Fees of Physicians, entirely debar them from
joining other Advice to their own; and it is with Difficulty, that those of
middle Circumstances are persuaded to consent to it, even where there is
Danger. No doubt then, but since our Scheme opens a Door of having easily the
Concurrence of a Physician to whatever is done, the Surgeons must have great
Satisfaction in it; for two Advices must be as good as a single one at least,
and the Character of DOCTOR will add some Honor to the Consultation, and so be
more agreeable to the Patient. Besides, the Person who furnishes the Medicines,
seldom has the same Freedom of Mind to prescribe as another, lest he be
suspected to have a View to his own Interest, and therefore he always wishes to
have another to do it for him.

THAT the Character of DOCTOR adds little or nothing to the Matter, may be
alleged, for this Reason, That the Surgeon-Apothecaries in this Place, are
mostly Gentlemen, consequently have the same Education with our Physicians, as
to all the Parts of Learning that are commonly taught in our younger Years;
That afterward, during their Apprenticeships, they have much Opportunity of
seeing sick People, and so, by Degrees, learning how to Practice, by observing
what is done by others; That some of them, after these Advantages, have been
bred in the most famous medical Schools; Others again have, for a long Tract of
Time, had a most numerous Practice in the Army or Navy, and by this Means, must
necessarily have their Knowledge enriched with many valuable Observations of
their own, which never fail to improve one better than what is learned by
Hearsay; That in this Place they are not admitted to Practice, but after having
gone through a very strict and severe Examination, upon all Parts of Anatomy,
Surgery, and Pharmacy, (which include a vast Part of Medicine) and which they
are obliged to undergo, in about seven different Diets, by their present Rules.
This seems, as indeed it is, to be as August a medical Trial as any in the
World, although confined to some particular Parts of the Science; and they are
not admitted to this Trial, 'till after Eight Years from the Beginning of their
Apprenticeship; in which Time it is to be presumed, that they are pretty well
qualified, when we know that there are some Graduations, after a very few
Months Study, and perhaps without any at all. It Is true, there are some
particular Persons, who have a Right to be admitted to Trial with the Surgeons
sooner than at the End of Eight Years: But as that respects not the Generality,
it is not worth noticing; and the Abridgments that are made of this Time are
commonly very small. By all this then it would appear, That the Surgeon seems
to bid fairer for being a good Practitioner than the Doctor, and wants only the
Diploma.

WITH the greatest Regard imaginable to the Gentlemen of the honorable
Profession of Surgery, the most ancient, and still the most certain Part of
Medicine, it must be acknowledged, That the Facts above recited are true; but
yet it must be allowed, That the learned Faculty of Medicine will still keep
its Dignity, if the Case be fairly considered.

A Physician, who justly merits and possesses the Rank and Title of DOCTOR, is
not one who comes instructed with a few Scrapes of Knowledge, taken from his
own Observation; but brings with him, before he offers to Practice, the learned
and laboriously acquired Treasures of vast Numbers of Ages. The Life of one Man
is extremely short, and is therefore, without great Assistance, incapable of
making any considerable Improvements in so noble, and in some Cases intricate,
a Science as that of Medicine. There is then no possible Means of attaining to
any Degree of Perfection in it, but by reviewing the Monuments of Antiquity,
which, by a particular Providence of Heaven, have been preserved to us. There
we are instructed by Multitudes of Observations exactly taken, through a great
Tract of Years, in all the Changes that appear, as the Humane Body from Health
degenerates into a State of Sickness; as it again, by the Means of Nature,
returns to its former healthful Condition; or perhaps continues infected by
some Remains of the Disease; or, being overcome with the Load of the Distemper,
perishes. We are well advertised of all the sensible Causes, that have been
observed to precede and produce those Distempers, and of all the Methods that
the Wit of Man has been able to discover, for assisting Nature to overcome
them; and how those Methods have succeeded now for many Thousands of Years. It
is no small Task to become well acquainted with the Observations and Doctrine
of the Illustrious Ancients; and no small Pleasure, to find them daily verified
in our own Practice. If we add to those, what the Industry of later Times has
furnished to us, with respect to some new Diseases, we may be allowed to be
well qualified in our Profession: But yet more so, if we call the Assistance of
Philosophy to our Aid, under due Restrictions, that is, never suffering our
Reasonings to lead us away from what is undoubtedly true in Fact. If after an
exact Scrutiny into all the Parts of the Animal Machine, we be able to
demonstrate the Uses of all that various Structure, and nice Complication of
Organs in every different Part of it, and to explain the Springs of all their
Actions, we cannot be at a Loss, when its Functions are put out of Order by
Sickness, to understand where the Fault lies.

IF then we go further, and examine the Properties of all the Material World, to
discover what Parts of it may be of Service in our Art; If we survey the
beauteous vegetable Creation, and draw what Aid we can from the healthful
Qualities of Plants; If we dive into the Recesses of the Earth, and extort
Assistance from the Mineral Kingdom; Then explore the Seas, Earth, and Air, for
all the various Animals that have any Parts that can be useful to preserve or
repair the Body of Man: If all those different Objects are carefully
considered, and their Properties enquired into, and all done with due Regard to
the standing practical Observations above mentioned, undoubtedly we must draw
such Helps from Philosophy, as very much must improve our Art: And we will
think it but a small Exaggeration in the Founder of it, who was a Heathen, when
he affirms, That a Physician who is a Philosopher is equal to a God. With such
a Physician, if any such there be, no Surgeon or Apothecary but will think it
his Happiness to be engaged about a Patient: For though he himself, as above, may
have seen a great deal of Practice, and understand several Branches of the Art;
yet the many Interruptions to Study that commonly an Apprenticeship brings
along with it, and the over soon going to Practice at one's own Hand, will
certainly make him unacquainted with many Things which a learned Physician
knows, and has gathered from the Writings of Antiquity, whence the most of his
Knowledge comes. For really the Practice of any true Physician, does not so
much furnish him with new Observations, as it gives him a Facility in repeating
the old Ones, and applying them to particular Cases: So that Study and Practice
both concur to make a complete Artist. But it is easy to observe, that much
Study, with a moderate Share of Practice, makes a far greater Physician, than
little or no Study, though with vast Practice: For, as above, he relies not on
his own Observation, but on that of a great many Ages. To return to our Point,
the Character of Doctor must add to the Satisfaction both of the Patient and
Apothecary in every Case, if he be what he ought to be, and can recommend
himself by his Dexterity, both in foretelling what is to happen in Diseases,
and by curing them if they are not desperate; which will distinguish him from
all Impostures, better than his Degree in the University, the Honor of which
is often basely prostituted. The Wisdom of Great Britain has erected Colleges
in the different Metropolis's of the Three Kingdoms, to be a Check upon all
Foreign Degrees. And it were to be wished, that our own Universities would take
Care to admit none, but who are well qualified, which would make every Doctor
an Honor to the Faculty. And if at the same Time the Fees were such as is
proposed in this Paper, the Practice would soon entirely come into their Hands,
to the great Benefit of all, and the Loss of no Body, not even of the Surgeons,
as has been proved. Now it may be further added, as a Reason why a Physician
ought always to be consulted about any sick Person, that as we are not here in
a Place where, by the established Laws, any Person indifferently is allowed to
exercise what Branches of the medical Art he shall think fit; so it is a Sort
of Usurpation of other People's Rights, and a flying in the Face of Authority,
for any one, not legally entitled, to prescribe Medicines. And grant that some
who are not graduated, may have more Knowledge than others who are; yet as the
Public knows no other Test of one's Qualifications, but the having a regular
Degree, which in this City must be examined and acknowledged by the Royal
College; and as the taking away the Necessity of such a Testimony, would have
very bad Consequences, by being an Inlet to the very vilest and most ignorant
of the People to practice without being questioned; so it is hoped that no
Person, however well accomplished, if he be not a Doctor, will take it amiss to
be told, that the just Right to give Medicines belongs to others. Let him, if
he pleases, take his Degrees and satisfy the College, or else keep within his
own Sphere, as the Physicians ought to do within theirs, neither performing
Chirurgical Operations, nor furnishing Medicines to any one, unless they have
the Privilege of so doing from the Board of Surgeon-Apothecaries. Neither need
they pretend any Advantage in their doing the last, on Account that they are
surest of their own Medicines, since the Faithfulness of the
Chirurgeon-Apothecaries of this City, in that Particular, is well known. The
Professions of Medicine and Surgery are much a Kin; to the one belongs the Cure
of Internal, to the other the Cure of External Maladies: The Professors of them
are then in that Respect Brethren, and on an equal Lay. If any Man will
exercise both, let him take the necessary Powers from both Societies. There is
no Inconsistency, no Dishonor in it, that they know who have studied the
History of those Professions, (whatever the more Ignorant may object) for the
greatest Masters were such as exercised both. But let no Apothecary pretend to
prescribe; his Business is only to obey Prescriptions: Let no Surgeon do the
same, if it is not in External Cases, which naturally come within his Province.
Let no Physician perform an Operation, make External Applications, or compound
and furnish Medicines, unless such a Person be vested with the Powers of both
Societies. This would evite all Confusion, and keep every one's Privileges
distinct; and all Pretenses for confounding of them will be taken away, if
every Sick Person may have the Advice of a Physician at an easy Rate. For we
know that the Exorbitancy of the Fees was always given as a Reason why the
Surgeons were under a Necessity to prescribe; but that it would be much better
for them were it otherwise, it is hoped is is now made clear.

THE Fifth Proposition it is needless now to insist on, for the Advantages to
the Country must be very great, if the poorer, as well as richer Inhabitants of
it be all equally admitted to reap the Benefit of so valuable an Art as
Medicine. By this Means the Populace, by getting free Access to regular
Physicians, will have no longer their Bodies left at the Mercy of every
ignorant Pretender to Physic, or be glad to apply for Advice to every
impertinent Quack, because his Fees are such as they are able to afford; to
which Sort of Gentlemen, we see they constantly flock wherever they offer, and
of which there has been a notable Instance lately in this very Place. It can be
proved, that neither Pestilence, Famine, or War, ever have committed such
Ravages to the Destruction of Human Kind, as the unskilful Application of
Medicine has. If such wrong Applications then, of a noble and useful Art, can
be in a great Measure prevented by our Scheme, were it not an egregious Cruelty
to the World, in the least to oppose its taking Effect, especially considering,
that no one Person can possibly lose any Thing by it, as has been sufficiently
demonstrated?

AFTER what has been said upon this Subject, it may appear somewhat strange,
that such an important Affair has been so long neglected: And as it appears to
be something of Moment, so it were to be wished, that a proper Method of
actually putting it in Execution, were fallen upon; because the best and most
profitable Designs often prove abortive, on Account of the bad Management of
the Undertakers.

No doubt, since there is a College of Physicians, here, erected by Royal
Authority, for the Improvement of Medicine, it is their proper Business to
further this Proposal; and it were well if they did so. But as Societies seldom
do much in the like Matters, on Account that their Members are seldom all
agreed in any one Point; and as this Project has been before them a long Time
ago, and much pressed by some of the most Noted in the Society; and as at that
Time it met with Discouragement, (certainly, as appears by what is here
advanced, without any good Reason) so in all Probability it would do the same
again; and therefore some single Person, or a few, must set about it, otherwise
so good a Design must for ever perish. It is indeed a bold Undertaking for any
one Man, but what inevitable Necessity seems to throw upon some Body. It may
here perhaps be asked, Does any Man in this Place, especially if he is not a
very old One, think himself qualified as a Physician ought to be, according to
the Description given of a True Physician above, and that therefore he can be
the Person to undertake this Work? This may be answered by asking another
Question; Pray, does any young Man think himself qualified for prescribing to
Patients, in Quality of Doctor, where the Life of his Neighbor is so nearly
concerned? Really any Person that is sufficient for the one, may be sufficient
for doing the other, and can be capable of neither, without a great deal of the
Study above spoken of, and Practice for some Time. And indeed any Man can as
easily know, whether he himself has made considerable Progress in the Doctrine
of Hippocrates, as another can whether he again understands Euclid. And it is
presumed, that no Man of common Sense will be refused an Allowance to pass a
Judgment upon himself, whether he understands the last mentioned Author or not.

IF this then is so, some Person or other may, without incurring the Imputation
of extraordinary Vanity, take the Burden of this whole Affair upon him, and set
up with as good a Grace for being ready to serve a great many at a cheap Rate,
as any other Man can to serve a few at a dear one. And no doubt, but that if
this Method were once followed with any tolerable Success, by any Person, the
Royal College would by Degrees come into it, however unwilling they may be at
the Beginning; and so at length the Country reap the whole Benefit proposed by
it.

THERE is one Advantage not yet taken Notice of, which is, That if some certain
Persons were the Undertakers, the young Students of Medicine might reap a great
deal of Good by it.

THERE has of late been taught here, and with some considerable Success, at the
Surgeons Hall, the whole Art of Medicine, in a Systematical Way; in which
Course, with all imaginable Care of the Performers, nothing has been omitted
which to them seemed necessary, either to demonstrate the Theory, or illustrate
and explain regular Practice, as drawn from certain Experience and
unquestionably just Observations. This they have done, with all due Regard to
the great Names of those who have furnished the World with a vast Treasure of
practical Observations, and of those whose great Industry and accurate
Genius's, have confirmed and improved the Theory by many valuable Discoveries;
and with no less Deference to the Great Person who, from vast Volumes, has
collected all relating to the one or the other, into such an exact Order, and
into such Bounds, that what concerns either of them can be explained in the
Course of a Seven or Eight Months College; which Task they own themselves
unable to have performed, without the Aid of so great a Master.

THEY hope that they are of Service in several Respects to their Country.
First, The Money which it was formerly necessary for Physicians to bestow on a
foreign Education, may be kept at home. Next, A great many who had not Ability
to go abroad to purchase Learning, are now taught in their own Country, which
puts them to a small Expense; and by this Means a great many acquire a just
Notion of a regular Practice, who otherwise would perhaps never have heard of
it; and yet, may be, would have played the Doctor with as great Assurance as
they shall do now; but under what Disadvantages it is easy to tell. Besides,
the extraordinary Pains that those Gentlemen have been at, in teaching in
English as well as in Latin, and in insisting so minutely on every Particular,
as to be understood by those of any Capacity, will have this good Effect, that
many who perhaps wanted the previous necessary Learning fit to accomplish one
for studying Physic, although they cannot possibly reap the same Benefit from
the Course, as others well educated will; yet they will always carry away a
great deal, and so be much better fitted than they could have been without it,
to serve either in the Army, or the Navy, where Medicine, as often as Surgery,
is their Business; although a sufficient Knowledge of the last is absolutely
necessary for them, and the Whole of it, to wit of Surgery, is fully explained
as Part of the Course. The hearing of it then, will make any of them, at least,
much sooner good Surgeons, than they can be without it. And as Edinburgh
furnishes a great many Surgeons to all the British Dominions, it is with
Pleasure that these Gentlemen believe, if they meet with suitable
Encouragement, they shall save many a Subject to the Nation.

TO return, after this Digression, to our Point: If those Gentlemen, or any of
them, would undertake to give Advice, at the Rate of Half a Crown a Visit to
any Patient within the Ports of Edinburgh, or the Canongate; and for a Shilling
to every Person, who at certain Hours should consult them at Home; and Gratis
to every extremely indigent Person who should come to them: By this Means the
Students could see a great Deal of Practice, and have the Pleasure of
observing, that what was taught them in the College, was before their Eyes
verified in Fact. Their Master might take one or more of them, at a Time, to
such Patients as he should think proper; but especially, he could make them
Witnesses of his Practice at Home, which it is believed (all will agree) would
be a great Advantage to them; and therefore it is Needless to insist on it. But
what is their Advantage, comes in Time to be the Advantage of the Public. Now
if any of the Persons just mentioned, do undertake what we propose, it is hoped,
That their daily Employment of Teaching, puts them above the Suspicion of being
very ignorant; and therefore the good Work may succeed in their Hands, as well
as in that of any One whosoever. And then the two Obstacles that were proposed
in the Beginning, as the Hindrances of the Advantages arising from the medical
Art, that is, The Ignorance of some Practisers, and the Difficulty of
consulting the Best on Account of their Fees, will both be almost wholly
removed, when the whole Science is to be learned in our own Country, and
therefore every Man made inexcusable who learns it not, and yet designs to
practice it; and then those who have learned it, to be advised with at such a
Rate as every Patient can afford.

Is it then Fact, That the Method of practicing Medicine at present, is subject
to many Inconveniences, which affect most Part of the Faculty, and the whole
Lieges in general, except a very few? By the whole Tenor of the Premises is it
demonstrated, That what is here proposed would be an effectual Remedy, whereby
they might all be removed? Is the only Way left to bring such a Remedy about,
pointed out; that is, That it must be attempted by a single Person, or by a
few? And are there such Persons, who think they have a Probability of
succeeding in it? Are all these Things so, and nothing to stand in the Way of
so good a Design, but the Malice or Envy of some People of little Souls, and
mean Capacities? THEN let the Thing be instantly gone about. It is reasonable
in it self, and the present Circumstances of our Country, where there is such
an extreme Scarcity of Money, necessarily require it, were there nothing else
in the Matter. The more Dirt the Ignorant or Malicious endeavor to throw upon
the Undertaker of a good Work, the more Honor to him, who can contemn Things
of so much Insignificancy, and go on to do well; and the more Ignominy and
Disgrace to his Opposers, in the Eyes of all the knowing and candid World. The
Author of this Paper is very well apprised of the common Methods of running
down any Thing, however just, if a Person shall please, whose Talent lies that
Way. He, and every Body else, is aware of the Backbiting Tittle-tattle, the
impertinent Sneer to insinuate a Slander, and all the little jirking villainous
Arts of Detraction and Defamation, and of the wrong Constructions that may be
put upon every Thing. He owns frankly, That if any of this Sort of Artillery be
brought against him, he heartily despises it. If any reasonable Argument be
brought against what is proposed, he is willing to hear it; and if it be a good
one, to be convinced by it.

IN the mean Time he thinks, after what is said, it is proper to let the
Public know, That there is a Design, by some of the Faculty of Medicine, as
well in Edinburgh, as in some of the other Royal Burghs in Scotland, actually
to Practice in the proposed Way, (that is, for a small Fee each Consultation)
and it is hoped, That so laudable an Undertaking will meet with all due
Encouragement. The Particulars of the Persons Names, and the Fees they are to
take, will afterward be declared. All others are heartily invited to come into
the same Way of doing, making such Alterations in their Method of following out
the Scheme, as shall best suit their Convenience, and the Circumstances of the
Place they live in.

THIS small ESSAY is humbly submitted to the Judgment of the candid World; and
the Author is persuaded, That whether his Proposal succeed at present, or not,
that there are some Considerations which seem plainly to evince, That sooner or
later it must necessarily take in this Country; and then it will be sufficient
Honor for him, to have been the first Mover in such an important Affair.

FINIS.

