Map of ASIA
map of Asia

THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author, Sold at the Literary
Press. No. 62. Wardour Street, Soho.

1790.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including
all the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. XII.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, at the LITERARY-PRESS, No. 62, WARDOUR STREET,
SOHO; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC XCII.

Among others, I saw, adds this author, a counterfeit lieutenant of the police,
who was suffered to exercise a pretty severe distibutive justice. Another
company, who personated the aga or general of the Janissaries, took possession
of his house, whilst he went his rounds, and his servants treated the mask with
as much respect as if it had been their master.

Many persons in office have comedies acted before their houses the whole time;
the subjects of these are various, but always very indecent, and the more they
are so, the greater satisfaction they seem to give. It is impossible to see
without astonishment the hall of the divan, that terrible and dreadful
tribunal, decked out for some days in the most ridiculous manner.

Turning lanterns, on which are painted extravagant and often obscene figures,
mixed with transparent writings, consisting of the name of God, his attributes,
the cipher of the Grand Signor, or some play on words; and pieces of
looking-glass intended to increase the splendor of these illuminations, amuse
the multitude at a small expense. Persons whom we might expect to be the most
grave, from their age and the importance of their employments, are not the
least pleased with these trivial and puerile imitations. A little palace made
by a European with bits of glass and glue, the vizir had given a thousand
crowns for to make a figure on a similar occasion.

The pleasure of knocking down Christians is so great a treat to the Turks,
that the favorites of Sultan Mahomet could imagine nothing better to amuse
their master, in an entertainment which they gave on this occasion, within the
seraglio. And they thought so little of it, as to request the foreign
ambassadors to lend them their European dresses, in order to put them on the
Jews, to make them resemble Christians. The Jews, ever destined to be beaten,
and ever ready to suffer, if it could be made worth their while, submitted to
all they pleased to inflict. Once, the court of the seraglio agreed that the
Jews never earned their money better than on that day. The ambassadors were the
greater fools of the two, in suffering themselves to be thus ridiculed.

It is at these times, says Habesci, that the Turkish ladies endeavor to
accomplish their amorous designs; being permitted to go abroad veiled during
the festival of the Bayram, and on all public rejoicings. When these
opportunities occur, they take with them a small bundle, carefully concealed,
containing a change of dress. Their own is always of gay colors, with yellow
drawers, and a kind of half-boots of the same color, fitted close to the legs.
The robes of the Christian women are of dismal, dark colors, and not made so
loose and flowing as the Turkish: in short the difference is as great as can
well be imagined. Having disguised themselves in this dress, they cross the
water to Pera; and if they have any appointment, which is generally the case,
and made by the intermission of some Jew, at whose house they have changed
their dress, they go directly to the tavern, where their lover is to meet them.
If not, they walk up and down the beautiful esplanade of Pera, which is
generally crowded with the most brilliant company of Constantinople. When they
see any young Christian, who attracts their attention, they let him know it, by
some significant glances; and if these are not sufficient to allure him, beckon
him aside, and make him an offer of their person, accompanied by some valuable
present; which gives him to understand they are women of rank, perhaps of the
highest. A brilliant or an emerald of five hundred pounds value is a trifle at
such a time.

A Turkish lady of quality walking one day in the manner we have described,
took a fancy to a French youth of about sixteen. Being in a Greek dress, she
made no scruple of accosting him, presenting a diamond to him, and requesting
to speak with him alone. The Frenchman was at no loss to conceive her meaning,
and being no stranger to the houses of pleasure at Pera, retired with her to
one of the best. The first meeting gave so much satisfaction, that a second was
agreed on. The day appointed, they were both punctual, and after repeated
proofs of their reciprocal affection, the lady proposed a scheme for taking her
gallant home. She was the wife of a very rich and noble Turk, who had no other,
and only kept four female slaves in his haram; he was very old. but doated on
his faithful wife. The youth having accepted her offer, prepared himself for
the adventure. She then sent for a Jew, a dealer in slaves, to whom she offered
a present of a 1000 ducats, if he would render her a very particular service,
which required fidelity and secrecy. The Jew who would have sold Moses and
Aaron for such a sum, readily consented. "Go then (says she) to a certain
tavern at Pera, where you will find a handsome French lad; he will expect you,
and dress him in the habit of a female slave: this done, bring him here, and
offer to sell him to my husband, but do not ask more than 250 piastres, leaving
your future recompense to me." The Jew, highly pleased with his good fortune,
purchased the necessary clothes, and went immediately to Pera, where the youth
impatiently expected him. The disguise being completed, he was conducted to the
Turk's house, and presented to him as a slave to be sold. The husband thought
the pretended slave very pretty, but would not purchase her, lest it should
make his wife jealous. By accident the lady made her appearance, and enquiring
what the girl was brought for, insisted he should, as a proof of his affection,
in being able to see so pretty a girl every day without any improper thoughts.
"Buy her (said she) and give her to me, I will keep her constantly about my
person, and take care she does not rob me of your heart." The Turk, who never
denied his dear wife any favor he could grant her, paid the price agreed on,
and this slave to love, was then placed in the paradise of Mahomet. The Turk
grew delighted with the beauty and address of his late purchase, and imputed
his wife's increased fondness for him, to the assiduities of the slave, who
always kept her lively and in good humor. In fine, the simple Turk grew more
enamoured with his wife than ordinary, became as he thought a father, and
finding his wife grow big at the end of eight months, made a public declaration
of it to the surprise of every one.

The sole interruption to the happiness of the slave and her mistress, arose
from the importunities and menaces of the Jew. He paid his visits regularly
once a week, in order to extort money from the lady, through a fear of
detection. His enquiries as to the health of the family, were generally
accompanied with some disastrous tale of his losses in trade; in short, he made
about 14,000 piastres by this intrigue. At length, another circumstance
threatened a discovery, and obliged a final separation. This was, that our
slave began to discover a beard, which could not be kept under; shaving only
increasing its growth. And after a thousand protestations of love and
gratitude, he was permitted to make his escape in the night, loaded with jewels
and money.

It is not a little singular, that the most infamous of all the houses of
gallantry at Pera, is near the hotel of our ambassador. And nothing is more
common than for Turkish ladies of rank to disguise themselves and hire a room
in this house, so situated as to see every person who enters it, and when they
have pitched upon a man they like, according to a private agreement with the
master, he is shown up to the disguised lady as to one of his public girls. If
he is a man of gallantry, he finds himself most agreeably surprised; for
instead of being in the arms, perhaps of a diseased prostitute, he finds
himself in the possession of a lovely wholesome wanton; and instead of being
called upon for money, he is, in fact, amply rewarded.

In the city, suburbs, and along the banks of the canal of the Black sea, there
are no less than 12,000 of these houses; their number is easily ascertained,
the masters of each paying a gold ducat per day for a license to keep them
open: this is a settled tax which never varies. It is well known they are kept
by Greeks, but they are chiefly frequented and supported by Turks of every rank
and description. The most esteemed taverns are, those of Galata and Pera, which
are filled with the better sort of Turks every Friday. There being no divans
held on that day for the decision of causes, doctors of the law, moulahs, and
emirs with their green turbans, resort to them, and pass the whole day in
eating, drinking, and other amusements not to be mentioned. In most of them
there are little companies, of five or six singing and dancing boys; two of
them play on some instrument, the others dance and sing: they are dressed like
girls, and accompany words adapted to the purpose, with wanton looks and
gestures, which will often so please their employers, that they will almost
cover the boys faces with ducats, sticking them on with their spittle; and the
boys, in their turn, have the dexterity, in the course of the dance, to slide
them almost imperceptibly into their pockets. One would imagine this amusement
and the intoxication of liquor would produce the most unnatural effects: not at
all. A Turk in liquor is quite different from a Greek. The latter in his cups
is lively, enterprizing and desperate; he is noisy and quarrelsome, wants to
fight, to kill, and dethrone the Ottoman monarch, that he may restore the
empire to the Christians. The Turk, on the contrary, is lifeless, peaceable,
timid, and afraid to utter a single word; it is then and then only that a
Christian may insult and use him ill with impunity.

This violation of the law of Mahomet, prohibiting the use of wine, is now
become so notorious, that the Turkish government does not attempt to apply any
remedy to so general a corruption. And indeed with what face could they pretend
to reform this evil, when all orders of the state are more or less infected by
it, from the Grand Signor down to the simple Janissary; not excepting even the
mufti, the imans, the moulahs, and the emirs of the sacred lineage of Mahomet.
The women and eunuchs in the seraglio, are more addicted to spirituous liquors
than wine; of this some judgment may be formed, by a debt left unpaid at the
death of Sultan Mustapha for 600 cases of French liqueurs: this degeneracy,
however, has been the chief cause of the decline of the empire, and will no
doubt hasten its fall.

Except in their public festivals, when licentiousness is always extreme, and
always allowed; the actors of comedies in Turkey, who are Jews, never exhibit
their talents, but within the walls of houses, where marriages are celebrated,
or some particular entertainments given. These companies of wretched buffoons
are either all men or all women.

To give some idea of their wretched, theatrical performances, Baron Tott
relates the particulars of a public entertainment given on the birth of a
princess, by one of the great officers of state in the meadows near
Constantinople.

Two great posts, forty feet distant from each other supported a cord fastened
to their upper ends. Round this cord, other cords were tied, to which glass
lamps were fixed at convenient distances from the objects they were intended to
illuminate. The cipher of the Grand Signor, the representation of his barge,
and words taken from the Alcoran, decorated the edifice, during the three days
this entertainment lasted; while rope-dancers, a company of Jewish comedians,
and female figure-dancers, amused the spectators, till the night was far
advanced. This spectacle became still more worthy curiosity, by the light of a
score of chafing dishes of iron, raised upon stakes, in which a red flame was
maintained, by burning rays dipped in tar and pine-splinters.

These dismal chandeliers were placed in a circle, to give light to the dancers
in the center, while tents, prepared for the grand vizir and his company,
formed, together with the multitudes who were present, a grand line of
circumvallation, of which the women of the populace occupied a part. The
illumination without this circle was only to give notice of the entertainment,
of which the comedy was the most valuable article.

A kind of cage, three feet square, and six feet high, hung round with a
curtain represents a house, and contains one of the Jewish actors dressed like
a woman. Another Jew, in the habit of a young Turk, and supposed to be
enamoured with the lady of the house; a valet pleasantly absurd; a fourth Jew
dressed like a woman, and acting the part of gallant; a husband who is imposed
upon, and, in short, the characters which are seen every where, stand without,
and compose the piece. But that which is to be met with no where else, is the
denouement; every thing is acted, and nothing left to the imagination of the
spectators; and if the summons of the Muczzin is heard during these interludes,
the mussulmen turn their faces toward Mecca, whilst the actors continue to
play each their part. I shall have said enough of this strange mixture of
momentary devotion and continued indecency, adds the baron, to those who
perceive that this picture, difficult to describe, ought still less to be
described.

Some clumsy rope-dancers, awkward wrestlers, stupid buffoons, and female
figure-dancers, fill up the intervals between one comedy and another. Among
these last, whose merit, certainly, neither lies in the elegance of their step,
nor propriety of their action, but who give infinite pleasure to the Turks by
that talent which is their characteristic; a young girl, between ten and twelve
years old, distinguished herself greatly; and when at the end of every dance,
she according to custom went round with the plate to receive in money, the
value of those agreeable ideas which she had raised in the company, the Turkish
lords put her as it were up to auction, sticking sequins on her forehead, to
prove their good wishes. A sequin is a piece of gold so light, that putting it
on the forehead, it will stick there for some time, and it is customary with
the Turks to recompense in this manner the agility of their dancers. The price
of this slave, whose figure was not extraordinary, amounted to twelve purses or
seven hundred and fifty pounds; which were given for her to the merchant, by an
old molloch or lawyer.

At the feast of Tchiragan or Tulips, so called, says Baron Tott, because it
consists in illuminating a garden, and this flower being that which the Turks
most admire, the gardens of the haram are laid out in a most superb taste.
Vases of every kind, filled with natural and artificial flowers, are brought
for the occasion, and add to the splendor of an illumination, caused by an
infinite number of lanterns, colored lamps, and wax candles, in glass tubes,
reflected on every side by mirrors disposed for that purpose. Shops erected for
the rejoicing, and furnished with different kinds of wares, are occupied by the
women of the haram, who represent in proper dresses, dealers, and offer the
goods they contain for sale. The sultanas, whether sisters, nieces, or cousins
of the emperor, are invited by him to partake of this amusement; and they as
well as his highness, purchase in these shops, trinkets and toys, of which they
make each other presents; extending likewise their generosity to the women of
the Grand Signor, who are admitted to this diversion, or who occupy the shops;
and the dances, music, and other recreations prolong the entertainment, till
the night is far advanced, which spreads a kind of momentary gaiety over a
place, seemingly, in every other respect, devoted to sadness and discontent.

Besides the amusements of the seraglio, the Grand Signor frequently diverts
himself in hawking or hunting. Once every year there is a grand hunting party
appointed. A large track of country is then enclosed, to such an extent, says
Le Brun, as would take up several days to ride over. The inhabitants of all the
towns and villages, where it lies, are also required to give their aid and
assistance. By this means the game is surrounded and brought into a very
confined circle. The Grand Signor then ascends some eminence, and has the
pleasure of seeing it knocked down with bludgeons, which is sometimes not very
easy, especially if there are plenty of wild boars among the game.

The ordinary hunt is held every week, during the winter particularly, and
lasts from morning to night. The prince attended with a large retinue of fifty
or sixty of his household, besides his huntsmen, hunts generally, as we do,
hares and foxes; but sometimes wolves, and at others unhoods his falcons, in
quest of pheasants and partridges.

When the Grand Signor goes to any of his country seats, he generally travels
in a kind of coach, so contrived that those ladies he takes with him can have
the pleasure of viewing all external objects, without being seen themselves.

Their coaches are not at all like ours, but much more convenient for the
country; the heat being so great that glasses would be very troublesome. They
are made a good deal in the manner of Dutch stage-coaches, having wooden
lattices painted and gilded; the inside being also painted with baskets and
nosegays of flowers, intermixed commonly with little poetical mottos. They are
covered all over with scarlet cloth, lined with silk, and very often richly
embroidered and fringed. This covering entirely hides the persons in them, but
may be thrown back at pleasure, and thus permits the ladies to peep through the
lattices. They hold four people very conveniently, seated on cushions, but not
raised.

The sultan, when he wants to make the common people believe he has no fears,
goes out incognito in a hired boat, with only two or three attendants. I have
seen him come out in this manner from a back door of his garden, says Lady C.
just after his fleet had sailed; a fire the night before was calculated to
renew his fears, if he had lost them. But here, it is known when he sallies
forth without guards or ceremony. It is like children who sing in the dark, to
make their nurses believe that they are not afraid.

Traveling is cheaper in Turkey than in any other part of the world, on
account of the small expense of horse-hire, and the cheapness of provisions;
and particularly to Christians, who have only to apply, through the medium of
their ambassador, to the officers of the Port, who will grant them a Firman
from the Grand Signor, by which, nearly all their traveling charges are borne
at his expense. There are no stated posts in Turkey; but at the distance of
three or four leagues, there are houses of entertainment, and horses stationed
for the Grand Signor's couriers, and those persons to whom he gives these
Firmans, or orders.

When a nobleman or gentleman having a Firman, arrives at one of these stages,
there are persons ready to take charge of his baggage and horses, while he
refreshes himself, and provide, him with fresh ones. There is always some
refreshment to be had at these places; so that let a traveller arrive at
whatever hour of the day or night he pleases, he is certain of being well
entertained.

As for the caravanseras, or inns, where those travelers stop, who have no
Firman, they are to be met with at proper distances, in almost every town or
village. Those in the towns, as we have remarked, are magnificently built of
stone, and covered with lead; they are in the form of a square, with a
quadrangle within, and a little piazza, or cloister, in one of the sides, with
cells to lodge in, like those in the monasteries. They are usually furnished
with matts or straw, but no beds to lie on; and the traveller is not only
provided with his lodging gratis, but, in many of them, with his diet; and such
is the hospitality of the Turks, that if a poor traveller has no provision of
his own, he may, without ceremony, sit down and eat with any of his countrymen.

Lord Baltimore gives us the following description of a caravansera in Romania
-- In our journey, says he, we lodged in a large and commodious Khan, capable
of accommodating three or four hundred persons; the entrance was through a
grand stone portal, into a quadrangle, bigger than the Royal Exchange, with a
large fountain in the middle. On each side were apartments without furniture;
one side for the women, and the other for the men. From this quadrangle issued
stables capable of holding 5000 horses. It is entirely built of freestone,
with regular masonry, and the whole covered with sheet lead. It must have cost
an immense sum, and was built through the vanity and devotion of a Grand
Vizier; the Turks as we have already observed, esteeming it an act of piety to
build such inns for the free reception of travelers.

The Turks are accustomed to chew opium, as our seamen chew tobacco, and I
apprehend, upon the same principle. Sailors say it keeps them warm, and it is
well known that persons accustomed to opium, feel a chilliness upon leaving it
off. Being by their religion forbidden the use of wine, and requiring
something, occasionally, to raise their spirits, was the origin of this custom;
and the pleasing intoxication, or insensibility it brings on, with the uncommon
flow of spirits it afterward occasions, has led them to a continuance of this
destructive habit. A Turk will chew as much opium in a day, as would destroy
half-a-dozen men unaccustomed to it: a convincing proof that habit is second
nature, and that what is one man's food, is another man's poison.

Those who have given themselves up to the immoderate use of this drug, are
easily known by the kind of rickets which, in the end, it never fails to
produce. There are shops in a particular part of the city, on purpose for the
sale of it; the lovers of opium go into them, and call for a dish of coffee;
after which they smoke two or three pipes, and then swallow the pernicious
drug, in pills, drinking with them a cup of cold water; after this they take
another dish of coffee, and a fresh pipe, and while this last pipe is in their
mouth, they begin to feel a voluptuous sensation, which thrills through all
their veins, and lulls their senses in such a manner, that they remain in a
state of inaction, with their eyes half open, as if they were between sleeping
and waking. They continue in this sensation two or three hours, according to
the quantity they have taken; during which time they pretend they have tasted
the most sensual delights, it is possible for the human body to enjoy, and that
it is in this state of intoxication their Prophet Mahomet inspires them with
good ideas, and communicates to them his own and the Divine will. The pale and
melancholy figures which these miserable slaves to their intemperate
voluptuousness exhibit, would be sufficient to raise our pity, says Baron Tott,
did not their lengthened necks, their heads turned on one side, their backbone
distorted, their shoulders raised up to their ears, and a number of other
extragavant attitudes which result from this disease, present a most ridiculous
and melancholy picture. Those most used to this pernicious custom, he adds,
will swallow four pills at once, each larger than an olive. An agreeable
reverie at the end of three quarters of an hour, or an hour at most, never
fails to animate these automatons; they throw themselves into a thousand
different postures, but always extragavant and merry. This is the moment when
the scene becomes most interesting; all the actors are happy, and each returns
home in a state of total irrationality, but in entire and full enjoyment of a
happiness, they say, not to be procured without it. Disregarding the ridicule
of those they meet, who take delight in making them talk absurdly, they fancy
themselves possessed of whatever they wish for.

There is one custom, says Lady M. peculiar to this country -- Adoption -- very
common among the Turks, and yet more so among the Greeks and Armenians. Not
having it in their power to give their estates to a friend or distant relation;
to avoid their falling into the Grand Signor's treasury, when they are not
likely to have any children of their own, they will choose some pretty child of
either sex, amongst the meanest people, carry the child and its parents before
the Cadi, and then declare they receive it for their heir. The parents, at the
same time, renounce all future claim to it; a writing is drawn and witnessed,
and a child thus adopted, cannot be disinherited. Notwithstanding this noble
provision, many common beggars have been seen, that have refused to part with
their children, in this manner, to some of the richest among the Greeks; so
powerful is the instinctive affection natural to parents, though the adopting
father is generally very tender, as they call it, to the child of his soul. I
own, says Lady M. this custom pleases me much better than our absurd one of
leaving legacies and estates to persons of our own name; it is much more
reasonable to make an infant happy and rich, whom I educate after my own
manner, brought up in the Turkish phrase, upon my knees, and who has learned to
look upon me with a filial aspect; than to give an estate to one without merit,
or relation to me -- merely because he bears the same name.

The principal recreations of the Turks, are smoking and playing at chess, but
they never play for money, that being contrary to the precepts of the alcoran.
They will likewise listen patiently for hours together, to the stories and
buffooneries of their merry-andrews and juglers. They never, by way of
exercise, walk backwards and forwards in a chamber, or in any public walk, as
is the custom among us, but look upon it as ridiculous, and laugh at the
Christians for so doing. Seeing an Englishman walking up and down a room, one
asked a friend of his, if he was not disturbed in mind.

The diversions of those bred up to a military life are very different. These
consist in shooting at a mark with bows and arrows, at which exercise they are
very expert; they are likewise very adroit in the use of firearms; and there
are some who will hit a mark with a gun at full speed on horseback.

Another diversion is fishing, and the manner in which they fish has something
extraordinary in it: they take this diversion in the night time, and make use
of fire, for this purpose; fastening an iron grate at the end of a stick, and
burning straw on it, or small wood which makes a great blaze; the fish are
attracted by the light, gather round it in shoals, and are caught in a net laid
to ensnare them.

Music also is a customary and most familiar amusement with them. Their martial
music is of the most barbarous kind, enormous hollow trunks, beaten by mallets,
unite heavy noise to the lively and clear notes of little timbrels, which they
accompany with clarinets and shrill trumpets; the tones of which are forced, to
complete the most discordant confusion of sounds that can be imagined.

Their chamber music is on the contrary very soft, and if its monotony of
semi-tones, which is at first offensive, should be condemned, it must be
allowed to possess a kind of melancholy expression, with which the Turks are
extremely affected. A violin with three strings, raised to the pitch of the
guimbard, or viol d'amour which they have adopted; the Dervise flute, sweeter
than our German flute; a sort of drum; a kind of mandoline, with a long handle
and strung with wire; the pipe or flute of Pan; and the tabor, intended to
render the time more exact, compose their orchestra, placed at the end of an
apartment, where the musicians crouching down upon their hams, play melodious
and lively airs, without written music, but always in unison; whilst the
company, in profound silence, become intoxicated with languishing enthusiasm,
the smoke of their pipes, and pills of opium.

Turkish music, adds Lord Baltimore, though very different from ours, is by no
means disagreeable; it consists mostly in unisons. There is a temple in Pera in
which is performed twice a week, the dance of the Dervises, one of the most
extraordinary ceremonies to be seen any where: Christians are admitted to a
sight of it, the Turks esteeming it so delightful a performance, as to induce
every one who sees it to turn Mohammedan. Seven or eight Dervises, with high
conical caps and a kind of long petticoats, narrow at top and broad at the
bottom, enter a large circle, and after having bowed to their president, begin
to turn round in a certain measure to music, that at first plays very slowly,
but increases by degrees to the utmost rapidity, whilst the Dervises accelerate
their motions in like manner, and continue it for about twenty minutes, without
being the least giddy.

We shall conclude our account of the character, customs and manners of this
famed people of the East, from Lord B. Those who delight in fine paintings,
carving, fine furniture, Grecian architecture, the Roman classics, in the
various labyrinths of medicine, in respect shown to them, in politeness,
gallantry, gazettes, operas, plays, concerts, and assemblies; or those who
would learn a regular exercise from the Prussian infantry, the admirable
construction of French fortifications, the great science of navigation from an
English navy, or profound knowledge in almost any thing whatever, will not find
their account in Constantinople, or any place near it.



CHAP. X. Births, Marriages, and Funerals.
THE Turks have a notion that when a woman leaves off bringing forth children,
it is because she is too old, let her face say what it will to the contrary.
This opinion makes the ladies so ready to give proofs of their youth, which is
as necessary here, in order to be a received beauty, as it is to produce proofs
of nobility, to be admitted a knight of Malta. They do not content themselves
with using the natural means, but fly to all sorts of quackeries, to avoid the
scandal of being past childbearing, and often destroy themselves in so doing.
Without any exaggeration, says Lady M. all the women of my acquaintance have
twelve or thirteen children; and the old ones boast of having had five and
twenty or thirty, and are respected according to the number they have produced.
-- When they are with child it is their common expression to say, they hope God
will be so merciful as to send them two this time; and when they have been
asked how they expected to provide for such a flock as they desire? they
answer, the plague will certainly kill half of them; which indeed generally
happens, without much concern to the parents, who are satisfied with the vanity
of having brought forth so plentifully. What is most wonderful, is, the
exemption they seem to enjoy from the curse entailed on the sex, that of
bringing forth children with labor and pain; they see company on the day of
their delivery, and at the fortnight's end return visits, and dress themselves
out in all their jewels and new clothes. There are no professed midwives,
neighbors assisting each other in these kind offices.

At the first symptoms of an approaching labor in the Seraglio, the Vizier,
the Mufti, and the grand officers, civil and miltary, are sent for to wait the
moment of delivery, in the hall of the Sopha, which is the intermediate
apartment that separates the Harem from the rest of the buildings, occupied by
the Grand Signior and his household. Immediately after the delivery, the Kislar
Aga comes out of the Harem with the infant, to present it to the great officers
of state, who draw up a certificate of its birth and sex; after which the guns
of the Sopha are fired, and these are repeated by those on the cape of the
Seraglio, and at Tophana. To these different salutes succeed those of the
Custom-house, the Fleet and the Tower of Leander.

Marriage among the Mahometans, is only a civil act or contract entered into in
the presence of the Cadi or judge, who, in this case, officiates only as a
common notary. There is no religious ceremony performed on this occasion, nor
is the bride even required to be present. The father or some of her relations
appear in her behalf, and this ceremony through custom has the force of law.
The portion as well as the paraphernalia, which are objects of the most
importance are registered in this instrument; which secures the return of them
to be made in case of divorce. After the contract is signed, the relations of
the bride bring her with great ceremony to her husband's house, who undresses
and puts her to bed.

A very remarkable circumstance in the Turkish marriages is that the wife never
brings a portion to the husband, but the husband on the contrary assigns one to
his wife. This marriage portion cannot be registered in the marriage contract,
because it is only stipulated, and not payable except in case of the death of
the husband or of a divorce. In this it differs from the Kapin which becomes
due at the expiration of the term prescribed by the contract. This is so true,
that when a woman demands separation from her husband on account of
ill-treatment, or for want of a proper maintenance, she must give up her
portion in presence of the judge, and pronounce the following form of words,
usual when such a divorce is obtained: Nikiahum khalal, bachum agad; i. e. "My
portion resigned, my person free." If the husband solicits the divorce, he is
obliged to allow his wife her portion, her clothes, and her jewels, and she
then restores him the contract in presence of the judge.

They have likewise an inferior kind of marriage which they call Kapin. This
contract is likewise made before the Cadi, but it is only for a limited time,
and a sum of money is stipulated to be paid by the husband to the woman, if he
puts her away at the expiration of the time. This species of marriage was
instituted for the convenience and pleasure of strangers and travelers. The
Turks are allowed seven of these wives, but few of them will have more than one
or two on account of the heavy expenses attending them. Their other wives are
their women-slaves, and of these every man may have as many as he pleases; and
the children he has by them are considered as legitimate, and have as much
right to their father's inheritance as any of the rest, if he enfranchises them
by his will; otherwise they remain slaves to the eldest by the lawful wife: but
if a Turk takes a slave to his bed, and she has children by him, he is not
allowed to dispose of her again, but she becomes one of his family. A Mohammedan
may marry women of any religion under the sun, provided there are books written
or printed in its favor: even the eunuchs are allowed to marry, and several of
them have many wives, Mahomet himself having set the example. A Turk is allowed
four legitimate wives, and he is limited to this number rather from economy
than the rigor of the law; for as he is obliged to make a settlement upon each
at his marriage, the expense would be insupportable.

The Turkish laws forbid maids and married women to unveil to any man, but the
husband, or relations within a certain degree. A Turk therefore marries the
daughter of his neighbor or his widow without knowing her. He can only
determine by the report of his own women, or some person by whom she has been
seen.

They relate a pleasant story of a man who, as is usually the case, not having
seen his wife till after his marriage, and finding her far from handsome, two
or three days after their nuptials, when she desired him to name the persons
who were to have the privilege of Namaharem; that is, of entering her Harem;
(this is generally restricted to the father, uncle, and brothers of the married
lady) that she might not endeavor to conceal herself from them, returned for
answer, "I give you my free permission, my dear, to show yourself to all the
men in the world, except to myself."

On a moment's reflection we shall perceive that this law of Namaharem cannot
be so scrupulously observed among the common people, as by those whose
situation places them more at their ease. The artist may call in the assistance
of his eyes to direct his choice, when the want of fortune renders his right to
a plurality useless. Misfortune almost always meets with something by which it
is consoled. It is only the abuse of happiness that is destitute of every
alleviation.

Plurality of wives is of this latter kind; it leads to extravagant expenses.
By whom can they be supported, except by those who having been engaged in
commerce are become rich by their economy, or by such as have arrived at
opulence by their employments. The fortune of these persons is merely personal,
which avidity accumulates, and terror conceals; which luxury dissipates and
opportunity renews. The uncertainty of their situation increases their haste to
acquire and to squander.

The Turks rarely leave large fortunes to their children. Sums sufficiently
considerable to serve for portions would be capable of exciting the avidity of
the Sultan; and he would easily find pretenses to sieze them, by searching into
the means by which they were acquired.

A Turk therefore is seldom rich enough to maintain any considerable Harem,
till by the favor of his patron he has arrived at employments of great
authority, and where this authority becomes lucrative in proportion as it is
abused.

But, mixed with other young persons, whom the same ambitious expectations have
attached to the same master; reduced to live among men only; carried away by
the violence of his passions; separated from the women, though excited by
knowing they are near; if such a Turk is obliged to cede to nature, he cannot
but wander from her laws.

We have already seen that the Turkish women who cannot be procured but by
marriage, nor known till that has taken place, are equally reduced to live
entirely among themselves. What therefore must be their education? Born in
opulence, they are either the daughters of a legal wife, or of a slave, the
favorite of the moment. Their brothers and sisters have had different mothers,
who were no other than slaves in the same house. Without any employment but
that furnished by jealousy; scarcely able to read or write; or if they read,
reading nothing but the alcoran; exposed in their hot baths to all the
inconveniences of a forced perspiration, so frequently repeated as to destroy
the freshness of their complexion, and the grace of their features, even before
they are marriagable; indolent through pride, and frequently mortified by the
efficacy of the means employed before their eyes to please their proprietors;
what gratification can such women says Baron Tott be supposed to give their
husbands?

It is very remarkable that the concubinage of the husband does not make the
wife jealous, as in Christian countries; however, the husbands are obliged to
caress their wives once a week at least, if not they may lodge a complaint with
the Cadi, and demand a divorce if they think proper: complaints of this kind
are very frequent among the lower class of people; as to the better sort they
know how to indemnify themselves, by more agreeable and more secret means. The
dishonor attending the infidelity, wantonness and lubricity of Turkish wives,
does not fall upon the husband, but upon the relations of the woman who made
the contract for her before the Cadi. The Grand Signor is not obliged to marry,
but the first four women who have children by him are called the Sultanas, his
wives.

Lady M. mentions two other particulars respecting their marriages, worthy of
being remarked: when a man has divorced his wife in the most solemn manner, he
can take her again upon no other terms, than permitting another man to pass a
night with her, and there are some examples of those who have submitted to this
law, rather than not have back their beloved. The other point of doctrine is
very extraordinary. Any woman that dies unmarried, is looked upon to die in a
state of reprobation. To confirm this belief they reason, that the end of the
creation of woman is to increase and multiply; and that she is only properly
employed in the work of her calling, when she is bringing forth children or
taking care of them, which are all the virtues that God expects from her. Our
vulgar notion that they admit not women to have souls, is a mistake. It is
true, they say, women are not of so elevated a nature, and therefore must not
hope for admission into the paradise appointed for the men, who are to be
entertained by celestial beauties. But there is a place of happiness destined
for souls of the inferior order, where all good women are to be in eternal
bliss. Many of them are very superstitious, and will not remain widows ten
days, for fear of dying in the reprobate state of a useless creature. But those
that like their liberty, and are not slaves to their religion, content
themselves with marrying when they are afraid of dying. This is a piece of
theology very different from that which teaches that nothing is more acceptable
to God than a vow of perpetual virginity.

It is very pleasant, says Lady M. to observe how tenderly the admirable Mr.
Hill, who so gravely asserts he saw in Sancta Sophia, a sweating pillar, very
balsamic for disordered heads; as well as all his brethren voyage-writers,
lament the miserable confinement of the Turkish ladies, who are, perhaps, more
free than any ladies in the universe, and are the only women in the world that
lead a life of uninterrupted pleasure, exempt from cares, their whole time
being spent in visiting, bathing, or the agreeable amusement of spending money,
and inventing new fashions. A husband would be thought mad that exacted any
degree of economy from his wife, whose expenses are no way limited but by her
fancy. It is his business to get money, and hers to spend it, and this noble
prerogative extends itself to the very meanest of the sex. Here is a fellow who
carries embroidered handkerchiefs on his back, to sell, and as miserable a
figure as such a mean dealer may be supposed, his wife will scorn to wear any
thing less than her cloth of gold, her ermine furs, and a very handsome set of
jewels on her head. It is true they have no places of amusement but the
bagnios, and there can only be seen by their own sex; however, it is a
diversion they take delight in.

At one of these, adds Lady M. I had an opportunity of seeing a Turkish bride
received, and all the ceremony used on that occasion, which made me recollect
the epithlamium of Helen, by Theocritus, and it seems to me that the same
customs have continued ever since. All the female friends, relations and
acquaintances of the two families newly allied, meet at the bagnio, and several
others go out of curiosity, to the number of two hundred women. Those that were
or had been married, placed themselves round the rooms on the marble sosas; but
the virgins very hastily threw off their clothes, and appeared without any
ornament or covering than their own long hair braided with pearl, or ribbon.
Two of them met the bride at the door, conducted by her mother and another
grave relation. She was a beautiful maid of about seventeen, very richly
dressed, and shining with jewels, but was presently reduced to a state of
nature. Two others filled silver gilt pots with perfume, and began the
procession, the rest following in procession to the number of thirty. The
leaders sung an epithalamium answered by the others in chorus, and the last two
led the fair bride, her eyes fixed on the ground with a charming affectation of
modesty. In this order they marched round the three large rooms of the bagnio.
It is not easy to represent the beauty of this sight, most of them being well
proportioned and white skinned; all of them perfectly smooth, and polished by
the frequent use of bathing. After having made their tour, the bride was again
led to every matron round the rooms, who saluted her with a compliment and a
present; some of jewels, others of pieces of stuff handkerchiefs, or little
gallantries of that nature, which she thanked them for by kissing their hands.

We shall now entertain our readers with the ceremony of marriage among the
Armenians, at Constantinople. The lady is equally invisible as among the Turks,
and the contract is made by the friends and relations of the parties. On the
day fixed for celebrating the nuptials, one of their priests goes to the house
of the young lady, and gives the nuptial benediction. The bride is closely
veiled during the whole time of the ceremony, and when over, the husband
returns home; at night the bride is brought to his house, surrounded by her
relations, where she is conducted to an an apartment filled with women, to
partake of an entertainment; the bridegroom entains her male relations with
those of his own in a chamber apart. When the entertainment is over, they all
go, except the bridegroom, and pay their compliments to the bride, to which the
lady makes no reply; for was she to utter a syllable, she would be deemed a
bold, wanton hussy; after this she is conducted to the nuptial chamber, where
the bridegroom is ready to receive her. She still continues veiled; and after
they have placed her on a stool, the company withdraw. As soon as they are
alone, the bridegroom approaches the bride, and, whilst she is trembling with
fear, lifts up her veil; it is then for the first time, he beholds a face that
is to be familiar to him for life. Whatever may be his sentiments, he no doubt
conceals them, and according to custom, embraces her; no return is made to his
caresses, but by a downcast look, or by tears; and as soon as possible she
gives the first token of her submission, by rising to fill a glass of wine, and
hand him some sweetmeats; this done, she fills another for herself, the first
she presents to her husband, and then, touching each others glasses, they drink
to their mutual happiness. The bridegroom then undresses his bride and himself,
and the moment they are getting into bed, contrives to give the signal for a
concert of music, which is immediately performed in the antichamber,
accompanied by voices, in honor of Hymen.

We will close these details of the marriage-ceremony in Turkey, with Lady
Craven's observations on their Harem, or apartment for the ladies. The Harem,
says she, is sacred, even to that rapacious power which has seized the master's
life, only because he was too rich. It may be said that in Turkey likewise,
women are safe from an idle, curious, impertinent public; and what is called
the world can never disturb the ease and quiet of a Turkish wife. Her talents,
her beauty, her happiness or misery, are equally concealed from malicious
observers -- Of misery, unless a Turkish woman is beyond exception
unreasonable, her portion cannot be very great; for the wife whose wretched
husband earns subsistence by carrying water, or burdens, sits at home bedecked
with jewels, or goes out as her fancy directs, and the fruits of his labor are
appropriated to her use. In great houses, the wives of the Turks, who compose
the train of a Turkish husband, are destined to be subservient to the state of
the first wife, and she treats them as she pleases in her Harem.

It is not the custom among the Turks to make enquiries about their wives, and
it would be considered the height of indecorum in Turkey, to ask a Mohammedan
how his wife did.

The art of medicine is very little known among the Turks, being a very healthy
people they need few physicians, and it is not without some risk that they
exercise their skill, in this country; for should their patients die under
their hands, they may be accused of having killed them. This excellent state of
health which they enjoy, is attributed to their frequent use of the baths, and
their extraordinary temperance. In common disorders, such as the headache,
toothache, pains in the ear, etc. they usually scarify, lance or burn the part
affected, and this generally proves a sovereign cure. If we may credit Lord
Baltimore, the chirurgical art does not seem to be in the least countenanced in
this country.

There are few physicians, fewer apothecaries, and no surgeons here, says his
lordship, the inhabitants therefore, he concludes, can know little of the
horrid mischiefs occasioned by a certain disease we labor under in great
cities.

The first physician to the Grand Signor, says Peysonnel, is honored with the
title Hekim Bachi Effendi, and wears the large round turban called Eurf, the
badge of the first class of the law professors. No physician whatever, native
or foreigner, can exercise that profession without his consent, nor open a shop
without his license. It may appear surprising to our readers to hear of
physicians opening a shop, but such is the established custom at
Constantinople, and throughout all Turkey. It is the practice of all the
physicians who are Greeks or Jews, and even many Europeans, who are almost all
apothecaries likewise. The Grand Signor in his indispositions frequently
consults European physicians, who, when they are fortunate enough to obtain his
confidence, often acquire an influence in matters foreign to their profession;
but they are not allowed to administer any remedies to the Sultan, without the
consent, and even presence, of the Hekim Bachi, to whom the care of the
sovereign's health by right belongs.

Those dreadful stories told of the plague, says Lady M. have very little
foundation in truth. I own I have much ado to reconcile myself to the sound of
a word, which has always given me such terrible ideas, though I am convinced
there is little more in it than in a fever. As a proof of this we passed
through two or three towns most violently infected. In the very next house
where we lay, two persons died of it. Luckily for me, I was so well deceived
that I knew nothing of the matter; and was made to believe, that our second
cook had only a great cold. However we left our doctor to take care of him, and
they both came to us afterward in perfect health, and I was then let into the
secret, that he had had the plague. There are many that escape it, neither is
the air ever infected. There can be no doubt it would be as easy a matter to
root it out here, as out of Italy and France; but it does so little mischief,
they are not very solicitous about it, and are content to suffer this one
distemper instead of our variety, which they are utterly unacquainted with.

Lord B. likewise, at the very beginning of his remarks on Constantinople, has
words to the same effect; and first, says he, I can assuredly affirm that the
plague there is not so dangerous as we imagine, nor do I look upon it more
contagious than other epidemic fevers; besides, mankind perish by such various,
invisible and unknown infections, that the diseases incident to peculiar
countries, should never prevent a person of sense from visiting or residing in
them.

The smallpox, which used to be so fatal in this country, is entirely harmless
in Turkey, by the invention of ingrafting, which is the term they give to
inoculation. It is a set of old women there, who make it their business to
perform the operation, which they do every autumn, in the month of September,
when the great heat is abated. People send to one another to know if any of
their family has a mind to have the smallpox; they even make parties for this
purpose, and when they are met, commonly fifteen or sixteen together, the old
woman comes with a nut-shell full of the matter of the best sort of smallpox,
and asks what vein they please to have opened. She immediately rips open that
they offer to her, with a large needle, which gives no more pain than a common
scratch, and puts into the vein as much matter as can lie upon the head of her
needle; she then binds up the little wound with a hollow bit of shell, and in
this manner opens four or five veins. The Greeks superstitiously open one in
the middle of the forehead, one in each arm, and one on the breast to mark the
sign of the cross; but this has a very ill effect; all these wounds leaving
little scars, and is not done by those that are not superstitious, but who
choose to have them in the leg, or that part of the arm that is concealed. The
effect which this ingrafting produces, is nearly similar to the effect it has
in England, (and it is to her ladyship alone we owe this salutary custom having
been introduced into this country.) The children, or young patients, play
together all the rest of the day, and are in perfect health to the eighth. Then
the fever begins to seize them, and they keep their beds two days, very seldom
three. They have very rarely above twenty or thirty in their faces, which never
mark; and in eight days time they are as well as before their illness. Where
they are wounded, there remains running sores during the distemper, which is no
doubt a great relief to it. So many thousands undergo this operation every
year, that they may be said to have the smallpox here by way of diversion, as
they take the waters in other countries. There is no example of any one dying
of it.

If a Mohammedan is very seriously indisposed, it is the custom in Turkey, as in
other countries, for the priests to go and pray by him, and if they find his
end approaching, to join with his friends in recommending a cheerful submission
to the Divine will, against which it would be impious either to murmur or
repine. On his death the women in the Harem set up such hideous howlings, as if
they were in the agonies of despair. Preparations are then made for his
interment, which are much the same as with us; except that the color of the
coffin in which the body is placed, is painted differently, according to the
profession of the person to be interred; if he was a soldier, it is red; if of
the family of Mahomet green, and that of any other person, some writers say
white, others black.

Mourning, says Baron Tott, is not worn by the Turks; but although this manner
of paying respect to our deceased relations is certainly of little consequence,
the haste with which they bury their dead certainly is not so. It seems, says
he, as if this nation, naturally so grave and plegmatic, possessed activity in
that business alone. They scarcely wait five or six hours, before they perform
this last duty to their kindred; and are not prevented by any fear lest those
they bury should not be actually dead. The misfortunes which result from this
practice are scarce ever known. Yet I have seen a Turk, says the Baron, taken
up again; who, recovering from his insensibility, had strength enough to cry
out, and make himself heard; but he was still in some danger of becoming the
victim of ceremony, or rather of the dislike which the Judge and Iman,
discovered to restore the dues they had already received.

To this abominable hurry in burying their dead, the Turks who carry the bier,
add an extreme quickness of pace; Mahometans believing the deceased to remain
in a suffering state till the end of this ceremony.

Relations and friends attend the corpse to the grave, the priests marching in
the van, the women in the rear, who every instant set up such piteous cries,
beating their breasts and tearing their hair, as if sorrow had bereaved them of
their senses. When they come to the burial place, the body, contrary to the
custom of this, and other Christian countries, is taken out of the coffin and
put into the grave, for the Turks never bury their dead in a coffin. It is
deposited in the ground in such a manner, that the corpse may sit upright to
undergo the examination of the angels, which are believed to resort to the
grave to enquire into the faith of the deceased. The mourners then depart. When
the grave is filled up, the poorer sort of people erect a stone over the head
of the dedeceased, for the angel that examines them to sit upon.

After the interment has taken place, the women make frequent visits to to the
tomb of the deceased, where they pass several hours at a time. The friends and
relations likewise go there to pray to God, that he would be pleased to deliver
him from those pains, which the black angels might inflict; and, calling him by
his name, they cry, "Fear nothing, answer boldly;" for they have a notion that
the soul returns again to the body, and that as soon as any person is interred,
two black spirits, of an hideous form, come into the grave and take hold of the
deceased, by the tuft of hair, which the Turks always leave on their head for
this purpose, and interrogate him in these words. Who is thy God? What is thy
religion? Who is thy prophet? To which he is to reply, My God is the true God,
my religion is the true religion, and my prophet is Mahomet. But if the
deceased is self-convicted on account of the number of his sins, then his guilt
makes him cry out through fear, Thou art my God, and my prophet, and I believe
in thee. Upon this reply, they say one of the evil spirits gives him such a
blow on the head, with a bar of iron, as drives him seven fathoms deep in the
earth, from which the other immediately draws him up again with an iron hook;
but no sooner is he drawn up, than the first knocks him down again, and so they
continue tormenting him till the day of judgment.

But if he returns a favorable answer, the two black spirits instantly leave
him, and two others whiter than snow come in their place, and seat themselves,
one at his head, and the other at his feet; where they stay by him till the day
of judgment. Many persons bring victuals and drink to the graves, and leave it
there for travelers, that they may pray for the dead, for whose sake it is
there laid.

The interment of the Grand Signor does not differ from that of others, except
in the importance of the great officers who accompany the body to the mosque.
Of the latter, it is customary for each emperor to build one; and in the court
of the mosque a cupola is constructed, under which the corpse is to be
deposited; and, it is is to be remembered, that the Turkish emperors are buried
with the same celerity as their subjects.

The burial places for the dead are very numerous, and, in a manner, surround
Constantinople and Pera, forming very shady romantic walks, as the trees and
grave-stones are huddled together in a confused manner, both presenting great
variety to those who ramble among them. It is difficult to give a just idea of
the beauty of the trees; which, particularly in these burial places, are never
touched; they spread therefore, and grow in the most luxuriant and graceful
disorder. There are no fences to restrain or mark the form of their burial
places, some extend a mile or two, and if it was not for one disagreeable
reflection, would be as pleasant to a foreigner, as a Turk; but when it is
considered, that it is pestiferated earth we tread on, that every fresh grave
may contain a body rotting with the plague, and likewise the slight manner in
which it is covered with earth, from the hurry it is thrown in, no one can,
with prudence, remain for any time among them.

The Turks, who are predestinarians, and therefore imagine that it is to be
fate, and not the precaution taken by Christians, which prevents their falling
a sacrifice to this fatal disorder, walk unconcerned under the dangerous shades
of trees that hang over their deceased neighbor.

It is surprising, says Lady M. what a vast quantity of land is lost this way
in Turkey. Sometimes I have seen burying places of several miles, belonging to
very inconsiderable villages, which were formerly great towns, and retain no
other mark of their ancient A TURKISH CEMETERY.
grandeur, than this dismal one. On no occasion do they ever remove a stone
that serves for a monument. Some of them are costly enough, being of very fine
marble. They set up a pillar with a carved turban on the top of it, to the
memory of a man; and as the turbans by their different shapes, show the quality
or profession, it is in a manner putting up the arms of the deceased. Besides
the pillar commonly bears an inscription, in golden letters, reciting their
virtues. The ladies have a simple pillar, without other ornament, except those
that die unmarried; who have a rose on the top of their monument. The
sepulchers of particular families are railed in, and planted round with trees.

The sight of the tombs surrounded by cypresses, and the immense extent of
ground, peaceably occupied by the dead, so near to where the living reside,
fills the mind with a kind of gloom, which is often inexpressibly pleasing.
Alas! are we born then to die! And was not Homer in the right to compare men to
the leaves of the trees! None but the Turkish burial places are allowed to be
ornamented with cypresses. Those of the Jews, Armenians and Greeks, are
surrounded with mulberry trees and poplars.

Their tomb-stones are of marble; and thus it is that the finest marbles of
antiquity announce now the remains of some obscure individual. I have seen,
says Bisani, Cadies walking about them melancholy and disconsolate; and am told
that the Greeks and Armenians are accustomed to spend their festivals among
them, after having been to weep there the day before. This custom of planting
trees round the tombs is very ancient; for we read, even as far back as Homer,
that Aelion's tomb was adorned with elms.

CHAP. XI. Commerce, Manufactures, and Coins.
THE Turks carry on very little commerce, beyond the confines of the Ottoman
Empire. One branch of their trade consists in their navigation of the Black
Sea, with two kinds of vessels, called Caiques and Voligues: the cargoes of
these differ, according to the parts for which they are designed. The trade to
the coast of Asia, in the vicinity of the river Fasti, is confined chiefly to
wood for fuel, and for building. For the European coasts, the cargoes consist
of coals; and from more distant territories, near the Danube, they bring corn,
beeswax, and cattle.

The Crimea abounds in oxen, small cattle, wax, honey, butter, and corn; all
necessary articles for which, there is a constant demand to supply the market
of Constantinople, and a considerable profit is derived from this traffic. But
the most considerable branch of trade is that carried on by the Mediterranean
sea, in a species of Turkish vessel, called Cayrines. Drugs and coffee are
transported by the Red Sea, to Suez, and from thence upon camels to Cairo; from
Cairo they are forwarded, by the Nile, to Dalmatia, Rousset or Alexandria; and
from thence to Constantinople. The woollen cloths, worn by the common people,
are fabricated at Salonica. Fine cloths were formerly manufactured at
Constantinople; but that manufactory is lost, either through want of skill in
the conduct, or, which is more probable, through the intrigues of the French
agents. Camblets are made in Natolia, a country abounding in fine wool: the
rich silk girdles, and other beautiful silk manufactures, are wrought at Scio,
in the Archipelago. The cotton stuffs are manufactured at Alexandria and
Cyprus, and linen cloths in almost every part of Turkey.

All the islands of the Archipelago furnish wines. Tinos has its silk
manufactories. Damascus and Aleppo their soap manufactories, and silk fabrics;
Diarbekir its red morocco. The prices of all these commodities are regulated by
custom, and the discretion of the dealers, who are in general satisfied with
small profit.

Thus we see the principal commerce of the Turks consists in transporting the
commodities, of the different provinces of the empire, either in their natural
or improved state, from one place to another: they are not willing to run any
risk or hazard for greater advantages. In general, they are idle,
superstitious, and haughty: idleness confines them in their shops and
warehouses; superstition and pride prevent their leaving their own country, to
travel into others inhabited by infidels, to the hazard of losing the Mohammedan
faith, and corrupting their pure morals. This is the language of the chief part
of the Turks, in other respects persons of the highest reputation for integrity.

With respect to the conquered nations, a great many of the Greeks are employed
in the commerce of the Black Sea, and there are some hundreds of Caiques solely
belonging to that people. The rest who have not the means of carrying on this
branch of traffic, employ themselves in the retail trade, with the foreign
merchants established at Constantinople.

The Armenians, on the contrary, never risk any thing by sea; and the most
considerable trade they carry on consists in jewels, which they buy rough of
the Europeans, and fashion to the Eastern taste; a traffic that produces them
very considerable advantages. The Jews do not engage in navigation themselves,
but risk great capitals, carrying on some commerce with all the nations of
Europe. Many of them are physicians, and exercise their function by permission
of the physician of the Grand Signor, who is almost the only constituent of the
University of Constantinople; and on whom all those who exercise the medical
skill depend, except the European physicians. A great number of Jews are
brokers for all kinds of merchandise. The Persians formerly carried on a very
great traffic at Constantinople, but that trade is now very much on the decline.

The trade from England to Turkey is carried on by a limited number of English
merchants, dependent on the Turkey company of London, who consign to them, by a
single annual convoy, such articles of commerce as they judge may be easily
sold or exchanged: the quantity is always in proportion to the wants of Turkey,
and they take particular care never to over-stock the market. This precaution
prevents their experiencing any loss from a glut of merchandise, and supports
that great repute which the merchandise from England has always enjoyed. The
chief articles of their trade are lead, tin, watches; all kinds of clock-work,
hard ware, woollen cloths, spice and china. The attention of those persons,
says Habesci, who are deputed as factors for this trade in Turkey, and who
carry it on with an exact observance of the rules and laws which they are to go
by, is worthy of imitation. Further, it consists chiefly of articles of great
value, the sale of which is certain. This is the reason that all the English
houses established in Turkey are rich. An English merchant who died lately at
Pera, (Mr. Parker) left immense riches to his heirs. His country seat alone was
valued at 400 purses, (each purse L 108. 6 s. 8 d.) by the Captain Bashaw, who
desired to purchase it. At Constantinople there is no merchandise to load back
to England: the ships are in general obliged to take in their loading at
Smyrna, which consists in raw cotton, wool, Bursa silk, and a great deal of
Angora hair for camblets. The caravans which used to come from Persia to
Smyrna, with great quantities of silk, have ceased coming, since the Russians
have been allowed a free navigation on the Caspian Sea; from whence they
transport this silk to Astracan, and from thence it goes to Petersburgh. This
is the reason that the English, at present, very frequently fall short in their
cargoes homeward, both at Smyrna and Aleppo.

The Dutch trade is very much on the decline to what it used to be; and that
which they have now in any of the ports of the Levant, is but very trifling.
The private interest of individuals, has ruined the Dutch trade in Turkey;
which, though formerly very flourishing, is now nearly annihilated.

The commerce which the Russians carry on at Constantinople, and other parts of
Turkey, though but little noticed, is by far the most advantageous, and
considerable, of the European nations; it consists principally of skins of
every kind, to make Turkish pellisses. All kinds of people, of every age, and
sex, wear pellisses in Turkey. The sale which the Russians have in them is
incredible; and some bear very high prices. Black fox and ermine skins are more
esteemed than any of the rest; and a small quantity of these two species of
furs, amounts to a very large capital. The Russians take nothing in return but
Morocco leather, oranges, lemon juice, and dried fruits. It is on the Black Sea
that this trade is carried on; and as by the last treaty of peace the Russians
have permission to pass into the Mediterranean, they go to the islands of the
Archipelago, in order to load back with wine, and the other products of those
islands. No other nation whatever has been able to obtain the permission of the
Port, to trade upon the Black Sea; though the Court of France has made
repeated efforts for that purpose.

The Germans have for a long time been endeavoring to establish a trade with
the Turks, which might be accomplished three ways; by land, by the Danube, or
from Triest, down the Adriatic. Those articles, however, with which they could
trade to any advantage, are of great weight or bulk, and consequently must
incur larger expenses in the freight; besides being already imported by other
nations into Turkey in great abundance, as iron, cotton, steel, etc. etc. and
from the quality of these merchandises it may be deduced, that their trade with
the Turks will ever be of little importance.

It is but very lately that the Swedes and Neapolitans have sent ministers to
the Port, in the characters of Envoys extraordinary, with a view to establish
a commercial intercourse with Turkey. The Swedes have just made a beginning by
sea. A single ship arrives every year at Constantinople, laden with iron, and
some other trifling products of the barren soil of Sweden. But there are a
great number of Swedish vessels employed in transporting the Turkish
merchandise to different parts of the Ottoman Empire; and particularly to the
coast of Barbary, from whence a very considerable profit is derived; though the
Swedes, who navigate these vessels, are to be considered as carriers, rather
than merchants.

The Neapolitans carry to Turkey, a species of silk stuff worked at Messina,
and by the Turks called Zebins; for which there is a great demand, on account
of their beautiful appearance, though they are very slight, and quickly change
color. The returns are small, and of little consequence; the balance,
therefore, is in their favor.

But the richest, and by far the most regular of all the European commerce
established in Turkey, is that of the French. The value of their commerce with
the Turks is estimated to exceed twenty millions of Turkish piastres a year;
which, admitting a Turkish piastre to be equal to four shillings, makes above
four millions sterling, annually. The principal article of their commerce is
cloth, of which they send out three sorts, all very acceptable to the Turks,
the price being always lower than that of English cloths; the colors also are
more lively and durable.

This commerce is carried on by French merchants established even in the very
villages of Turkey; they depend, however, on the chamber of commerce at
Marseilles, and can remain only a limited time, after which they must return to
France; and give up their business to others. No individual among these
merchants can dispose of his cloths without the prior knowledge, and permission
of his ambassador or consul, because the sale must be made in equal proportion
among them, by these means all underminings and deceptions are prevented, that
might sap the foundation of so valuable a branch of trade.

There is a general bank for the whole French nation, established in every
seaport of the Levant, to which all the French merchants who reside in Turkey
pay a certain tax, in proportion to the cloth they sell, and which is no great
burden upon them, considering their great profits. From the funds of these
banks many advantages arise, among others, that of insuring the capitals of the
merchants in France; because, in cases of bankruptcy, part of their loss is
refunded to them, from the common stock. It likewise defrays the extraordinary
expenses of the nation, for the hotels of the French ambassador or consul, in
Turkey, and for the maintenance of many poor families there. By this
institution, the economical administration finds its account there, and the
nation its interest, tranquillity and honor. The French likewise derive another
advantage which consists in transporting merchandise, on account of the Turks,
from one seaport to another. And, in every little seaport and small town, the
French have a consul, or vice-consul, to promote and protect their commerce.

Baron de Tott, who was sent a few years since, by the French ministry, to the
Levant, as Inspector General of the French commerce in Turkey, made several
alterations in these particulars. This Baron de Tott, says Habesci, was as much
in the interest of the Turks as of his own country, and, consequently, was well
paid by both parties. He passed for a man of great abilities, but, adds
Habesci, I had the opportunity of studying his character, during three months,
at Smyrna. Being employed to inspect the commerce of that seaport, his time
was more deeply engaged in paying his court to a Greek lady, who was married to
a very unfortunate, but very honest, Frenchman; and this lady made the Baron
commit a number of follies very unworthy of an Inspector General. The French
consul at Smyrna, M. Peysonnel, whose remarks on the Turks we have already
frequently had occasion to introduce, and which appear to carry with them great
discernment and candor, seems to have fallen the victim of Baron de Tott's
endeavors to please this lady; M. Peysonnel, adds Habesci, merited rather to
fill the place of the Baron, than to be dismissed by one so much his inferior
in abilities. Good luck, and certain other circumstances, of which he is not
ignorant, occasioned his promotion. In France, such promotions are common, as
well as in other countries where their manners are adopted.

The Venetians were, formerly, the richest European Merchants established in
Turkey. But other nations have since turned to their advantage the disgraces
and losses which fell upon them by their frequent wars with the Port. The
manufactures which have been established in different parts of Europe, have
likewise been of great prejudice to them; but what injured their commerce most
materially, as well with the Turkish as with other states, was the navigation
of the Dutch, and other powers, to the East Indies, by the Cape of Good Hope.
At present, their commerce with the Turks is confined to a small quantity of
gold stuffs, and a species of damask called Damasquetti, which is worn by
almost every family in Turkey.

There is no doubt that the commerce of the Europeans with Turkey is so very
disadvantageous to Turks, as to be one cause of the decline of the empire. The
merchandise carried into Turkey is very valuable, and what is exported not the
least so. The merchants, therefore, established in Turkey, having no articles
of commerce to export, equal in value to what is imported into the country, are
obliged to make their returns in gold, money and diamonds, and by these means
the country is impoverished. The most valuable Turkish coin is the Foncli
ducat, of very fine gold, equal in value with the Venetian ducat. Four or five
millions of these ducats, says Habesci, are sent every year out of the kingdom.
One may judge, therefore, how many millions of these pieces of gold must have
gone out of the country for these two last centuries. There is no law to
prohibit the exportation of specie from the Turkish dominions. The eunuchs, the
vizier, the great officers of state, and even the Grand Signor himself, all
contribute to ruin the empire; for they are fond of accumulating great riches;
they are continually receiving money, and scarcely ever parting with it again:
it follows then that these great sums, which are so hoarded up, must
considerably impede the circulation of money in Turkey.

The tyranny of their government destroys that happy security, which is the
mother of arts, industry and commerce; and such is the debasement of the human
mind, when borne down by hardships and oppression, that all the great
advantages of commerce, which nature has as it were thrown under the feet of
the inhabitants of this country, are neglected. The Turks command the
navigation of the Red Sea, which opens a communication with all the riches of
the Indies. Their capital is seated on a neck of land that separates Europe
from Asia, and communicates on the South with the Mediterranean sea; which
opens a passage to all the European nations, as well as to the coast of Africa.
The same strait communicating northwards with the Black Sea, opens a passage,
by means of the Danube and other rivers, into the interior parts of Germany,
Poland and Russia.

Yet, in this extensive empire, with all these advantages for a foreign
commerce, and where all the commodities, necessary for manufactures of every
kind, are produced; the Turks content themselves with working up, on a very
confined scale, the few trifling articles of cottons, carpets, leather and
soap. The most valuable of their commodities, such as silk, a variety of drugs,
and dying stuffs, they generally export raw, and unmanufactured.

It appears from Peysonnel's strictures on Baron Tott, that Lord Baltimore errs
in supposing Constantinople to be a free port. The duties indeed are very low,
which makes it next to a free port; being not more, according to Peysonnel,
then two per cent, and all merchandise is besides estimated much inferior to
its real value. It is to be observed further, adds Mr. P. that this duty once
paid, every European merchant provided with a Tasham, or quittance from the
officer, may convey his goods to any part of the empire, without paying any
thing more. No extortions are practiced in the customs, on account of the
Tariff, and disputes with the officers are very rare.

We should not omit to mention the lenity with which the laws in Turkey, treat
those who deal in contraband commodities. When any such goods are seized and
carried to the custom-house, the proprietor may claim them again, on paying
double duty.

The Turks seem likewise to have shown great generosity to the French
merchants, at a time when the plague made great ravage in the capital, in
suffering their merchandise to be immediately conveyed to the magazines,
without undergoing any examination, accepting the customs according to their
own declaration. Of this very honorable generosity, some of the French
merchants had the meanness to take advantages, notwithstanding the menaces of
their ambassador, by daring to give in unjust accounts to the chief
commissioner of the customs, who, though he had too much sense to discover the
fraud, disdained to make any complaint. We are happy in seeing no charge of
this kind made against our own nation.

The Turks can never make any great progress in the fine arts, while they
adhere to the dictates of their religion, as the laws of Mahomet forbid their
sketching the human figure in any shape. They paint flowers, however, and other
ornamental figures, to admiration. There are also shops in Constantinople,
where they engrave cornelians, and other sorts of stones: the Turks have,
likewise, an art of polishing their horn, so as to make it look like
tortoise-shell, and this they manufacture into spoons, it being contrary to the
precepts of their alcoran, as we have before observed, to make use of silver
ones. Their sabres are also in very great esteem all over Europe; the temper of
their steel, in all articles of their cutlery, being superior to that of all
other countries. Another principal manufacture which they have unrivalled, in
point of excellence, is their Morocco, or Turkey leather. Their embroideries,
in gold and silver, on this leather, are worked with great taste and elegance.
They particularly excel in their pocket-books, which are embroidered all round
the edges in a very superb manner. There are in Galata, a great number of shops
which deal only in this article, so much are they in esteem by all foreigners
who resort to Turkey. To those arts and manufactures, on which the Turks deign
to bestow any time or attention, like the ancient Greeks, from whom they are
said to have descended, they infinitely surpass all other nations in the
beauty, skill, and excellencies of their workmanship.

The gold and large silver coin, of all countries, is current in Turkey. The
proper coins of the country are, first, those of gold; namely, the altines, or
ducats, which are about seven shillings each, and the zechinos, worth about
nine shillings. Secondly, of the silver, the zeloti is worth about two
shillings and twopence farthing; the krip nearly a shilling; the grosh is
worth about threepence; the para worth about three aspers, and the aspers,
(says Busching,) about one penny halfpenny. Tott calculates them at not more
than a farthing. A purse contains five hundred rix-dollars, or one hundred and
eight pounds six shillings and eight-pence. In their commerce, they reckon by
piastres, as we do by pounds sterling. A piastre, in Turkey, is equivalent to
four shillings English.

The silver coin, in Turkey, used formerly to be at such a very high standard,
that the remittance of it to Europe, was found more advantageous than any other
article of exportation from the Levant. A French merchant having satisfied
himself, by an assay, of the justness of this speculation, converted the
produce of all the merchandise he had sold into piastres and zelottes, which he
melted down, and remitting the silver to France, found the profits fully answer
his expectation. His success encouraged him to continue this practice, and he
might have made an immense fortune by it, had he not divulged his secret, but
not being able to resist the vanity of boasting of his lucky thought, others,
taking the hint, presently imitated him. Their example was soon followed by all
the French and foreign merchants, not only (...) Constantinople, but in all the
seaports of the Levant; and this destruction of the silver coin, so eagerly
practiced by the European merchants, who traded to Turkey, diminished the
currency to such a degree, that the Port perceived it, and found out the
cause. The Ottoman ministers then resolved to reduce the coin to so low a
standard, that no person was afterward tempted, either to melt it down, or to
send it abroad.

CHAP. XII. Of their Religion.
THE Turks are of the Mohammedan religion, and appropriate to themselves the
name of Moslemin, which has been strangely corrupted into Muselman, signifying
persons professing the doctrine and precepts of Mahammed. A great difference of
opinion prevails among the Mohammedan doctors, with respect to the
interpretation of these precepts; Mahometism is divided into as many sects as
Christianity; and its first institution as much neglected and obscured by
interpretations. But none are so opposite and contrary to each other, as the
comments of Omar and Ali, who in fact, instituted two religions, the followers
of which became bitter enemies to each other. The Turks in general have adopted
the explanation of Omar, and the Persians that of Ali. The creed of Omar being
then the established religion of the Ottoman Empire, we shall confine ourselves
here to that alone.

The first article of their faith is, that there is but one God, and that
Mahomet is his prophet; no Turk must expect eternal salvation, unless he firmly
adheres to this doctrine. There are also five precepts of practical duty
enjoined to constitute a good Muselman, which are called the fundamentals of
their religion. The first is ablution; the second prayer, which must be
performed five times every day; the third, is the observation of the fast of
Ramadan, or Ramazan; the fourth, is to give alms indiscriminately, and lastly,
to perform, at least once in their lives, the pilgrimage to Mecca.

To these principal and essential articles, a great number of others are added
of an inferior obligation; such as abstaining from pork and wine, keeping
Friday holy, as we do Sunday in our church, and in being circumcised.

Ablution is the first of their indispensable duties. It is divided into three
distinct species. The first is that performed preparatory to entering a Mosque,
or before prayers. The manner of performing it is this. -- They begin with
washing both hands, repeating at the same time, these words -- "Praised be God
who has created clean water, and has given it the virtue to purify us, and
render our faith illustrious." After this, they take some water in their right
hand three times, and wash their mouths, saying, -- "I pray thee, O Lord, to
let me taste of that water which thou have given to thy prophet in Paradise --
more odoriferous than musk -- whiter than milk -- sweeter than honey, and which
has the power to quench, for ever, the thirst of him who drinks of it." This
done, they snuff a little water up the nostrils, and say, "Grant, O Lord, that
I may smell the sweet odours of Paradise, and enjoy them, and suffer me not to
breathe those of hell." Then they wash their faces, three times, all round, and
behind their ears, saying, "Make clean my face, O Lord, and that of those who
obey thee; that they may resemble thy prophets in the day of judgment." Water
is then taken with the right hand, and thrown up to the elbow three times,
repeating, "Give me, O Lord, at the last day, the book of my good works into my
right hand, and pardon my offenses." The same operation being performed with
the left hand, during the repetition of a similar sentence. The crown of the
head is then washed, repeating, "Let thy mercy surround me, O Lord, when I
shall appear before thee." Water is now taken up with both hands, and the
orifice of the ears washed with the thumbs, repeating, "Make me, O Lord, one of
those thy servants, who hearken to what is written in the sacred books, and
obey thy commandments." Finally, with all the fingers they wash the neck,
saying, "Deliver me, O Lord God, from hell, and from the chains put round the
neck and feet of sinners." The feet of course are washed during this
ejaculation, but it is sufficient to be done externally over the sandals, or
short boots which they wear, and the ceremony finishes with, "Hold me up
firmly, O Lord, and suffer not my feet to slip, lest I fall over the bridge
into hell." The Turks believe there is a bridge to pass over, in order to get
to paradise, as narrow as the edge of a knife, and that hell lies under this
bridge. The prayer which concludes this general ablution is, "Accept my
prayers, O Lord, pardon my sins, receive the offerings I have made, and do not
permit the prayers I have said, to be fruitless."

The second species of ablution is used with the warm bath when they rise in
the morning, after they have passed the night in their Harams.

The third consists in ablutions after easing the necessities of nature; some
are even so scrupulous to perform this ceremony after breaking wind.

With respect to public prayers, as the alcoran orders them to be said five
times in the space of twenty-four hours, the first begins at daybreak, -- the
second at noon, -- the third, exactly between noon and the setting sun, -- the
fourth, immediately after sun set, -- and the fifth, an hour and a half
afterward. Each mosque having turrets, persons appointed for that purpose, as
has before been remarked, ascend them, and cry out with a loud and
intelligible voice at each stated time, that it is the hour of prayers. The
veneration, attention, and true spirit of devotion, with which the Turks
perform their prayers, from first to last, is highly praiseworthy. Nothing is
capable of diverting their attention, which is carried to such a superstitious
extreme, that if they happen to cough, or sneeze, they begin all their prayers
again, and go over them with the greatest patience, as often as such an
accident happens. The different positions of their bodies, and their
contortions, whilst praying, are numberless. They will extend their arms, place
their hands upon their ears, bend their bodies, kneel, prostrate themselves,
and sometimes put their foreheads to the ground, like the Indians and Chinese.

The Turks, says Le Brun, very seldom miss these five hours of prayer, but
especially the first, and the last two; for should it be discovered, that out
of the five times enjoined them for prayers, they do not perform them, at least
three times, they would be severely punished. Nor is there any dispensation
that will avail them in this particular. If they cannot go to the mosque, they
are obliged to say their prayers wherever they are, and even when on a journey,
they must allight from their horses at the stated hours of prayer. If they are
traveling in company with a caravan, the master of it makes a halt, and
turning toward Mecca, either calls out himself, or orders some other person to
give notice, that it is the hour of prayer, upon which, all the Turks allight,
and begin their prayers. Christians who are with the caravan, are permitted to
keep on their horses, but they are not allowed to go forward, till the others
have finished their prayers; unless they are the more numerous party, for in
that case, the Turks themselves turn out of the road to pray.

The third article of a Muselman's faith, is an observance of the fast of
Ramazan, so called from the name of a lunar month. From break of day, whilst
this month lasts, the Turks neither eat, drink, smoke, or smell any odor; in
short, they do nothing to administer pleasure to the five senses till sunset.
Such is the law, and those who transgress it, are punished very severely; even
with death, if the offense has caused scandal. Formerly, in the height of their
religious zeal, the violaters of the fast of Ramazan, had melted lead poured
down their throats; at present, either the Turks are more strict, or the zeal
of their superiors is abated; for this barbarous punishment is no longer heard
of. But it may be easily conceived, that the night is turned into day, during
the Ramazan, for the Turks are of too indolent a disposition to work when they
do not eat, so that they sleep through most of the day. It is said, in the
alcoran, that during this month, they may eat, and drink, all night long, till
they can discern a white thread from a black, by the morning light.

The fourth article of their creed, obliges them to give the tenth part of
their income to the poor. But this precept is not so well observed as the
former, by those who have considerable revenues; and this is one reason, among
others, why the opulent Turks endeavor to conceal their riches from the public.

The fifth, and last article, is the pilgrimage to Mecca, which is held to be
of such importance, that he, who from, bad health or, the state of his affairs,
cannot undertake it, though the law may exempt him, thinks himself very
unfortunate.

The pilgrims for Mecca, set out from Constantinople in the month of May, and
repair to Damascus, where they join the other pilgrims, from Natolia and Asia.
Afterward, they unite with those that come from Persia, Egypt, and other parts
of the Ottoman Empire. The whole number commonly amounts to sixty thousand;
though Sir James Porter makes their number amount to two hundred thousand; but
this is a great error, and must mean to include all the trading, and other
travelers, who either for safety, or convenience, travel with the caravan;
yet, reckoning these with the suttlers and slaves, the whole will not amount to
this enormous number. At a small distance from Mecca, there is a mountain on
which the pilgrims offer up sacrifices to God, in honor of Mahomet, by
sacrificing some sheep upon altars, the flesh of which is given to the poor.
The day after the sacrifice, the pilgrims, before they ascend the mountain
again, strip off their usual clothing, and put on the coarsest dress that can
be conceived; to show they renounce the pomp and vanities of the world, and
aspire only to paradise. They are obliged to walk round the outside of the
temple seven times; and then going out of the city, by the gate they entered,
every one takes up a stone, and slings it to a certain distance, to denote his
contempt for all other religions. In the temple of Mecca, they kiss the black
stone, which fell from heaven, to point out the spot on which the Temple should
be built: it was originally white, they tell you, but being repeatedly polluted
by the lips of sinners, it has long since been changed to a jet black. Its
virtue consists in absolving those who kiss it with devout faith, from all
their sins.

The temple of Mecca is magnificent and rich; in the center, is the tomb of
Mahomet, which the common people believe to be suspended in the air. The Grand
Signor sends every year, to this temple, five hundred Venetian ducats, an
alcoran bound in gold, and a rich gold embroidered stuff, to cover the tomb of
the prophet. When the new covering is put on, the old one is cut into small
pieces, and delivered to the faithful, who preserve it with the greatest
veneration.

According to Peysonnel, the Sultan sends two coverings, one to Mecca, and the
other to Medina, together with the other royal offerings, designed for those
holy places. These are carried by the Surra Emini, or Intendant of Alms, who is
likewise to take charge of the money arising from legacies bequeathed by
individuals. The first covering, is intended for the Beith Oullah, or house of
God, at Mecca, which is the grand object of the pilgrimage, and is commonly
called, the Kiaba, or Cube, because its form is a perfect cube. This covering
is a black woolen stuff without any ornament. The Surra Emini, who carries the
new one, brings back the old, and presents it to the Emperor, who distributes
the pieces of it to the grandees, and his favorites. These pieces are held in
the highest veneration, and those who obtain them, give orders, that at their
burial, their heads shall be covered with them in the coffin; and care is taken
to let these precious fragments appear on the outside, over the rich stuff
which covers the bier, in the funerals of the great. The second covering is of
silk and gold, and is carried to Medina, to the tomb which it is designed to
envelop.

Devotions being ended, the pilgrims return to Damascus, in the same order they
arrived. Many of these pilgrims make repeated journies to Mecca, not for
devotion, but to purchase merchandise, which is there to be bought very cheap.
And as it is permitted for any one, who cannot perform the pilgrimage in
person, to send a deputy; there are others who make a traffic of these pious
deputations. They are maintained, and fed by those who send them, for whom they
perform the customary prayers and sacrifices; these people generally take great
care to conceal the name and quality of their employers, by which stratagem,
one deputy will obtain a great number of these devout commissions. In short, it
is a profession that affords a very comfortable livelihood.

The caravans of pilgrims to Mecca, used to be held sacred by the Arabs, and
even by common robbers. However, a few years since, the caravan, from Persia to
Mecca, was attacked. It was customary for the caravan to take conductors from a
particular tribe of Arabs, encamped in the environs of Bassora, whose chief
received a certain sum for protecting the caravan to Damascus, and this tribe
was one of the most powerful among the Arabs. It happened, in the year 1776,
that in the caravan, from Bassora to Damascus, there was the daughter of Kerim
Kan, a powerful Persian prince, accompanied by a train of ladies, all very
rich. The chief of the tribe, observing the great splendor and riches of this
caravan, and the quality of the pilgrims, demanded a more considerable sum than
usual to protect them, which they refused to pay; and addressed themselves to
the chief of another tribe, who agreed to protect them for the same sum they
had formerly paid. The caravan accordingly set out from Bassora, but when it
had reached the heart of the desert through which it was obliged to pass; the
chief of the first tribe, with his followers, suddenly fell upon the Arabs who
guarded it, of whom they made great slaughter; the pilgrims were then all
stripped, the daughter of Kerim Kan not excepted, and after having plundered
the caravan, the travelers were afterward left to pursue their journey to
Damascus, where they arrived in a most wretched plight. I saw one of the
company, a merchant, says Habesci, who, but a few days before, was in
possession of five hundred thousand piastres, which is between twenty and
thirty thousand pounds, reduced to the necessity of asking charity. This
adventure made the fortune of a Frenchman who resided at Tripoly, in Syria; for
the princess being unable to borrow money from the Turks, from their enmity to
the Persians; the Frenchman generously offered her his purse, which she
accepted; and when she returned home, Kerim Kan remitted him, not only the
original sum he had advanced, but double interest, and such magnificent
presents, that the French merchant was enriched for the remainder of his life.

Kerim Kan sent ambassadors to the Port, to complain of this daring outrage,
and demand satisfaction; it being the duty of the Grand Signor to provide for
the safety of the caravans that go to Mecca, while they are upon his
territories; but the Port only gave evasive answers, and alleged, that the
Arabs were rebels, and that the tribe who had committed this outrage, inhabited
the territory of Bassora, which was subject to the government of Bagdat, it
therefore belonged to the Bashaw of that city to indemnify him. Kerim Kan,
enraged at this answer, marched his troops to Bassora, which he took, and
plundered; the riches he amassed, by this expedition, were immense; and not
being satisfied, he directed his course to Bagdat, which he likewise besieged,
and kept blocked up six months; when the Grand Signor agreed to give him ample
satisfaction, and a peace was concluded. I was at Constantinople, says Habesci,
when the Ambassador from Kerim Kan arrived, and observed, he had audience of
the Grand Signor, without loss of time. -- To return to the religious tenets of
the Turks, it remains only to remark, that circumcision is not enjoined by the
alcoran, but is only a ceremony which the Turks perform as an ancient custom,
derived from their ancestors.

With respect to the precepts, which forbid the drinking of wine, and eating of
pork, I can take upon me to affirm, says Habesci, that they have only a nominal
existence. Friday, which should be considered as a day of particular devotion,
is now converted into a day of recreation. And it is, on this day, that the
public houses of entertainment are filled with Turks, who eat and drink to
excess, of every thing that is forbidden. The Turks, at Constantinople, adds
the same author, drink more wine than is consumed at Paris, and the importation
of this article alone, yields a larger revenue, than any other branch of
commerce whatever.

We scarce know how to credit this assertion, that wine is not prohibited by
the alcoran. Lady M. in her remarks on the religion of the Turks, begins with
observing, "it is certain, we have but very imperfect accounts of the manners,
and religion of this people. This part of the world being seldom visited but by
merchants, who mind little but their own affairs; or travelers, who make too
short a stay, to be able to report any thing exactly of their own knowledge.
The Turks are too proud to converse familiarly with merchants, who can give no
better account of their ways here, than a French refugee, living in a garret in
Grub-street, can of the court of England. I had the advantage, she adds, of
lodging three weeks, at Belgrade, with a principal Effendi, that is to say, a
scholar, and an intimate daily conversation with him, gave me an opportunity of
knowing their religion, and morals, in a more particular manner, than perhaps
any Christian ever did. This man, she says, made no scruple of deviating from
some part of Mahomet's law, by drinking wine with the same freedom we did. When
I asked him how he came to allow himself this liberty; he made answer, that all
the creatures of God are good, and designed for the use of man; however, that
the prohibition of wine was a very wise maxim, and meant for the common people,
being the source of all disorders amongst them; but that the Prophet never
designed to confine those who knew how to use it with moderation; nevertheless,
he said, that scandal ought to be avoided, and that he never drank it in
public. This is the general way of thinking amongst them, and very few forbear
drinking wine, that are able to afford it."

It appears therefore, from this extract, taken from Lady M. that wine is
prohibited by the Turkish law; notwithstanding its being drunk to such excess,
as affirmed by the former writer.

Le Brun likewise gives the reason why it was prohibited; that Mahomet, in
passing through a village, observed great rejoicing at a wedding, and that wine
was the occasion of the mirth, which made him drink it very copiously. But that
returning back, the next day, by the same road, he saw the marks of a great
deal of blood having been spilt; and conjecturing that those persons, whom he
had seen so convivial together the day before, had fallen out and wounded each
other, he forbid the free use of wine, and recommended his followers never to
drink of it in future, but by way of physic.

The grand festival of the Turks is the Bayram, corresponding to the Easter of
the Christians. It begins the moment the new moon can be discovered, which
succeeds that of the Ramazan. Happy is the man who can first discover it, for
which he is amply rewarded by the Mufti, or Grand Visir, and the tidings are
immediately made public by a general discharge of artillery, and music
instantly striking up. The common people then leave their work, go about
congratulating each other, and betake themselves to different amusements, every
countenance expressing uncommon satisfaction and pleasure during the three days
that this festival continues. The first morning after the new moon, the Grand
Signor sets out, as soon as it is light, for the principal mosque in
Constantinople, attended by his whole court, in the most superb dresses; and as
he passes along, throws money to the populace, and at the mosque sacrifices
three sheep. His return from the place of worship is accompanied with equal
splendour, after which he enters the divan chamber, and seats himself on the
throne, to receive the compliments of the Grand Visir, and all the officers of
state, with the whole body of ecclesiastics; who all prostrate themselves at
the foot of the throne, crying "May the days of the Sultan be happy!" The last
person who pays his respects, is the Agha of the Janissaries, who, on his
return home, is attended by a retinue as splendid as that of the Grand Signor.
Every Turkish lord receives the same compliments that day from his inferiors.

The Sultanas who are shut up in the old seraglio, have the liberty, likewise,
on that day, to pay their respects to the Grand Signor, and to visit the
Sultana-mothers; it is, therefore, the pleasantest day, to them, of the whole
year, for they are permitted to walk in the delicious gardens of the seraglio,
and may obtain any little favor they ask of the monarch. The principal
personages of the empire dine, on that day, at the seraglio, on a particular
invitation from the Sultan; but he does not eat with them. Before they partake
of this entertainment, sixteen of the principal officers of state are robed, by
the Sultan himself, with rich pellices, or caftans, a ceremony corresponding
with the investiture of the different orders of knighthood, by the other
princes of Europe. This solemnity ended, the Grand Signor withdraws to the
interior part of the seraglio. Seventy days after the Grand Bayram, there is
another festival called the Little Bayram. The Sultan goes to the mosque, with
the same ceremony, on the first day of this festival, as he does on that of the
other, and sacrifices three sheep; with this difference, that the sheep must be
larger than for the Grand Bayram, and painted of all sorts of colors; they
must, likewise, have the sign of the half moon, or crescent, on them: these
sheep are placed at a small distance from the door of the mosque; it being
required that the Grand Signor should kill one of them with his own hand,
before he enters the mosque. Every person of fortune kills some sheep on that
day, as a sacrifice. The Little Bayram lasts three days, but the sacrifice of
sheep is only on the first; whereas on the Grand Bayram, every day is a day of
sacrifice.

The most magnificent and the largest edifices at Constantinople are the
mosques. They are almost all built upon the same plan, having a dome and
minarets, that is to say, a kind of turrets from which the inferior Imans call
the people to prayers. At the stated hours appointed for that purpose, they go
up to these minarets; and in those mosques which have none, stand at the porch,
and clapping their thumbs to their ears, call out with a loud voice, in Arabic,
Alla Hecbar, which signifies, "God is great." this they repeat several times,
and then invite the people to prayers; in those mosques where there are several
minarets, filled with people, crying out, altogether, very loud, and in
different tones; so many voices make a symphony very pleasing to the ears of
Mahometans.

Though the voice of these criers does not sound so loud as the ringing of
bells, which is not permitted by their religion; yet, coaches not being in use
in the streets of Constantinople, nor any trades carried on in that city, the
noise of which deafens the ear; their notes, which are generally pretty shrill,
easily pass through all the quarters of the city, and may be heard at a
considerable distance. The good mussulmen take great delight in ascending the
minarets to assist these Imans in their holy office. There are a great number
of these mosques called royal ones, but they are only to be found in the cities
of Bursa, Adrianople and Constantinople, as having been the residence of the
Sultans. The fixed revenues of the principal one, that of St. Sophia, which we
have already so amply described, amount to fifty thousand pounds sterling. The
revenues of these mosques are by no means either equal or certain, as some
depend on pensions from the Sultan, or contributions from the people, and
others on the lands of villages, sometimes of whole provinces. The people
inhabiting places obliged to contribute from the produce of their lands to the
support of the mosques, enjoy very great privileges, among which is an
exemption from quartering of soldiers, or any other person in the service of
the prince. To be sensible of the value of this privilege, it is necessary to
remark, that the military, and other persons employed in the Grand Signor's
service, are very numerous, and almost always in motion; so that the countries
through which they travel, are ruined by them; for they are very oppressive,
and insist on being treated almost as well as the monarch himself.

The mosques founded by private persons cannot confer these privileges, because
they have no revenues arising from land; their whole income arises from the
interest of sums lent, which is eighteen per cent: this privilege of lending
money on interest, being granted only to the mosques and the Jews; for the
Mohammedan laws strictly forbid this way of traffic, in any other instances,
under penalty of losing the principal, if discovered.

To build a mosque, is not a custom followed indifferently by all the Turkish
emperors, since all have not a right, that being only to be acquired by
conquest. The Sultan, before he can build a temple within the walls of
Constantinople, must have gained some victory over the enemies of the empire,
or have extended the Ottoman possessions, and therefore merited the surname of
Gazi, or conqueror. Sultan Mahmoud, who had legally acquired this right by
gaining the battle of Grosca, against the Germans, and taking Belgrade, erected
a very beautiful one within the capital. When he had resolved on raising this
edifice, he procured from Italy, France, and England, the most elegant designs
and models to be found in Europe, proper for his undertaking. From these, that
prince, who possessed great abilities and taste, formed himself the plan of his
mosque, which he showed to the Ulemas, or body of ecclesiastics and lawyers
united. They objected that it more resembled a Christian church than a mosque,
and advised their master to give it a form more agreeable to the Mohammedan
taste, that it might not offend the common people. Sultan Mahmoud, obliged to
give way to the insinuations of the heads of the law, produced a monstrous
mixture of the European and Turkish style, though still magnificent and
elegant. He ornamented the court of this mosque with a superb colonade, the
idea of which was furnished by the church of St. Peter, at Rome, which he
executed in miniature. He employed, in this work, the rich columns that had
formed the peristyle of the ancient palace of the kings of Pergamus, which had
escaped the ravages of time, but were taken down, and removed to
Constantinople. Sultan Mahmoud died before this building was finished; Osman,
his brother and successor, consulted the professors of the law, to know if he
might complete it, and give it his name. The Mufti delivered his Fetfa, or
opinion, in which he declared, that this building not being finished, or
dedicated to religious worship, could only be looked on as an edifice, the
property of which incontestibly vested in his brother, by right of inheritance;
and by consequence, he might take possession of, and complete the unfinished
building, consecrate it by the prayers of the faithful, and give it his own
name. In virtue of this decree, the mosque, though built by Sultan Mahmoud, was
called the Splendour of Osman: by which name, the mosques erected by different
emperors are usually distinguished.

The Mufti is the sovereign Pontiff, he is, at once, the expositor of the law
of Mahomet, he has, therefore, a twofold sovereign authority, in all cases,
religious and civil. His election depends entirely on the Grand Signor, who,
commonly, appoints to this high office, men who are eminent for their integrity
and learning.

When the Mufti is elected, which must be from the order of Moulahs, he is
ordered, by the Grand Signor, to repair to the palace; where he invests him in
his dignity and office, with his own hands, by clothing him with a pellice of
ermine, lined with white cloth; giving him, at the same time, a handkerchief
embroidered with silver, containing a thousand Turkish piastres, in gold. He
then pays a visit to the Grand Vizier, who receives him at the foot of the
stairs, and conducts him to the great hall of the Divan, where he gives him the
seat of honor, and puts another pellice upon him, of ermine, lined with green
cloth: when he departs, the Visir attends him to the door, and orders him to be
waited on by several of his officers, loaded with the rich presents which he is
obliged to make him, upon his election.

The Mufti is held in as much reverence by the Turks, as the Pope is at Rome.
He is not denied the privilege of marriage, though he is expected to make his
residence at Constantinople. His authority is so great, that when he passes a
definitive sentence, the Grand Signor himself never contradicts it. The
difficulties which are proposed to him, and his sollutions, whether as to cases
of conscience, or any other matters are committed to writing. His reply is
generally very concise, consisting only of a simple affirmative or negative, to
which are added these words, "God is the best judge," by which he shows he does
not pretend to infallibility. The Grand Signor has a power of displacing him,
but yet he never ventures to engage in any affairs of importance, without his
consent previously obtained.

Next to the sublime office of Mufti, is that of the Caddilaschirs, or Judges,
of which there are two, one for Romania, and the other for Natolia. Their
jurisdiction extends to military causes, as their title sets forth, for Caddi
means judge, and laschir signifies militia. This office makes a person eligible
for that of Mufti.

To the Caddilaschirs succeed the Moulahs. This body of people, who are the
expounders of the law and religion, in Turkey, furnish many examples in former
times, that, when unanimous, they are entire masters of the people; and can
influence them so as to dethrone the most skilful and vigilant monarch that
ever reigned. They are very numerous, and are treated with particular
distinction by the Sultan.

The superintendants or superiors of the Mosques, are chosen by the Grand
Visir: these are called Imans. Upon a vacancy, the inhabitants within the
district of the Mosque, present another to the Visir, who generally accepts
their recommendation, and of his own authority, without any previous ceremony,
invests him Iman of the Mosque to which he has been recommended. The Mufti has
no jurisdiction over them, but, in civil and criminal cases, they are subject
to the jurisdiction of the common magistrate.

The Emirs may likewise be ranked in the class of ecclesiastics: they are
distinguished from the rest of the Turks by a green turban, the favorite
color of the prophet.

They are eligible to any office in the state, and may aspire to the most
honorable. The privileges they have are very great, and, among others, that of
having any person's hand cut off, who affronts or strikes them. The Turks,
however, have found the means of evading this barbarous law; for when they meet
any Emirs in the street, who are drunk, and have any altercation with them,
which frequently happens, they take off their green turbans, with the utmost
respect, and then give them a good drubbing: the only mark of an Emir being his
green turban, when it is taken off, they pretend not to know them, and this
stratagem secures them from punishment.

An eternity of rewards and punishments is one of the fundamental maxims of
their religion. Yet there are sects among the Mahometans who do not believe in
it. For example, the Giahamites say this eternity is metaphorical, as when we
wish the reign of a prince may endure for ever; and the Giahedites believe that
the damned, in course of time, will be changed into fire, like all other
matters consumed by that element. Among the followers of Ali, there is a sect
which takes its name from a doctor called Alkhathab, who teaches that the
delights of paradise, and the pains of hell, are nothing more than the
pleasures and afflictions of the present life.

It must not be imagined that the happiness promised by Mahomet, is confined to
the pleasures of sense alone; for though the prophet says that true believers
will find in his paradise, gardens on the borders of rivers, where they will
live to all eternity, with women whose youth and beauty will ever remain; yet,
he adds, that besides these delights they will enjoy the sight of God, which
will make them perfectly happy. His hell contains very uncommon objects,
nothing but the heads of devils. An angel, likewise, presides here on the part
of God, and this hell, according to the alcoran, has seven doors, The greatest,
however, of all their misfortunes, in this place, will be their separation from
God.

Predestination is one of the frightful doctrines taught by the alcoran;
viewed, however, under certain aspects it has its advantages. It is to this
doctrine that the Port is indebted for the facility with which such numerous
armies are raised. It likewise tends to calm the useless affliction of a father
on the death of his children, or of a person who has lost all his property by
some reverse of fortune, or his honor, through the injustice of his equals.
The populace who carry every thing to extremes, acts in the same manner with
regard to predestination. During the plague, they will purchase the clothes of
a person who is just dead of this disorder, which they will instantly put on
their back, and say that they can only die of that death which is decreed them
by fate. This doctrine of predestination is very ancient in Eastern countries.
We read in Homer, says Bicari, that the affairs of this world are conducted by
a kind of fatality to which Jupiter himself is obliged to submit, equally with
the lowest of mankind.

The resurrection of the dead is likewise implicitly believed by the Turks. One
of the signs, which are to precede it, say they, is that all the animal
creation will die, that the mountains will fly in the air like birds, and that
the heavens will melt and run upon the earth.

Their ablutions and circumcision are likewise drawn from the ancient customs
of the East. It would be ridiculous to insist that circumcision was not
absolutely necessary in the East, when it is known that there are many people
in Asia who would otherwise be useless to society. And with respect to their
ablutions, the Assyrians according to Strabo, made use of them at all times,
after performing the duties of marriage. The eating of pork was forbidden,
either because it was unwholesome in the country where Mahomet introduced his
religion, or else to make his court to the Jews, who were dispersed in all
those parts where his doctrine was preached.

The Mahometans believe both in the new and old testament. They often cite the
new testament, and will sometimes cite what is not to be found in it; saying
that the Christians have altered the text, because they have retrenched every
thing relating to Mahomet. And the Jews, they add, have done the same by the
old testament.

The Turks bear no enmity to each other, and whenever any disputes arise
amongst them, they always endeavor to be reconciled before Friday, the day of
their Sabbath; being obligated, before they begin their prayers, to declare in
the presence of God, that they freely forgive their enemies; or else they
believe their prayers will not be acceptable.

If persons dispute, or come to blows, in Turkey, notwithstanding all the
entreaties that are made use of to prevent them, any one is at liberty to
separate them, by calling out charoe ulla, that is "by the Law of God," they
are then carried before the Cadi, or Judge, who punishes them for their
obstinacy. For this purpose the offender is laid on his back, and receives two
or three hundred strokes, on the soles of his feet; besides having a fine, of
two or three thousand aspers, levied upon him, for suffering himself to be so
far carried away by his passions.

The severity of this law, has not only restrained the Turks within the bounds
of their duty; but has likewise accustomed them to refrain from swearing, and
profaning the sacred name of God; a practice too common among other nations,
who pretend to be more civilized than the Mahometans. The greatest oath, they
use to attest the truth of any thing is, valla hebilla, which means, "by the
God whom I adore."

The Turks, like the Christians, have their convents and religious orders. The
origin of these institutions, both with respect to the time and cause of them,
is like those of the Roman Catholics, entirely fabulous. The two principal
orders are, the Dervises, and the Santons. I had the curiosity, says Lady M. to
visit one of the monasteries of the Dervises, and to observe their devotions;
which are as whimsical as any at Rome. Their fellows are confined to an odd
habit, which is only a piece of coarse white cloth, wrapped about them, with
their legs and arms naked. Their order has few other rules, except that of
performing their fantastic rites, every Tuesday and Friday; which is done in
this manner. They meet together in a large hall, where they all stand, with
their eyes fixed to the ground, and their arms across, while the Iman, or
preacher, reads part of the alcoran, from a pulpit placed in the midst; and
when he has done, eight or ten of them make a melancholy concert with their
pipes, which are no un-musical instruments. Then he reads again, and makes a
short exposition on what he has read; after which they sing and play, till
their superior (the only one of them dressed in green) rises and begins a sort
of solemn dance. They all stand about him in a regular figure, and while some
play, the others tie their robe (which is very wide) fast round their waist,
and begin to turn round with an amazing swiftness, and yet with regard to the
music, moving slower or faster as the tune is played. This lasts above an hour
without any of them showing the least appearance of giddiness, which is not to
be wondered at, when it is to be considered they are all used to it from their
infancy; most of them being devoted to this way of life from their birth. These
turning round amongst them, some little Dervises of six or seven years old,
says Lady M. who seemed no more disordered by that exercise than the others. At
the end of the ceremony they shout out, "There is no other God, but God, and
Mahomet is his prophet!" After which they kiss the superior's hand, and retire.
The whole is performed with the most solemn gravity. Nothing can be more
austere than the form of these people; they never raise their eyes, and seem
devoted to contemplation. And, as ridiculous as this is in description, there
is something very affecting in the air of submission and mortification they
assume. By a rule of their institution, a Dervise must not eat more than eight
ounces a day.

Those Dervises who are sufficiently impudent to take advantage of the general
ignorance of the Turks, set up for prophets, and prophecy with impunity. If it
happen, that the event justifies their predictions, they are looked upon as
saints, and held in great esteem; nay, those, who for want of success, can pass
only for fools, find admission every where. Nothing can resist their
effrontery; the name of God, profaned by these rascals, says Baron Tott, always
imposes on the superstitious multitude; and I have seen one of them come and
seat himself, insolently, by the Grand Visir, whilst I have been privately
discoursing with him; and people of great consequence kept at a distance. The
fanaticism of the public obliges the most enlightened persons to submit; and
the most eminent Turks have no other means to get rid of this rabble, than by
giving them money; which serves only to make them more troublesome and insolent.

Their principal convent is at Cogni, in Natolia, without the walls of the
city; its circuit is about a mile and an half, and it contains five hundred
chambers, for as many Dervises; but the greatest part are generally from home.
When I visited them, says Habesci, I found but ninety in the convent, the rest
being dispersed throughout the empire; either in other convents, or living
privately with women; for though they are allowed to marry, their wives are not
permitted to live with them in the convent. They are called poor Dervises, but
with little reason, for they take care to provide themselves with all the
conveniences of life; yet, to keep up appearances, their clothing is coarse
and simple; consisting of a shirt made of ordinary linen, a robe, or tunic, of
a dark colored flannel, and a surtout of white woollen cloth; their stomach
and their legs are naked, upon their heads they wear a round cap of camel's
hair, and they have a leather girdle round their waist. They generally have a
chaplet in their hands, and keep constantly turning over their beads,
repeating, at the same time, the name of God. Besides the observance of the
Ramazan, in common with the rest of the Turks, they fast every Tuesday,
Thursday and Friday. The rapidity with which they turn themselves in their
devotions, says Habesci, is so great, that it is impossible to distinguish
their countenances, or their forms; and they do it with so much dexterity, that
it is the most astonishing spectacle in nature. Some of them fall into
extacies, in imitation of their founder; who, when he was exhausted with his
whirling round, fell into swoons, and then had his visions from the prophet, to
found the institutions. They eat great quantities of opium, and are so
stupefied by this drug, as to be almost deprived of reason, and all corporeal
sensation. Some of them are thrown into the same state by wine, and other
fermented liquors, of which they consume more at present, than the rest of the
Turks.

The religious tenets of the Santons, are very different from those of the
Dervises. They hold it as a maxim, that if God permits them to live through the
day; it is that they may make the best of it, which they contend, is by
gratifying their passions. They constantly repeat these words, "Today is for
us, and to morrow for him that shall then be alive." There is neither
austerity, nor hypocrisy in this order of men; for they preach publicly, that
paradise may be as easily gained by making use of the good things of this
world, as by abstinence and severity of manners. For this reason, they think
only of eating and drinking, and spending their time in all manner of
amusements. They look upon the tavern as sacred as the mosque; and hold the
homage paid there to Bacchus, as pleasing to the Divine Being, as that offered
to him in our places of worship.

There is another sect of religious in Turkey, who make charity the basis of
their institution; this they extend even to animals; and one of their principal
concerns is to feed, and take care of, the dogs that are employed in the
streets; they will frequently likewise purchase pigeons, and other fowls, for
the pleasure of letting them fly. There is another order, who do not profess
abstinence of any kind; but whose sole employment is, to sing the praises of
God in Arabic verses. The novices of this order undergo a very rigid noviciate;
they are shut up alone in a chamber forty days, and have no other nourishment,
than twenty-four drachms of dry bread every day. It is only by supporting this
trial, with fortitude and cheerfulness, that a candidate can obtain admission
to the fraternity.

The greatest part of the Janissaries profess the doctrine of another sect,
which discharges its followers from every obligation to attend prayers; the
founder having maintained that they were not necessary to obtain eternal life;
this order, of course, is very pleasing to military people, who are in general
not much disposed for practical devotion. But unfortunately, he is accused of
having propagated the lawfulness of that most unnatural vice; which is but too
much practiced by the Turks of the present age.

According to Peysonnel, all the Turkish monks are divided into two orders; the
Mevlevis, and the Bektachis. The Mevlevis are cloistered, and live together in
convents; though they have liberty to go out, during their hours of recreation.
Those who turn round and howl, belong to the order of the Mevlevis, though they
have different rules; just as the Capuchins, Recollets, and Cordeliers, are all
of the order of St. Francis, though they differ from each other, in their
regulations and habits. The Bektachis have no convents, or fixed habitations,
but wander about. They often attach themselves to the great. I have known
several Pachas, adds the above author, who have taken them with them, when they
traveled; and kept them constantly in their houses, as the Italian Nobles do
their confessors. Some of them are exceedingly acute, active, subtle, and
possessed of considerable wit and information. Many of these Dervises Baktachis
usually follow the army, when it takes the field; and no Orta, or regiment of
Janissaries, makes the least motion to change their garrison, open a campaign,
or perform any ceremony, without one of these Dervises preceding their march.
On such occasions, they generally have the feet, legs, and a part of the body
naked; they throw cross-ways, over their shoulders, the skin of a tiger, lion,
or some other wild beast; and carry in their hand a pike, halberd, or
battle-ax; and as they march, sing verses in praise of the Orta; and offer up
prayers for the glory of their holy religion, and the prosperity of the Turkish
Empire.

The Mohammedan religion, says Habesci, is divided into a greater number of
sects, than any other. The common opinion is, they amount to seventy-two; but
there is reason to believe, they greatly exceed that number.

To be convinced of this, it is necessary to pay particular attention to the
conversation of different Turks, on the subject of their religion; we shall
thereby discover, that almost every individual has a system of his own,
different from his neighbor; so that it is impossible to speak with precision,
of all the Mohammedan sects. The two principal ones, from which all the rest
have sprung, as we have before observed, are those of Omar and Ali; the Ottoman
Turks are disciples of Omar, and the Persians of the latter. The hatred that
subsists between these two sects is incredible. Of their implacability, and the
essential difference* in their religious tenets, it may therefore be expedient
to render a more particular account.

The origin of their reciprocal hatred is very ancient, being derived from the
Persian legislator himself, and arose in the following manner, says Habesci;
Mahomet, in his last moments, having declared Ali his successor, the three
other competitors, upon the death of the prophet, took advantage of Ali's
absence* who was then propagating the Mohammedan faith, on the confines of
Persia, and entered into an alliance to exclude him from the high station, to
which the prophet had appointed him; and by force of arms they set up Abubeker,
as the true heir and successor to Mahomet.

Ali, finding that the last will and orders of the prophet were rendered null,
and his hopes disappointed by this measure, acted nevertheless with great
moderation toward his antagonists. As Abubeker was very old, he satisfied
himself, for the present, with the power he had acquired, at the head of his
army, on the borders of Persia; not doubting, but that after the death of
Abubeker, the dying orders of Mahomet would be obeyed, and he should be elected
supreme chief of the Mussulmen; but he was a second time deceived; for upon the
death of Abubeker, Omar was elected his successor; and was no sooner invested
with the sovereign authority, than he sought for every opportunity, by force of
arms, to oppress and reduce the adherents of Ali, who remained on the frontiers
of Persia, highly exasperated; but unable, with his inferior force, to oppose
the progress of his rival. Thus circumstanced, he had recourse to religious
policy; for, by explaining the precepts of the alcoran, in a manner totally
opposite to the opinions and practice of Omar's party, and boldly maintaining
his to be the true faith of Mohomet, he branded Omar with the opprobrious title
of heretic; and gained a great number of converts; who deserted the standard of
his rival, and fled to him for protection. The charge of heresy was retorted by
Omar and his followers, and both parties condemned each other to the flames of
hell. After the death of Omar, such a formidable force appeared, under the
command of Ali, that he was peaceably raised to the throne; but, instead of
endeavoring to unite both parties, in one common interest, he used his utmost
efforts to crush the doctrines of his predecessor, which had an effect contrary
to what was expected; for the animosity and vengeance of his opponents, took
such deep root, from this ill-timed persecution, that it could never be
eradicated; and, when, it was found that the doctrines of Ali, owing to his
superior influence, prevailed in both the Arabias, in Persia, and in other
adjacent countries; the disciples of Omar grew more zealous in support of the
opinions of their deceased master, and took care to transmit, from father to
son, that mortal hatred which, to this hour, animates both persuasions.

The first great article of difference, in their rituals, respects the chief of
their religion. The Ottomans believe, that the Mufti of Constantinople is the
only supreme infallible head of the church; the Persians believe, the same of
the Mufti of Persia. This difference gave rise to numberless persecutions, and
a swarm of different sects, springing from the same source. The Persians
reject, with horror, three of the greatest doctors of the Mohammedan laws,
Abubeker, Osman, and Omar.

The virulence of these two sects is so great, that both parties have condemned
each other to the flames of hell. The Persians, to enrage the Ottomans as much
as possible, despise the green color, which was the favorite one of the
prophet, and even put it to the meanest uses; making their socks and slippers
of it, that they may tread the color under their feet. They eat all kinds of
meat, and drink wine, without any scruple; but the chief accusation of the
Turks is, that the law of Ali permits one woman to marry several men. The
Persians are likewise commanded by their law, to lay waste, and ruin, the
countries belonging to the Turks; to strip their women quite naked, and to
carry them off to be made slaves. From these principles the Turks conclude,
that it is impossible a Persian should ever become a good and faithful servant;
or ever be converted to the true faith. This persuasion, says Habesci, is so
rooted in the minds of the Turks, that no Persian is ever suffered to enter the
walls of the seraglio, in Constantinople; though persons, professing all other
religions, may be admitted there, and become good Musselmen.

The Turks believe, or affect to believe, that the souls of the Jews, after
their death, are converted into asses, to carry the souls of the Persians into
hell. In fine, they positively maintain that a Turk, who kills a single
Persian, has more merit than in killing five Christians in battle.

A vast number of sects, as we observed before, have sprung from those of Osman
and Ali; which either from their obscurity, or their absurd opinions, do not
merit notice; more especially as they are deemed heretical by the Persians, as
well as the Turks: however, it ought not to passed over in silence, that some
of them acknowledge Christ to be the true Messiah; and approach so near the
Christian religion, that this is the principal cause of their rejection by the
Mohammedan believers.

The Turkish government is well apprized, that many of its subjects are of the
sect of Ali; and among these, there are some who hold considerable civil
employments, and others who may happen to command their armies: besides, the
inhabitants of almost all the frontier towns, on the side of Persia, not only
follow the religion of Ali, but are prejudiced in favor of the Persian
government; because the governors of the Persian provinces are not so
tyrannical as their own. The Turks, therefore, take every precaution to prevent
a rupture with the Persians; who if they were not torn to pieces, by civil
dissertions, would constantly seek some plausible pretext, for commencing a war
with the Turks; partly from inveterate hatred, but more from a desire of
extending their dominions.

By a due attention to the life of Mahomet, and the religion he has
established; it is very clear, that all his precepts may be considered as
political maxims; on the due observance of which, the grandeur and prosperity
of the Turkish government has ever depended. An enquiry then, how far the
modern Turks have deviated, from the original institutes of their founder,
cannot but be highly interesting; as it will lead to an explanation of the
causes, of the present humiliating situation, of a once formidable power; whose
arms were dreaded, in former times, by some of the most respectable states of
Europe, and their alliance courted by others; whereas, in the present moment,
they excite the pity of some Christian princes, the contempt of others, and the
ambition of a third; ready to seize every opportunity to aggrandize itself, at
the expense of its weak, but inoffensive neighbor. Notwithstanding the great
appearance of devotion among the Turks, the principle of whose religion is
Deism; yet its very opposite, Atheism, says Habesci, has generally prevailed of
late years. Let this be a lesson for deists in Christian countries. It is not
in the external observation of the Ramazan, in their ablutions, or in the
pilgrimage to Mecca, that we must look for the present state of religion, in
Constantinople, the seat of the Turkish empire. It is by conversation, with
Turks of distinguished rank and fortune, either in office under government, or
living on their revenues, that we can alone discover the degeneracy of the
present Ottoman race. Some are Pythagoreans; and, firmly believing the
transmigration of souls, would not, on any account, be the death of an animal.
Others are professed Cartesians, who doubt of every thing, and never maintain
any opinion decisively: from persons of this pliant description, the Mufti is
chosen.

The Platonic system has likewise a numerous party, among the professors of the
law, and the Imans of the royal mosques; they believe in the unity of the
Deity, and in the love they ought to bear their neighbors; which makes them
extremely civil and complaisant to strangers. As far as the alcoran agrees with
these principles, they venerate it; but in other respects, they pay no regard
to its numerous absurdities.

But as no people entertain such doubts of their religion as the Turks, it is
not in the least suprising, that they have proceeded one step further, and
embraced atheism. This fundamental error has penetrated the most private
recesses of the seraglio, and infected all parts of the empire. The Bashaws of
provinces, in particular, converse freely upon the system of nature. By the
word Nature, they mean that internal principle which disposes, and regulates,
the conduct of all existent beings; from this principle, they say, the sun,
moon and stars, derive their origin; and from the same principle, man has the
faculty to raise himself upright, to grow, and to bend like the flowers, the
grass, or the trees in the fields.

Some years since a printing press was permitted at Constantinople, which might
have put an end to the national religion of a people, so doubtful and wavering
in their opinions; if a general insurrection, fomented by the doctors of the
law, had not put a stop to it. Forty thousand scribes, who had gained their
living by copying books, and writing all that is necessary to be known in that
city, would not readily submit to a novelty, that was to reduce them to
indigence.

One of the political principles of Mahomet's religion was, to propagate it by
persuasion; and, if that did not succeed, by force of arms; for it was
necessary at all events to increase the number of his subjects. His successors,
and all the different sectaries, adhered strictly to this principle, till of
late years. Though they affected to tolerate religions of every kind, yet they
spared no pains to make them embrace Mahometism. If a man, who had children,
under fourteen years of age, became a Turk, from motives of interest perhaps,
all the family were obliged to follow his example; and, if they pretended that
they were past that age, the Turks would find means to terrify them into a
denial of it. If a Christian or a Jew, had the least amorous intercourse, with
a Turkish woman; upon her bare deposition alone, without any other evidence,
the unfortunate infidel was either instantly put to death, or obliged to turn
Mohammedan.

All those who, in a fit of passion, said they would turn Mahometans, (or if
such an expression escaped them, though it was in a moment of intoxication,)
were afterward put to death, if they retracted their sentiments. A criminal of
any religion, of whatever crime he had been guilty, treason excepted, might
save his life by turning Mohammedan; by these means, their religion has been so
universally propagated, and extended throughout the East; and, even to this
day, it is not unusual to see fifty proselytes at a time, demanding the turban
from the Grand Visir, or the Mufti; but then it is done with a view of
succeeding better in their several arts and trades in Constantinople; for most
of them, in the end, either escape to some christian country, or to mount
Libanon.

The following anecdote from Baron Tott, in delineating the character of an
eccentric prime minister, it may not be amiss here to insert.

Divested, says he, by the natural strength of his mind, of all those
prejudices, with which the Turks are generally deb^ed; this Visir diver^ed
himself, even on the most shocking subjects. It will easily be imagined that
Mahometism itself was not secure from his jests.

A European, one day, appeared at the Port, and signified, more by signs than
by words, that he was a German, and desired to turn Turk. On being questioned
as to his motives for renouncing his religion, he informed the visir that he
was born at Dantzick, and had traveled, with all speed, from thence to
Constantinople, purposely to embrace Mahometism. This resolution appeared too
extraordinary to the visir, for him not to attempt to discover the real motive;
and the candidate being again interrogated, devoutly answered, that Mahomet had
appeared to him in a vision, to invite him to merit the blessings attendant on
Islamism. Is not this a strange knave? said the visir, -- Mahomet has appeared
to him, at Dantzick! To an infidel! Though in the course of seventy years,
during which I have been punctual to my prayers, he has never done me the like
honor. Inform him, dragoman, I am not to be deceived with impunity, that he
certainly has killed his father or mother; and that, unless he will heartily
confess what crime he has been guilty of, I will hang him up instantly.
Terrified at this menace, the traveller confessed he had been a schoolmaster,
at Dantzick, where he had had the misfortune to occasion some disagreeable
suspicions; that the parents of the children, with whom he had been instructed,
had given him a great deal of trouble on this subject; and that the magistrates
likewise, were disposed to show him no mercy: in order therefore to escape
their sentence, and from being informed, that at Constantinople, so much noise
is not made about so trifling a matter, he had come there to change his
religion, and hoped to be soon sufficiently instructed, to contribute to the
education of the Turkish youth. Let him make his profession of faith, said the
visir, and take the new convert to such a mollach, mentioning his name, that he
may provide for him; they were made for each other, I have sent him a
companion; but let them charge the Iman of that quarter, to instruct and inform
them both, that no religion has ever tolerated such practices.

Mahometism having been established by force, it was a maxim never to surrender
a town, in which there was a mosque; and as soon as one was taken from the
enemy, the first thing done was to build a mosque in it, that the Turks might
be the more zealous for its preservation.

In order to inspire the soldiers with more than ordinary courage; they are
made to believe that those, who die fighting against the infidels, are
instantly transported into paradise, and placed by the side of their prophet;
who, from heaven, has been witness to their heroism. And this belief formerly
produced feats of valor.

We will now beg leave to point out the decline of this great empire, which
happens, sooner or later, to all civil societies, by a departure from the
principles on which they were first established. Within the last half century,
we have seen the Turks yield to the superior intrepidity of the neighboring
christian powers; and to the intrigues of the more distant ones, carried on by
their ambassadors at Constantinople. Neither officers nor soldiers, believe
now, they shall go instantly to paradise, if they are slain in the field of
battle, and therefore they fly from before the enemy: in the sea service, in
particular, the Turks can scarce ever be made to stand to their guns.

By land, it is well known, they have given up many towns, both to the Russians
and Germans, in which there are mosques. While Prince Repnin resided at
Constantinople, the Divan gave orders to deliver him all the Russian slaves,
even those who had embraced their religion. Christians who have presented
themselves to the Grand Visir, to receive the turban, have likewise been
refused, for fear of giving umbrage to the ambassador, from the country in
which they were born. Europeans have even been known to have turned Mahometans,
for their personal interest, and afterward to have renounced their religion
again for christianity, notwithstanding which they have been suffered to remain
at Constantinople unmolested. All these circumstances seem to denote, an
approaching revolution in the Turkish system of religion; or a total subversion
of this, once formidable, empire. Perhaps the plan for its annihilation is
already laid, in more than one European cabinet. Russia has just paved the way,
by seizing an extensive, and valuable part of its domains; the Crimea, and the
town and district of Oczakow.

CHAP. XIII. Army and Navy.
THE Ottoman empire was founded by the sword, and it was only by force of arms
that it arrived to that degree of power, which rendered it formidable to the
christian world. The heroic enterprises of the Turkish troops, and the
incredible fatigues they underwent in former times, are convincing proofs that
they were not only, by nature and custom, rendered robust and hardy; but that
they were also endowed with excellent capacities: these accomplishments,
however, could not exempt them from those revolutions, to which all nations are
subject. A relaxation from the rigid discipline, established at their first
institution, has introduced a general corruption: so that they are totally
degenerated, and are no longer the terror of the neighboring countries. Every
military corpse, throughout the empire, is become the mere spurious issue of
what it was in former times.

The military forces of this great empire are, as in other countries, divided
into distinct classes. They consist of infantry and cavalry. To the infantry
belong the Janissaries, the Topeis, the Kombaragis, the Bostangis, the
Mekteregis, the Serigis, and the Levant. The cavalry consists of Spahis,
Zainis, Timariots, Zebiris, Zebganis, and Muclagas. These forces have not all
the same pay. The Zainis, and the Timariots* are paid from such lands as the
Grand Signor gives them, which are in the nature of the old feudal tenures in
christian countries; the rest are paid from the Imperial treasury.

In treating of each class of the Turkish military, we shall follow the
division usually made in other countries, by ranging it under the following
heads: land forces, artillery, and marines.

Of all the Ottoman troops, the corpse of Janissaries, from its ancient
reputation, and the very great number of soldiers of which it consists, was the
most respectable. But, at present, these troops are a reproach to the empire;
no infantry, of any nation in Europe, says Habesci, are upon so despicable a
footing. They are contaminated with every vice, and are consequently
pusilanimous; they are, moreover, composed of the lowest dregs of the people.
Badly clothed, without musket or sabre, and, subject to no discipline, they
are only ready to devour the miserable soup, sent them by the sultan for their
daily food; and to strike terror into the breasts of all Christians, Greeks,
and Armenians, whose business obliges them to pass through the streets where
they are quartered: these they insult with impunity, because no christian is
allowed to make any reply to them. So cowardly were these troops, in the last
war, that of 60,000 who marched from Constantinople for the Crimea, not above
6,000 arrived there.

This subversion of discipline, is partly attributed to the present mode of
enlisting recruits, and the indolent lives they are suffered to lead in time of
peace. Instead of the recruiting parties going into the towns and villages, to
enlist the most robust and comely youths, they will receive any person into the
corpse of Janissaries. Roman-catholics, Jews, and Heathens, are accepted by the
officers on the recruiting parties; if they have but the appearance of youth
and strength, without any enquiries into their principles. The Armenian
patriarch, who resided at Constantinople, during the late war, having created a
suspicion, by some expressions in his sermons, that he was a Roman-catholic,
the Armenians complained to the Grand Visir, and obtained an order to send him
to the galleys; but the patriarch being apprized of his danger, he immediately
sent for a Colonel of the Janissaries, to whom he made known his situation, and
prayed to be enlisted into his company, which was accordingly done the same
day, and he invited the colonel, with the rest of the officers, of his
regiment, to dine with him at his house the next day, which happened to be
Sunday; he officiated as usual, and, upon coming out of the church, found one
party of Janissaries ready to conduct him to the galleys, and another to
protect him; but the former instantly retired, upon hearing from the latter,
that the prelate was a Yengi-cheri, or new Janissary, and their officers joined
the company at dinner, where they were all very merry at the expense of the
Grand Visir, whose order to arrest the partriarch was the subject of ridicule.

The Janissaries are the Ottoman Militia; they are divided into 160 chambers,
or regiments, says Habesci, and each regiment ought to consist of 1000 men: but
at present they do not amount to more than half that number. The proper term is
Jengits^eri, compounded of Jengi, new, and Ischeri, a soldier. These troops
were formerly the flower of the Turkish forces, says Buschin, and were first
formed out of captive christians, by the Emperor Amurath I. They are of a
superior rank to all other soldiers, and are also more arrogant and factious;
and it is chiefly by them that the public tranquillity is disturbed. Forty
thousand of them are kept constantly at Constantinople, for the city-guard, and
to assist the officers of justice; the rest are dispersed in the different
provinces of the empire. Every regiment has its separate chamber or barracks,
and neither women, nor wine, nor any thing that can corrupt their morals,
should enter these chambers, under the severest penalties; but the degeneracy
of the times has destroyed all rigid discipline, and their chambers now are the
sinks of iniquity.

Each chamber has its Odda-Bachi, or Colonel-Commandant, its treasurer, its
standard bearer, and its cook Besides their pay, they have a daily allowance
from the Sultan, of mutton, rice, and butter. They enjoy, however, very great
privileges; and an esteem for their persons, is so thoroughly rooted in the
minds of the common people, that they are generally treated with great respect,
if they do not misbehave themselves very much. The Grand Signor himself is
always a Janissary, and has his name enrolled in one of the chambers; from
which he receives his pay of seven aspers a day. The pay of a Janissary, on his
first enlisting, is one asper a day, which rises afterward, as far as seven,
according to merit.

Before the Bostangis were raised to the rank of body-guards, as a counterpoise
to the power of the Janissaries, the latter were more highly esteemed, and took
more pains to merit it. And it is certain, if they could submit to better
discipline, they might still be formidable; not only to their enemies, but even
to their own sovereigns. For the Grand Signor is very sensible that he reigns
chiefly by the support of this numerous corpse, and that they have it in their
power, not only to dethrone, but even to strangle him. Many have been the
examples, in former times, to demonstrate the truth of this observation. There
is a chief in every province, who commands all the Janissaries in that
district, and who ought to take care that each of them is provided with a
serviceable musket and a sabre. In time of war they fight without order, being
totally ignorant of military discipline. They should, in time of peace, by the
rules of their institution, be daily exercised in trials of strength and
dexterity, to inure them to fatigue, and accustom them to agility.

Baron Tott mentions an instance of this astonishing agility, which he was
eyewitness of, in his journey through Moldavia. We were passing, says he,
through an agreeable valley, with hills on each side, where sheep were feeding
under the care of their shepherds. I was questioning one of the Janissaries who
escorted us, concerning the quality of the wool; you shall judge for yourself,
said he: on this, he spurred his horse through a flock of sheep, gallopped
through the midst of it, selected one of the largest, pursued and overtook it;
stooped, seized it by the fleece, raized it with one hand, and recovering his
position, threw it across the bow of his saddle, and rejoined me full speed. In
vain did I endeavor to make him restore his prize to the owner, or pay him the
value of it; he laughed at my delicacy, and, at night, regaled himself and his
companion, on his booty.

The Agha of the Janissaries, at Constantinople, has very extensive authority;
and in the magnificence of his train, and the richness of his apparel, nearly
equals that of the Grand Signor. He resides in a kind of castle, situated upon
a hill, nearly in the center of the city; his guards are very numerous, and
there are twenty-four constantly watching in a tower raised above the castle,
to observe what passes in the city, and give immediate notice of any fire. If
they fail in their duty, in this particular, their master is involved in
disgrace, and punishment. The rules and orders, in cases of fire, are very
singular; for, if the Grand Signor arrives at any place where there is a fire,
before the Grand Visir and the Agha of the Janissaries, whose business it is to
use their utmost expedition, to prevent its spreading; the Grand Visir is
obliged to pay him a fine of 12,000 gold ducats, and the Agha 5,000 to the
Sultan, and 5,000 to the Visir, if he gets there before him. For this reason,
the guard in the tower, before they cry fire, give notice to the Agha, who has
always three excellent horses in readiness. The Sultan and the Grand Visir
have, likewise, the same number, ready saddled and bridled; so that it is
oftentimes a complete trial of skill in swift riding, to answer a very
benevolent purpose. The late Sultan Mustapha, frequently won the race, because
he strolled about the city in the night, in disguise.

The Agha of the Janissaries, at Constantinople, is also obliged to be ready,
at the door of the mosque, when the Sultan goes to public prayers; to take off
his boots, on alighting from his horse, before he enters the mosque; and, upon
his return, must draw them on, and assist him to mount. After which, he is
allowed to ride by the side of his royal master.

The enrolled Janissaries, according to Peysonnel, are so numerous, that if
their number could be ascertained, it would amount to several millions; for all
men get themselves enlisted that can, being by this enrollment exempted from
certain duties and offices. They are, however, estimated at only forty
thousand; for which reason they are called Kirk Bin Koul, or the forty thousand
slaves; and though there may be four hundred thousand on the pay list, which
Baron Tott asserts, it is certain the treasury does not issue pay for more than
fifty thousand, that being only received by the Janissaries of the Odas, or
barracks at Constantinople; and those who, in the garrisons, have followed
their kettles. All those who are not with the standard are called Yamaks, and
receive no emolument. The division of this body of forces, according to the
above author, is in Ortas, Buluks, and Seymens; forming in all one hundred and
ninety-six companies. The Janissaries are distinguished from the other Turks by
their broad caps; which, being made like the sleeves of a casaque, hang down
behind, half a foot long, gilt with silver and embroidered, and have a cone on
the forehead.

The arms of the Janissaries are a sabre, a bow, an arrow, and a lance. Being
drawn before the seraglio, to alter their exercise, and receive new
instructions from Count Bonneval, in the use of firearms, they threw their
muskets disdainfully on the ground; and, drawing their sabres, cried out "these
arms have sufficed to conquer this empire, and will suffice to maintain it."

They are punished, for ordinary crimes, by the bastinado, or blows on the
soles of their feet; and, if they are guilty of any crime, deserving of death,
they are strangled, put into a sack, and thrown into the sea; a cannon being
likewise fired, for every Janissary that suffers in this manner. These
punishments are always inflicted in the night; as no Janissary, nor any other
soldier, can be publicly punished. The Janissaries call each other brethren,
and are so attached to one another, that they will not suffer the least insult,
to be offered to any of their corpse. No person, besides their officers, is
permitted to strike them, under pain of death. And, if they should chance to
give any other person a blow, he must not resent the affront by striking; as no
protection whatever, can save the life of a man who has struck a Janissary. It
is from this great respect shown them, that the foreign ministers have always
some of them in their houses, as guards; and foreigners in general, are glad to
be attended by them in public, being secure from any insult, whilst accompanied
by them.

The Turkish cavalry, called Spahis, were formerly the most considerable of the
Ottoman forces, both with respect to rank, valor, and discipline; but their
power, and influence, at last rose to such a height, as became dangerous to the
Sultan; against whom they frequently entered into conspiracies, and sometimes
broke out into open rebellion. The consequences were, the degradation of the
whole corpse, by Mahomet IV. who gave preference to the Janissaries, granting
them such privileges, that he knew would disgust the principal officers of the
Spahis. This arrangment had the desired effect; for the Spahis, following the
example of their leaders, abandoned the court, and retired to the provinces,
where they continued to receive their pay; but when called upon, in time of
war, just appeared to answer to the muster-rolls, and then returned to their
respective homes, and left the sovereign to face the enemy, with other troops.
From that era, they lost the honor of being considered as a corps-de-reserve,
for the body-guard of the Sultan; and their places were supplied by the
Janissaries. But these likewise, having abused the trust reposed in them, the
Bostangis, in time, were formed into a corpse of Militia, regularly disciplined,
and well armed; and to them, the honorable employ, of being body-guard to the
Sultan, in his seraglio, and surrounding his pavillion when he is encamped, is
at present confided; and a formidable guard they are; for their numbers, when
complete, amount to 12,000.

It is remarkable, that when any of the Turkish troops lose their confidence
with the Sultan, they alike lose the esteem of the people; though the greatest
part, of the Ottoman army, consists of troops taken from the general mass of
the people. Such is the present state of the Spahis, who are held in such
sovereign contempt, by their countrymen, that they must perform wonders in the
field, to regain their lost reputation.

The Spahis, properly so called, are divided into two classes. The ancient, who
have a yellow ensign, and are distinguished by the name of Cascars; and the
modern, who humbly call themselves Spahis-Oglars, or servants to the others.
They carry a red ensign; and, notwithstanding the more modern date of their
institution, and their modest title, they are more respected than the ancient
Spahis; and have precedence, on a march, in commemoration of their having
restored the order of battle, and gained a victory, in the reign of Sultan
Mahomet III. These two classes, in time of war, amount to 12,000, and are paid
from the Imperial treasury.

There are two other corpse of cavalry, called Zainis and Timariots; who hold
lands under the Grand Signor, by ancient military tenures, and are summoned to
appear in arms, when a war breaks out; but who find means, after a personal
appearance, to leave the camp, and return home, if they have no inclination to
take the field; so that they cannot be relied upon, in time of danger. These
compose the major part of the Turkish cavalry; and the only distinction,
between these latter corpse and the former, is, that they serve by feudal
tenure, and receive their pay from the land they hold.

The hope of gaining some portion of land, induces great numbers to join the
Zainis, and serve at their own expense, in time of war, as volunteers. If they
perform any signal action, they are sure to succeed to the lands of the Zainis,
who are slain in battle. If a Zaini, or Timariot, is old, or incapable of
service, he may resign to his sons. If he is killed in battle, his income is
divided in equal portions, among his children; but if it amounts to only 3,000
aspers a year, the eldest son is the sole heir, and takes his rank. But if he
dies a natural death, at home, in time of peace, the governor of the province
has the disposal of his revenues. In Natolia, there are many lands privileged,
because they pass by inheritance, from father to son; and the possessors of
them are not obliged to serve in person, but may send a lieutenant, with the
number of horsemen required, in proportion to their income.

The Zehesis, who, at their first institution, consisted of a single corpse of
600 men, had the inspection and care of preserving and cleaning the arms. At
present they have changed their employment, and their numbers are considerably
augmented. They are computed at 30,000 horsemen, and are divided into sixty
chambers, but they are seldom complete. This corpse is considered in the same
point of view, as the cuirassieurs among the other great powers of Europe.

The Segbans are another species of cavalry, that the bashaws of provinces are
obliged to bring to the army, in time of war. These are a kind of dragoons, for
they fight on foot, as well as on horseback, and form a corpse of reserve; it
being their duty to take care of the baggage.

The Molagis are considered, by the Turks, as military men, but, in fact, they
are only servants to the bashaws, who having always a numerous retinue, keep a
great many domestics, who cost only their diet and dress, the Turks never
giving any wages. They form a kind of united body in the camp, and make a
numerous army of men; but, though they are young, robust, and generally well
made, we do not find they ever signalized themselves by any one act of heroism.
On the contrary, a great part of them are pretended christians, and the vilest
set of men upon earth. These are the men who, when a christian church is taken,
commit every kind of sacrilege, break open convents, violate the nuns, and
fighting under Turkish banners, exercise most horrid cruelties on the
inhabitants of christian countries.

Next to the Janissaries, the infantry most in repute in the Ottoman service,
is the corpse of Topchis, or cannoneers; and the Kombaragis, or bombardiers. The
former of these two corpse amounts to 18,000 men, of which 6,000 are constantly
kept at Constantinople, and the rest dispersed throughout the provinces; they
are divided into regiments, in the same manner as the Janissaries. Out of so
great a number, says Habesci, there are not above a dozen of them who are good
engineers; being totally ignorant of theory, the only skill they acquire, is by
practice; so that in time of action, the service of their artillery is commonly
left to chance.

The corpse of bombardiers ought to amount to 2,000, of which, 600 always remain
in the capital. But their numbers are never complete, for the officers wait
till the very moment of marching, to fill up their regiments. This accounts for
their want of knowledge. It must be confessed, however, they are very expert in
casting cannon, and melt their metals with great skill.

The Turks have no iron cannon, and either know not how, or disdain to cast it.
All their artillery is of brass, nor have they any other on board their ships;
for though we find pieces of iron ordnance, in some of their fortified places,
or on board their merchant-ships, they have all been taken in war, or purchased
from the Swedes, Danes, or other Europeans. It is, indeed, very surprising that
their founderies should have no furnaces proper for melting iron; since that at
Tophana sends every day to Constantinople, a prodigious number of brass pieces,
some of them of an enormous calibre, excellent, beautiful, and long since
brought to perfection, according to the proportion and models of the European
artillery. They are continually to be seen ranged along the shore, at Tophana,
frequently in double and triple rows; nor can we, without great injustice,
accuse the Turks of total ignorance in the art of casting artillery. It is, in
fact, difficult to conceive, how they can produce one so beautiful, without
furnaces proper for casting the small fieldpieces, of which they are in want.

The cannon, however, for which the Turks are famous all over Europe, are
called perieres, or small cannon; their only fault is, that they are too short,
so that on board of ships, especially under the wind, there is always great
risk of their setting the vessel on fire. The Turks formerly purchased their
gunpowder of the English; but a renegado, calling himself an Englishman,
taught them the art of manufacturing it; which they have brought to such
perfection, that English powder is no longer imported into the Ottoman
dominions. Yet, owing to the avarice of the makers, in augmenting the quantity
of charcoal and sulphur, and diminishing that of saltpeter, the dearest
ingredient, they have adulterated it to such a degree, that it is no longer
equal, in strength, to the best English powder.

Baron Tott, who was employed to make a reform in the Turkish artillery,
mentions a bon-mot of Sultan Mustapha, which does not augur much in favor, of
the knowledge of the Turks, in that department of the science of war. The Baron
had been employed to throw some pontoons, over a small river near the capital,
in order to satisfy the Port that this kind of bridge, which was a novelty in
Turkey, was sufficient for the transportation of artillery. In passing over a
dangerous frozen place, the Baron, notwithstanding his great precaution, met
with a fall, and sprained his left leg very much. The Grand Signor, though
frequent in his enquiries after the Baron's health, was too active to allow him
the rest that was necessary. The Prince, coming afterward to examine the
structure of these military bridges, after keeping me a long while standing,
says the Baron, spoke to me with much concern of the accident I had met with;
on which one of his officers, who had been ordered to attend me in this
business, thinking to make his court to the Sultan, by extolling my activity,
talked much of the fatigue I made him undergo; though, in reality, he only
discovered his own indolence. "Do you not know the reason of this great
difference between you?" said the Grand Signor, "I will explain it. When Tott
came into the world, he fell upon his feet, and immediately began to run;
whereas you fell on your breech, and there you have remained."

The carriages of their guns are made of oak, and are very heavy, and coarsely
wrought; and the iron work is as much too slight, and will not hold out any
wear. All persons whatever, except those belonging to the corpse of artillery,
are strictly prohibited to enter the foundry.

Baron Tott mentions an enormous piece of ordnance, which will carry a marble
ball of eleven hundred pounds weight. This piece, cast in brass, in the reign
of Sultan Amurath, was composed of two parts, joined together by a screw, where
the charge is contained, after the manner of an English pistol.

There is likewise, in the Turkish army, a corpse of Infantry called Mekteregis;
whose business it is to plan out the camps, in time of war; and to fix and
dress the pavilions, or royal tents, for the Sultan, and great officers of
state, Their skill and alertness, in the execution of their functions, is
highly extolled; and the institution of this corpse is not only economical, but
the cause of preserving exceeding good order, in the Turkish camps; by
preventing all disputes, about precedence in the situation, or splendour in the
officers' pavilions.

They have also the management of striking the tents, packing them up, and
transporting them from place to place, when the army is on a march. Their
number amounts to 6,000.

One, among many other reasons, why the Turkish army is so numerous, says
Peysonnel, is, that the people in Turkey are divided into two classes; the
Askeris, or military; and the Beledis, or peasants. Every Mohammedan, who does
not belong to some military corpse, is obliged to pay a capitation tax, and is
assessed for his share of the imposts, levied on cities, towns, and villages;
and though this law be not vigorously put in execution, it causes many persons
to enter their names on the lists.

The attention of government, says Lord Baltimore, is directed to keep up a
variance, between the law and the army; for, unless they unite, a revolution in
government can never take place. War, at present, is not sought after by the
Turks, especially by great men; who are always sure to fall a sacrifice; for,
if the Janissaries are successful, they grow insolent; and, if they are
defeated, they despond in a very great degree; either of which occasions the
destruction of their leaders. The following anecdote will serve to show
something of their disposition. After the death of Mahomet II. the Janissaries
began an insurrection, and put to death several of the visirs, and bashaws;
plundered the houses of others, and committed a great many outrages. There
lived at that time, in the city, an old bashaw, called Isaac, who had formerly
been visir to Sultan Amurath; he was a very good natured man, but extremely
ignorant, and a very had politician; and, to put a stop to the sedition, it was
thought proper to place some person on the throne; he therefore went and
brought forth young Corcud, Bajazet's brother, who was absent, and caused him
to be proclaimed emperor, in the room of his father; distributing, at the same
time, great sums of money among them, that they might return to their duty. A
short time after, the Janissaries mutinied again; and, under pretense of
excusing their past faults, came to the Divan of the Sultan, and told him,
"that all they had done was, by no means, for the sake of plunder; but, merely
to re-establish the affairs of the empire, the laws of which were no longer
observed: that none, but the children of villagers and citizens, had military
employs bestowed on them; whereas, by the decrees of the first Ottoman
emperors, these posts ought to be filled up, only by those who had served in
the troops, and grown old in the exercises of war: all their pretensions, they
said, went no further than to obtain that, henceforward, the captains,
colonels, generals, and governors of provinces, should be appointed from their
corpse." The good old fool Isaac, says Lord B. having read their propositions,
replied, on the part of the Grand Signor, "that their demands were very
reasonable; that in future due regard should be paid to them, and that they
might retire in peace." Having been so easily gratified, and dismissed, they
returned again directly, and cried out, that they would also have chosen, from
amongst them, the Cadiliskier, who is sovereign judge of the army; and ought to
be most profoundly versed in the law. The Bashaw answered them, "My children,
such an office ought to be held by a person of wisdom, who has studied the law;
is there any one among you who is capable of it?" The Janissaries replied,
"that there was one of their comrades, called Saroug Buchiuk, who knew how to
read pretty well, and who did not write amiss; that by study, and application,
he might acquit himself very well in this office;" which, the bashaw having
heard, said to them, "I am satisfied, the Cadiliskier also shall be yours.
Remain in peace."

Habesci, who was secretary to the grand visir, in the reign of the late
sultan, makes the amount of the military force, of the Ottoman empire, to be
432,570; half of which appear to be cavalry, and the remainder infantry. But,
it being evident, that this immense body of forces, cannot form one single
army, we must make the necessary deductions, to see what landforces the Grand
Signor can bring into the field, to face an ambitious enemy, who is making
daily incursions into his dominions; and dis-membering the Ottoman empire, by
piecemeal; while the christian princes of Europe seem totally unconcerned; not
considering that the empress of Russia, if she goes on as she has done, will
assuredly gain that universal monarchy in Europe, to which Louis XIV. of France
aspired; and, to prevent which, the blood of millions was shed, and many royal
treasuries exhausted.

Should this Crown of Russia once get possession of Constantinople, and make it
the seat of government for the Russian empire, the infatuated English nation,
will then bitterly repent their bad policy, says Habesci, in having sent their
most skilful ship-builders to Russia, assisted by their best naval officers, to
command her fleets. Already have they had proof of Russian ingratitude, in the
firm support, given by the Empress, to the famous armed neutrality.

After deducting for guards and garrisons, in the different cities and
fortresses of this extensive empire, it will not be found, that very little
more than half this immense army, can ever take the field at once. If the
Sultan commands the army in person, or, even if the grand visir heads it, the
number of men is considerably increased; because they are followed by the
cavalry, usually in the suite of administration, and by large bodies of
artisans from the capital: this mixed multitude amounts, at least to 50,000
horsemen; but these augment the number, without adding to the strength of the
army.

An ancient custom, the origin and rise of which is no longer known, has mixed
the most insipid buffoonery, with the art of assembling together the forces of
this great empire. This ridiculous ceremony is called, by the Turks, Alay; or,
the triumph. It consists in a kind of masquerade, in which each trade
successively presents to the spectators, the mechanical exercise of its
respective art. The labourer draws his plough, the weaver handles his shuttle,
the joiner his plane; and these different characters, seated in cars, richly
ornamented, commence the procession, and precede the standard of Mahomet; when
it is brought out of the seraglio, to be carried to the army, in order to
insure victory to the Ottoman troops.

This standard is of green silk, and preserved in the treasury, from whence it
is never brought, but to be carried to the army. Another relick is likewise
preserved with it in the treasury. This is, every year, dipped into a quantity
of water, which is afterward distributed, in phials, to the grandees of the
empire. The infidels, for such there are, even among the true believers,
pretend this relick is only an old pair of the prophet's breeches: but, it is
certain, this holy water is dear enough, to those who are favored with it; and
those who dispense it, know how to employ the things of this world, and the
salvation of the world to come, to purposes of extortion.

This banner, which they name Sandjah Cherif, or the Standard of the Prophet,
is so revered by the Turks, that, notwithstanding its reputation has been so
often tarnished, it still retains their implicit confidence, and is the sacred
signal under which they rally. Every thing proclaims its sanctity. None but the
emirs are allowed to touch it, they are its guards; and it is carried by their
chief. The mussulmen alone are permitted to look upon it; if touched by other
hands, it would be defiled; if seen by other eyes, profaned; in short, it is
encompassed by the most barbarous fanaticism.

Though the Grand Signor is obliged to be at very great expenses, for the
maintenance of such a numerous army, yet he derives very considerable
advantages from it; for he is heir to all his officers, who die without issue;
and if they leave daughters only behind them, he comes in for two-thirds of
their effects.

Every part of the military establishment of the Ottoman empire, at this hour,
announces its decline; but none more so, than the weak state of its marine. In
former times, the Turkish fleet was almost innunumerable; but since the war of
Candia, against the republic of Venice, which lasted twenty-one years, no
formidable fleet has been sent to sea by the Port. The great, and repeated,
losses the Turks sustained, during that war, gave birth to a saying, familiar
in the mouths of the Ottoman subjects, that "God made the land for the Turks,
and the sea for the Christians."

But the total destruction of the marine force of the empire, was not
accomplished till the last war against the Russians. It was reserved for the
brave Admiral Elphinstone, who commanded a Russian squadron in the Archipelago,
to put a finishing hand to the small remains of power, the Turks possessed at
sea. After having driven their fleet entirely out of the Archipelago, he
pursued, and forced them to take shelter in the bay of Cesmi, opposite the isle
of Scios; there he obliged them to run their ships on shore, and,
notwithstanding the fire of the fort, burnt and destroyed the greatest part of
their fleet. This action has rendered his name so tremendous, to the Turks in
those parts, that I have heard them quiet their children, says Habesci, by
telling them that Elphinstone was coming.

It is true, after the peace, the indefatigable Hassen Bachi, the present high
admiral, exerted himself in a signal manner to restore their marine; and, in
three years, had forty sail of the line at Constantinople, fit for immediate
service, besides several others, in different ports of the empire; but, for
want of experienced officers, many of these have been wrecked in the Black Sea;
so that, at this time, they have not half the number of ships, requisite to
protect the coasts, and islands, of their extensive empire.

The lieutenant to the high admiral, generally commands the fleet upon any
expedition; or when it puts to sea, to defend the coasts.

The captains of galleys are called Beys; they are all very rich, of the best
families in Turkey, and generally are bashaws with two tails; to whom are
assigned the revenues of certain land, for their salaries and the maintenance
of their vessels; or else the Sultan gives them the government of some maritime
place, such as Mitylene, Rhodes, Scios, etc. The Sultan likewise provides the
hull of the galley, and furnishes a certain sum to arm her; the equipment,
provisions, and men, must be found by the bey.

They have also galliots, and other small vessels, called Cungiabai, almost
like brigantines, calculated for the navigation of the Black Sea; because they
are light, and draw but little water. All these smaller vessels, are under the
direction of the general of the galleys; who has for his salary, the revenues
of some of the most valuable islands in the Archipelago. And it is very
remarkable, the commanders of these inferior classes of their marine, have the
precedence, and are more respected than those who command their first-rate
ships, and their great fleets; if the reason is demanded, the mussulmen reply,
that it is founded on the antiquity of their galleys, or some such fable.

Three different rates of ships compose the Turkish armaments. Those of three
decks, of course, are the first. The length of these is sixty else; and the ell
of the arsenal of Constantinople, contains two geometrical feet and a half.
Each of these ships carries 106 pieces of brass cannon: and, in order to render
such an unwieldy machine a little manageable, the masts and the sails are of an
enormous size. The crew of these ships amounts to 1200 men, called Levants;
besides 100 Greek sailors, to manage the rigging. The wages of the Levants are
60 piastres, for six months; and, in the winter-months, they are discharged;
but they serve, in expectation of pensions for life, if they signalize
themselves.

The second rates are called Sultanas; they are thirty-four else long, carry
sixty-six guns, 800 Levants, and 100 Greek sailors. The third rates are called
Caravalles; these measure forty else, are built like frigates, and mount from
thirty-six, to forty-five pieces of cannon, their crew consists of 200 Levants,
and thirty Greek sailors.

The Ottoman ships are, almost all, built by Greeks from the Archipelago; and
though they are totally defective in theory, having no rules to go by, but
those of practice; yet they are so well built, and their beauty and proportion
so surprising, as not to be surpassed, by any ships, of the most polished
nations in Europe. All that part of their ships under water, is built of oak;
but the upper parts are of fir, which renders them lighter, and less dangerous
to the crews, in time of action; for fir does not fly off in splinters, like
oak. But the following circumstances contribute to render their ships less
durable than those of other nations. The masts are made of several pieces of
wood, joined one above another, and secured with iron. The sails are made with
cotton, which take the wind better, and are more manageable than linen; but
they soon tear, and wear out. The cordage is wretched; and, will neither last
half the time, nor bear half the stress of other ropes. The quantity of tallow,
put about the cordage, to spare the labor of their seamen, is incredible; and
what they consume on the hull of a ship, is in proportion of fifty pounds to
one, used on board the ships of other countries; consequently, this article
alone is an enormous charge, in the equipment of their fleets.

The marine arsenal of Constantinople, is situated upon the port; in that part
opposite the city, where it begins to widen. One part of this arsenal, is set
apart for large ships, and the other for small vessels. A very large dome was
built, to secure them, while on the stocks, from the injuries of the weather;
but, either from custom, or for convenience, the large ships are always built
in the open air; and the dome used only for galleys, and galliots. All
magazines, for the service of the fleet, are kept within the enclosure of this
arsenal; the circumference of which is about three English miles, and it is
well secured from fire and thieves, by a strong stone wall. The magazines, the
number of which is increased very much, of late years, are covered with lead,
and are full of all sorts of stores.

It is the duty of a capitan Bachi, to take care to furnish these magazines,
with all the articles necessary for the construction, and equipment of the
fleet; and to have a plentiful stock in hand. If they were not kept always well
supplied, it would be considered as his fault; and he would certainly be
deposed, and perhaps strangled: because wood, iron, and sails, are to be had,
in the greatest abundance, at a small distance from the capital. It is
likewise, in his department to provide sailors, in time of war; and, of these,
there ought to be no want, as the city of Constantinople, alone, can supply
30,000; and the Archipelago is full of them. Yet during the last war, the
capitan Bachi was obliged to compel artisans, and shopkeepers, to serve on
board the Turkish fleets; owing to the failure, on the part of government, in
not having paid the wages of their sailors, on former occasions: this
circumstance has contributed to the decline of the maritime strength of the
empire.

Another method, taken by the Port, to supply the want of seamen, was, to
oblige the islands of the Archipelago, to furnish a quota of ships and sailors,
according to ancient custom. The succors, which government has a right to
demand, from its dependencies, when a war breaks out, are, -- Four ships from
Algiers, completely armed and manned; three from Tripoli; three from Tunis;
and, from Eygpt, twenty-four Cajrines; which serve as merchant ships, in time
of peace; but, in time of war, are fitted out as armed vessels, mounting fifty
guns each, and having 600 men, far superior, in point of bravery, and skill in
maneuvering a ship, to any other seamen, in the Ottoman service. However, of
all these succors, scarce any arrived during the last war; so little was the
resentment, of an enfeebled empire, to be dreaded by its dependent governments.

CHAP. XIV. Language and Learning.
THE common language of the country, known by all ranks of people, is the
Turkish, which was, originally, a mixture of Arabic, Persian, and Greek. The
Christians, of different countries, residing at Constantinople, and in the
provinces of the Turkish empire, have each of them a language peculiar to
themselves. For instance, the Greeks speak both the Greek and Turkish; and in
the same manner, the Armenians converse in their maternal tongue, and in that
of the Turks. The language of the Greeks of the present day, has scarcely any
resemblance to the ancient Greek tongue: it is a wretched jargon; and the true
Greek of antiquity, is so totally lost in Greece, that hardly six persons can
be found in all the country, who know any thing of it. To the eternal dishonor
of the Greeks, it is in the polished Christian kingdoms of Europe alone, that
learned men are skilled in the ancient languages. But what is still worse, the
miserable jargon of the modern Greeks, has taken such deep root, that books of
all sorts are printed in it; which will effectually prevent the restoration of
their ancient tongue. The Jews commonly converse in Spanish; and the Turks,
having commercial connexions and daily intercourse with this mixture of
inhabitants, know a little of the language of each. At the Ottoman court,
another language is spoken; which is that of the Persian. All commissions and
instructions to the great officers of state, military commanders, and governors
of provinces, are written in this pure language, which they call Farsi.

The confusion of languages in Constantinople, according to Lady M. must be
very great. In Pera, the suburbs, says she, they speak Turkish, Greek, Hebrew,
Armenian, Arabic, Persian, Russian, Sclavonian, Wallachian, German, Dutch,
French, English, Italian, Hungarian. The perpetual hearing of this medley of
sounds, produces a very extraordinary effect upon the people that are born
here; for they learn all these languages at the same time, and without knowing
any of them well enough to write or read them. There are very few men, women,
or even children, here, that have not the same compass of words, in five or six
of these languages. This may seem almost incredible in this country, and takes
off very much from the merit of our ladies, who set up for such extraordinary
geniuses, upon the credit of some superficial knowledge of French and Italian.

The Turkish language, says Peysonnel, is originally the same with the
Tartarian, or language of Zagathia, in which many books have been written. By
the adoption of the Arabic and Persian, it is become one of the finest in the
world. All copious languages have been formed in the same manner. The Arabic,
which is an ocean, derives its origin from the Hebrew, in itself confined and
barren.

The different characters are by no means left entirely to the choice of the
writer; but are appropriated, by custom, to particular species of composition.
The Neskbi, used in printing, is employed in works of science; the Tealik, in
poetry; the Divani, in the firmans, or edicts of government, and epistolary
correspondence; the Sulus, for mottos, public inscriptions, etc. He who is
unable to write all these different characters, writes as well as he can; but
if he intends to publish a book, present a memoir to a minister, a petition to
a great man, or a poem to his patron, he will take care to have them copied, by
some professed writer, in the character assigned by custom to these several
uses; in the same manner as with us, a person unable to write the law, or other
hands, will hire some one to copy his writings in the customary character.

Scarce any thing can be said on the subject of literature which is so much
neglected at Constantinople, that there is but one library in the whole city,
worthy of notice; and it is of very modern date, having been founded by Ragheb
Bacha, who, after having been bashaw of several provinces, at last became
visir, in which post he died. He was a man of genius, and wherever he
traveled, made it his business to collect valuable books in every language,
and upon most subjects, whether written by Mahometans, Christians, or Jews.
This rich legacy he bequeathed to the public; and, together with the library,
founded a school for the education of Turkish boys. A Turkish printing office
has, likewise, been lately established at Constantinople; which after great
opposition, obtained leave to print all kinds of books, except those on matters
of religion. Though the Turks are not men of science, to which their great
legislator Mahomet, has forbid them to apply to, as tending to puff them up
with vain pride; yet, as men of wit, they surpass most nations. There are no
people any where to be met with, who can relate an amusing tale, with more
grace and elegance. They likewise excel every other nation in the marrow, pith,
elegance, good sense, and ingenuity of their proverbs, which, adds the above
author, are always the surest test of the intellectual abilities of any people.
Like the Italian improvisatoris, they have their professional speakers, who, in
order to make their court to the great, undertake to carry on the conversation,
and amuse the company, on any subject whatever.

It must not be thought, however, that the Turks are so totally deficient in
literature, as they have been represented by many writers; and though they have
neglected tactics, navigation, and military discipline, yet they are in
possession of the elements of Euclid, all the philosophy of Aristotle, and the
entire works of Plato, whose surname of divine, they preserve, and whom they
style Filatoun el Lillabi. They have, likewise, among them a multitude of
Turkish, Persian, and Arabic books, on grammar, logic, metaphysics, morality,
history, astronomy, astrology, and the cabala; on geography, physic, chemistry,
alchemy, and medicine; on law, theology, and controversy; with an infinity of
poems, fables, moral tales, and romances.

The Turks have also their regular colleges, called Medressas, the same as with
us. They contain, as we have observed before, scholars of all ages, from those
who are so young, as to have made but little progress in literature, to the
Sohtas, or students arrived at years of maturity. These Sohtas, are a class of
literati, who devote themselves to the study of grammar, the Arabic language,
rhetoric, philosophy, their religious ceremonies, and jurisprudence. Some of
them arrive at the first dignities, while others remain in the subaltern places
of Imans; Mutevellis, or administrators of the revenues of the mosques; Naibs,
or first clerks to the Mollahs.

According to the strict rule of their public ordinances, the professors of the
law cannot be advanced to places of importance, unless they have first been
Sohtas, have gone through a course of study in the medressas, and have been
advanced to the dignity of Muderris, or principal of the college, which is
granted by Imperial diploma. The monarch can grant them writs, by which they
are immediately advanced; but the usual forms must always be so far complied
with, that the person then raised, must be furnished with diplomas of all the
degrees through which he ought to have passed. Nevertheless, these
dispensations have frequently occasioned great murmurs among the Ulemas, as
they often oblige men of merit, who deserve a more rapid advancement, to remain
all their lives in a subaltern station.

Bisani, in his remarks on the Turkish literature, mentions one of their
doctors, who had read the alcoran over twenty four thousand times. He likewise
notices an Abbe, who published a treatise on the literature of the Turks, with
extracts of most of the books in the public library at Constantinople; without
knowing a syllable of the Turkish language. The method he took was curious; it
was to make the dragoman read the titles, and different parts of each work to
him, in Italian, while the Abbe wrote down his notes; and, notwithstanding his
ignorance of the Turkish language, having had an ingenious dragoman to
translate to him, the work is said not to have been without merit.

We shall conclude this chapter with some few passages from the alcoran, and
likewise some extracts from their prosaic, as well as poetic writers; to give
our readers some idea of the morality and poetry of the East.

The finest moral in the Alcoran, is, "Forgive easily, do good to all, and
dispute not with the ignorant."

Sublime and masterly also, is this passage in the same book, where God stops
the deluge -- "Earth swallow down thy waters; sky, drink up those thou have
poured forth. The waters were immediately gone, the commands of God were
executed: the ark rested on the mountain, and these words were heard, WOE TO
THE WICKED."

Mahomet, in his journey to heaven, says the same book, saw an angel who had a
thousand thousand heads, in each of which were a thousand thousand mouths, in
each of these mouths, a thousand thousand tongues, and in each of these
tongues, a thousand thousand dialects, with which he constantly celebrated the
praises of his most glorious and immense Creator.

The following are some of their maxims:

"When destiny is against you, all forethought is useless. When the measure is
full, numbers are no more wanting".

"The success of human affairs depends not on men: it is Providence, and divine
decree decides all things."

"The world is nothing, the affairs of the world are nothing; do not,
therefore, be anxious after the acquisition of nothing."

"He that afflicts himself for what may happen, does wrong; for should what we
dread happen, or not; the disquiet we take, brings no sort of remedy or
advantage with it."

"Do you desire the prince to be soft and moderate? Exercise among yourselves
justice, and be obedient to his commands: consider that your behavior is the
principal cause of the good or bad treatment you will receive. A prince may be
compared to a looking-glass; what you see therein, is but a reflection of the
object you present to it."

"Four things should never flatter us; familiarity of princes, the caresses of
women, the smiles of our enemies, nor a warm day in winter; for these things
are not of long duration."

"The worst of princes is he whom the good fear, and the bad hope."

"He that thinks to content his desires by the possession of what he wishes
for, is like one who puts out fire with straw."

"Wise men use their estates liberally, and, during their life, make their
friends partakers of them; but the avaricious are so foolish, that they amass
riches even for their enemies."

"The most excellent of all virtues is purity of intention. Justice for an hour
is better than devotion for a year."

"The time you employ ill, is carried away by the wind of the common
vicissitudes of the world, without its being ever again retrievable."

"A man who dresses himself beyond his station, is like one who puts vermilion
on his cheeks, whilst an ulcer is devouring him."

"When the mind is tired, and you seek to relieve it by some diversion; use it
like salt on your meat, sparingly."

Haleb al Nagar, being asked, "what was the most excellent thing in man?"
replied, "Sense." "But if he has none, what is the best thing he can have?"
"Honesty," replied Haleb. "And if he has not that?" -- "The counsel of his
friends," replied the doctor. "And in want of that?" -- "Taciturnity." -- "And
when he cannot have either of these things?" "A sudden death, as soon as
possible."

An Eastern poet addressing himself to the wind, passing by his door, in its
way to his mistress, says,

"You shall have my life for a recompense, if, in the moment when you blow by
the door of her habitation, you repeat her these words; I beheld, at the corner
of the street, a desponding lover, who, pressed with extreme desire to see you,
is at the point of death."

The same poet says, in another place, "Extreme was the pleasure I felt on
hearing your footsteps, ardent as I was to see the only object of my wishes,
after a thousand languishing moments of faint hopes."

"By the tears in my eyes, and the wound in my heart, the clay of which I am
made, consumes in flames, and dissolves in water, at the same time."

"At your approach, which charms my heart, I said it was the zephir, which
brings with it so sweet an odor, after having passed over fields, full of a
thousand sweet scented-flowers."

"These roses are like the cheeks of a modest young lady, when her lover
approaches to salute her."

CHAP. XV. History, Constitution, and Government.
TO give our readers some idea of the origin of the Turkish empire, it will not
be amiss to begin with an account of the founder of the Mohammedan religion.

That Mahomet was the author of the Mussulman faith, is a well known fact. He
was born at Mecca, in Arabia Felix, in 571. His father, an Arabian Chief, dying
while he was very young, his uncle seized upon his patrimony, and made several
attempts to have him taken off by poison, or assassination, which obliged young
Mahomet to conceal himself under different disguises, and pass a miserable
life, till he had the good fortune to be taken into the service of a rich
widow, who afterward married him. This event happened in the thirtieth year of
his age, and he had the dexterity to conceal from his wife, an infirmity,
which, had it been known, would have prevented his good fortune; he was subject
to epileptic fits, and when he found them coming on, had made it a practice to
withdraw himself from her company, and from society; in order, as he alleged,
to pass his time in devotion. His wife being accustomed to these retirements,
before marriage, he easily made them subservient to his ambitious views
afterward. The first object of his attention was to recover his paternal
inheritance, and the knowledge he had acquired by frequent converse with the
Christians and Jews, made him conceive the bold project of becoming a
legislator, and founding a new religion. The spirit of the times was peculiarly
favorable to his enterprise. The Arabs, grown cool, and relaxed, in the
worship of their idols, ever degenerated into atheism. The Christians were
divided into sects; persecuting each other, with brutal fury, for the glory of
God; and sacrificing, to their common animosity, the inoffensive Jews, who
retaliated their cruelties.

Thus circumstanced, Mahomet began his astonishing career. His temporary
seclusions from his wife, and from the world, became more frequent; and he
affected to lead a solitary life, assumed an exemplary piety in his discourse,
and a constant addiction to prayer, meditation, and contemplation. When his
wife, who became more inquisitive and superstitious, surprised him in one of
his epileptic fits, as soon as he recovered, he solemnly protested that the
splendid appearance of the angel Gabriel, who came to him, by the express
command of God, to declare his divine will, concerning the true religion, had
entirely overpowered him. She, either actually deceived, or pretending to be
so, propagated a report that he was a prophet. His admirers began to increase;
upon which he spoke more freely on the subject of his visions, and the
revelations made to him, by the angel. In this imposture Mahomet was powerfully
assisted by Sergius, a Greek priest, who took great pains to persuade his
followers of the truth of Mahomet's prodigies; and, being full of novelty, they
became his disciples. Mahomet finding his partisans daily increasing, boldly
threw off the mask, and affirmed he had received a commission from God, to
propagate his new religion by force of arms. And that he might establish his
temporal authority, on a firm basis, he made alliances with the chief
inhabitants of Medina; to which place he had fled from the persecutions of his
relations, and married the daughters of four of the principal noblemen; by
whose assistance he took the field, with a numerous army of his disciples,
collected from the adjacent towns and villages, and made himself master of
Mecca.

The rapid successes of Mahomet, excited the jealousy of the neighboring
princes, who all declared themselves his enemies. The Arabs of Syria were the
first to to take arms against him; but, before he undertook to subdue them,
dreading the valor of the christians, like an able politician, he entered into
an alliance with them; by which he engaged not to molest them, in their civil
and religious liberties; and they, on their part, agreed not to give any
assistance to the enemies of the mussulmen.

By this treaty, Mahomet secured against any powerful opposition, saw himself
at full liberty to assume the sovereign power; and, in the course of twenty
years, had the satisfaction to see his religion embraced by several nations,
and his empire aggrandized by the Saracens, who owned him for their master;
and, being a powerful people, had conquered several provinces in Asia.
Mahomet's new dominions, therefore, took the title of the Saracen empire, by
which it is known in history.

At the head of numerous armies, this most enterprising, and successful
impostor subdued great part of Africa, many provinces in Europe, and still
more, in Asia; and died, in full possession of every earthly dignity, in the
year 631, leaving his extensive territories to be governed by his successors.
The title of Caliph, which had been bestowed on him, when he was invested with
the diadem at Mecca, in a limited sense, signified no more than high priest;
but in his person, it comprehended the idea of King, Priest, and Prophet; and,
as none of his successors could support a claim to these three characters, an
attempt was made to dispose of the temporal dignity, to one of his relations,
he having left no son; and the spiritual, to another. This occasioned a
contention, which had nearly overthrown the new empire; at length Omar, one of
his four generals, and favorites, whom he called the sword of God, was
elected, by the army, to fill the Saracen throne, to whom the rest of the
competitors submitted. After his death a fresh dissension took place,
concerning the succession; which, by degrees, weakened the empire, and laid the
foundation of another revolution, the establishment of the Turkish, upon the
ruin of the Saracen empire.

The glory of the Saracen empire ended with the reign of Watik, who subdued
great part of Italy; penetrating, in the year 847, almost to the gates of Rome:
but he was succeeded by a brother, whose cruelty, and debauchery, rendered him
so odious, to his subjects, that intestine commotions took place, which
terminated in the revolt of the most distant provinces. And, in the end, the
Mohammedan religion had three chiefs, at the head of different sects, who
completed the ruin of the Saracen empire. For the Caliphs of Bagdad, in 1082,
in order to support the ancient government, called to their assistance, a
warlike people, from the extremity of Tartary, called Turks.

The Turks were a people who lived in obscurity, without any system of
government, and were but little known before the middle of the ninth century;
when they made a formidable appearance at sea, from the Caspian ports, and
ravaged the coasts; they then laid waste Armenia, Georgia, and Mingrelia, and
defeated the armies of the Persians, and the Saracens, Encouraged by these
enterprises, they invaded Thrace; and the emperors Constantine, and Romanus
being unable to make head against them, were obliged to bribe them with large
quantities of gold, to retire from their dominions: which they did, flushed
with conquest, and fixed their residence in the Turquestan. In proportion as
these Turks aggrandized themselves, the Saracens degenerated, and were, at
length totally subdued by the Turks; who took possession of Persia, Babylon,
Diarbeck, and Mesopotamia.

In 1096, they became so formidabe, and extended their conquests so far, as to
approach the very gates of Constantinople. Such frequent, and powerful,
irruptions spread a general terror; and obliged the Greek emperors, and the
Christians inhabiting Palestine, to apply for succor to the European powers;
but more particularly to the Pope, from whose influence, with the Christian
princes, they expected to obtain a military force, superior to that of the
Turks. This application gave rise to the famous expedition to the holy land,
decreed by the council of Clermont; the consequence of which was, the taking of
Jerusalem, by the French, in 1099. Several expeditions, universally known by
the name of Crusades, succeeded the first, and lasted near two centuries, till
the Christians were totally subdued by the Turks.

The Emperors of Constantinople, in those days, were constantly involved in
domestic discord. Scarce one of them died peaceably in their beds. A new
monarch was no sooner seated on the throne, than he made the most strict search
for the relations, and friends, of his predecessor; whom he either massacred,
or, exercised such cruelties on their persons, as rendered them incapable of
all the offices of life; and these tortures, and assassinations, were hardly at
an end, before his own turn came, and himself, and his friends, submitted to
the same fate from his successor. An empire, so turbulent, could not fail of
being torn to pieces by civil faction, and rendered so weak, as to promise an
easy conquest to any hero, in the Turkish dominions, which were now extended to
the neighborhood of Constantinople.

Ottoman was the chief whose genius disposed him to watch every motion of the
Greeks; and when their civil discords had produced a state of anarchy, he laid
siege to Constantinople, and took it by assault. After this revolution, he
extended his dominions by conquest, and thus became the founder of the Turkish
empire; which, at one time, was equally the terror, and admiration, of all
Europe; as much as it is now an object of pity and contempt. In the year 1300,
he took upon himself the title of Emperor of the Othmans, or Ottomans, calling
the people after his own name. It is from this prince, that the present Grand
Signor deduces his pedigree.

His residence he fixed at Yengescheri; and, exclusive of many other towns, in
1326 took Prusa, in Bithynia, now called Brusa, which his son and successor,
Orchan, made the seat of his empire.

Othman was succeeded, by a race of the most warlike princes mentioned in
history. About the year 1357 they passed the Hellespont, and took Adrianople,
which Amurath made the feat of his empire. It was this prince who instituted
the corpse of cavalry called Spahis, and divided among them the territories he
had conquered. He was the first mussulman who submitted to the operation of
circumcision; which was performed upon him, in public, with great solemnity. To
this emperor also, the grand visirs are indebted, for the origin of their
dignity, and unlimited power. His son, and successor, Bajazet, was very
successful, both in Europe and Asia. He was a prince of the boldest, and most
sanguinary disposition of his time. To revenge the death of his father, he
marched against the Bulgarians; and, with his own hands, slew Eleazer, their
prince, and gave the lands, in Bulgaria, to his cavalry. His conquests were
afterward so rapid, and extensive, that it seemed as if no obstructions could
set bounds to them; and historians relate, that such were his own sentiments on
that subject. But he was mistaken; for Timur, or Tamerlane, emperor of the
Tartars, marched against him, and gave him battle, on the same spot where
Pompey had formerly defeated Mithridates. Tamerlane, with an inferior army,
totally defeated the Turks; and Bajazet, attempting to save himself by flight,
was overtaken by the Tartarian cavalry; who conducted him to the tent of
Tamerlane, where his haughty deportment, and insolent language, fixed his
future, singular fate. For being asked by his conqueror, how he would have
disposed of him, if the fortune of war had reversed their fate; answered, with
scorn and bitterness, I would have put you in an THE TRIUMPH OF TAMERLANE
iron cage, and carried you in triumph, to make you the object of public
derision. With equal justice then, said his conqueror, may I pass this sentence
upon you; and accordingly, this cruel oppressor of nations, was enclosed in an
iron cage, and allowed only sufficient food, of the coarsest kind, to keep him
alive. Tradition likewise informs us, that Tamerlane mounted his horse, from
the top of his cage, and obliged the wife of Bajazet to wait on him, at table,
naked. The wretched captive, despairing at length of all hopes of liberty, in a
fit of rage, struck his head with such violence against the bars of his cage,
that he put an end to his miserable existence, in 1403.

The successors of Tamerlane, by declaring war one against another, left the
Turks more powerful than ever; and though their career was checked, by the
valor of the Venetians and Hungarians, they gradually reduced the dominion of
the Greek emperors; and, after a long siege, Mahomet the Second took
Constantinople, in the year 1454; the Greeks losing all courage and discipline
after the death of Constantine, their emperor, who was slain in the assault.
Mahomet then caused the head of the Greek emperor to be cut off, and carried it
round the city, stuck upon a spear, to insult the wretched inhabitants. Three
days after the city was taken, he made a triumphal entry into Constantinople;
when he ordered proclamation to be made, that he should in future make it the
place of his residence, and the capital of the Turkish Empire. Thus, after an
existence of ten centuries, from its first commencement under Constantine the
Great, ended the Greek empire, an event which had been long foreseen, and was
owing to many causes; the principal one being the total degeneracy of the Greek
emperors, their courts, and families; the dislike their subjects had to the
popes, and the Western church, one of their patriarchs declaring publicly to a
Romish legate, "that he would rather see a turban, than the pope's tiara, on
the great altar of Constantinople." But as the Turks did not exterminate, but
only reduced, the nations to subjection; the remains of the ancient Greeks
still exist, particularly in Constantinople, and the neighboring islands;
where, though under grievous oppressions, they profess christianity under their
own patriarchs.

The Greeks having established a new Imperial throne at Trebizond, the
conqueror of Constantinople thought his victories incomplete, while any part of
the Eastern empire remained in the hands of the Christians; he therefore
meditated the conquest of this place, which the dissentions among the European
powers enabled him to accomplish. The conquests of this emperor were so very
numerous, and extensive, that he is reported by historians, to have subverted
two empires, conquered twelve kingdoms, and taken two hundred cities. Shining
accomplishments, and detestable crimes, appear to have been blended in his
conduct. He had a sovereign contempt for all religions, and called the founder
of his own, "the chief of a banditti." He, however, cultivated learning, and
the polite arts; was skilled in many languages, and master of geography and
history. He likewise practiced drawing and painting, for his amusement; and
invited Bellini, the Venetian painter, to his court. In fine, Mahomet might
have rivalled the most illustrious heroes of antiquity, if his debaucheries,
his licentiousness, and his cruelties, had not tarnished the luster of his
military glory, and fine accomplishments. Some, of the many well attested
instances, of his savage barbarity, are denied by Voltaire, and other
historians; but independent of his putting to death several captive princes, in
violation of treaties of capitulation; his cutting off the whole house of
Notaras, because that nobleman refused to give up one of his daughters to his
lust, and his ordering seventeen of his pages to be ripped up, to discover
which of them had eaten a melon, that had been stolen from him, are sufficient
to make his memory detestable.

Such has been the origin and progress of the Turkish empire; which, though it
had its commencement many centuries back, does not appear to have acquired its
present extensive dominion, and seat of empire, till toward the latter end of
the fifteenth century. -- An empire evidently founded in conquest; and where,
though property may perchance be sacred, life seems to have been of little
value; as depending solely on the will of the prince and his ministers.

Next to Mahomet the second, Solomon the second, better known in history by the
title of Solomon the magnificent, seems to have been the most distinguished of
the Ottoman line of Emperors. He ascended the throne in 1520. It was he who
took the celebrated island of Rhodes, which had been in the hands of the
knights of St. John, of Jerusalem, upwards of two centuries. His conquests were
so considerable in Asia, Africa and Europe, that his dominions extended from
Algiers to the Euphrates, and from the boundaries of the Black Sea, to those of
Greece and Epirus.

Historians have discovered a striking resemblance between this prince, and the
celebrated Charles V. Both were equally qualified for peace or war; and
memorable for the great number of journies, sieges, and battles, in which they
were personally engaged. Solomon was undoubtedly the greatest warrior, and
Charles the ablest politician. There are likewise some other traits in the two
characters totally dissimilar. Charles was sincere, true to his engagements,
and merciful to his captives, his severity to the protestants excepted.
Solomon, on the contrary, was capricious, a violator of treaties, and inhumanly
cruel. After the victory of Mohatz, when he made all Hungary tributary to the
Ottoman empire; fifteen hundred prisoners, chiefly consisting of Hungarian
nobility, were placed in a circle, and upon a signal given by the sultan,
beheaded, almost at the same instant, upon the field of battle. He likewise
sacrificed Ibraham Bassa, one of his best generals, and an able statesman, to
the vengeance of Roxalana, ordering his throat to be cut in his presence; and
his officers were often obliged to undertake impracticable enterprises, in
which they perished miserably, from a dread of being put to an ignominious
death, if they disobeyed. One of his generals, to whom he had sent to build a
bridge over the Drove, returned him for answer, that it was impossible. The
emperor, firm in his resolution, sent him a long linen bandage, with the
following words written upon it; "The emperor Solomon, thy master, dispatches
to thee the same courier thou has sent to him; and orders thee to build the
bridge over the Drove, without paying any regard to the difficulties that may
occur in the execution of it. He gives thee to understand likewise, that if the
bridge is not finished on his arrival, he will have thee strangled with the
piece of linen, which announces to thee his supreme will.

Solomon was the first Ottoman emperor who made an alliance with the French;
and it was the origin of a partiality, for that nation, still subsisting at the
Port.

The beginning of the seventeenth century, presented a compound of ambition,
cruelty, and lust, in the person of Amurath the third, who began his reign with
a barbarous act of Turkish fratricide, in causing five of his brothers to be
put to death in his presence. He took advantage of an insurrection in Persia,
to send 100,000 men to conquer that kingdom; and whilst this scene was passing
in Persia, he sent another army into Poland, which laid waste great part of
that country; burning no less than 500 noblemen's seats, besides several towns
and villages. Every expedition, made by this tyrant, was marked with blood;
till the very Janissaries, disgusted with his cruelties, set fire to
Constantinople, and destroyed above 150,000 houses; and then, assembling in a
tumultuous manner, before the gates of the seraglio, demanded the head of the
high treasurer. The whole city was in the utmost consternation, and impatiently
expecting a revolution; when Amurath, who well knew his life and crown depended
on his personal courage, burst forth from the palace, sabre in hand; and fell,
with incredible fury, on the leaders of the revolt; killing several with his
own hand, and so intimidating the rest, that they fled; and, soon afterward,
submitted to a severe reform in their discipline, happy, at any rate, to obtain
a pardon. His reliance upon these troops being re-established, he made great
preparations for invading Poland and Moldavia; but was diverted from this
design, by the powerful intercession of Queen Elizabeth. The Christians
inhabiting Croatia were not so fortunate; for Amurath made a dreadful slaughter
of these wretched people, to the amount of sixty-five thousand.

Having now traced the origin and progress of this great empire, till it arose
to its present grandeur, we shall proceed to give some account of its
administration, and the political maxims, by which it appears to be governed.

In the succession to the Turkish empire, no attention, says Habesci, is paid
to age, or birthright; the Turks thinking it sufficient if, in their
elections, they keep to the Ottoman family. Women, however, are entirely
excluded from the Ottoman throne. The government is purely monarchical, but if
the emperor indulges not the humors of the mutinous Janissaries, he is not
only in danger of being deposed, but of even being put to death.

The first care of an Ottoman prince, when he comes to the throne, says Baron
Tott, is to let his beard grow; to which Sultan Mustapha added the dying of it
black; in order that it might be more apparent on the first day of his
appearance, when he was to gird on the sabre; a ceremony by which he takes
possession of the throne; and which is equivalent to our coronation. The
Persian monarch does the same. See the plate, page 87, vol. viii.

It is always performed by the Mufti, at the mosque of Youb; a little village
famed for its earthen wares, and its dairies; and situated near the bottom of
the harbor, forming a kind of suburb to the city. This ceremony takes place
immediately on the sultan's coming to the throne. All the streets, from the
seraglio to Youb, are lined on both sides by Janissaries, in the habits and
bonets of ceremony: but without arms, and with their hands crossed before them.

The ministers, great officers, professors of the law, and, in general, all
those persons, who by their situation are connected with government, precede
the Grand Signor in this procession; which begins, as processions do in other
countries, by the personages who are of the least consequence; and who file off
without order. They are all on horseback, and are each of them encircled by a
number of valets on foot, according to the rank and fortune of their masters.

The professors of the law are remarkable by the largeness of their turbans,
and the simplicity of their horses trappings; but the Agha of the Janissaries,
accompanied by his attendants, makes the most splendid appearance of any of the
great officers. Besides the number of valets, who surround his horse, he is
preceded by two rows of Tchorbadgi, or Colonels; who, on the right and left,
march on foot before their general. These officers precede him in yellow boots,
each one with a white staff in his hand, and a helmet on his head, embroidered
with gold, and ornamented with a grand plume of feathers, after the Roman
manner; forming a long lane of such crests, at the bottom of which appears the
Janissary Agha, who over-tops all his numerous attendants. But an object really
curious is, the dress of the Achetchi Bachi, who walks on foot, in the middle
of the two rows of colonels, and only some few paces before his general. An
enormous Dalmatic of black leather, loaded with great knobs of silver, covers a
kind of waistcoat likewise of leather, and no less strangely ornamented. This
latter is fastened on by a large girdle, with great hooks, and a clasp which
sustains two enormous knives, the handles of which almost entirely hide his
face; while spoons, bowls, and other utensils of silver, hung by chains of the
same metal, scarcely leave him the use of his legs. He is indeed so loaded,
that on all public occasions, which oblige this officer to wear this
extraordinary dress, he is propped up by two Janissaries, who support his
ornaments.

The Tchaooche-Bachi, one of the ministers of the Port, whose office
principally relates to civil affairs, is preceded by the bailiffs, of whom he
is the chief; each of them bearing an ostrich's feather on the side of his
turban. The Bostangi-Bachi is in like manner preceded by two rows of Bostangis,
with their staves in their hands; whose red habits, and head-dresses, present
to the eye a very agreeable uniformity. These different officers of the empire,
as they pass along, salute, on the right and left, the Janissaries drawn up on
each side, who return the compliment by bowing; but pay this honor with much
more respect to the turbans only of the Grand Signor, which are carried in
state before the Sultan. Two of these head-dresses, ornamented with feathers,
were intended at first, only for a change, instead of that which the Emperor
wears, if he thought proper; but this custom, meant merely for convenience, has
at length become a subject of ostentation.

These turbans, placed on a kind of tripods, of a scarlet color, are carried
in the right hand, by two men on horseback, surrounded by a great number of
Tchoadars; and these officers are to incline the turbans, though but a little,
to the right and left; while the Janissaries, by seven or eight at a time, make
a profound reverence to salute the Imperial plumes.

In this procession, not less curious to be seen than difficult to be
described, the visir and the mufti, both clad in white, the first in satin,
and the second in cloth, walk on the side of each other, surrounded by their
attendants, and preceded by led horses, and the Chatirs, or footmen of the
Grand Visir. On the side of this minister walk the Alay-Tchaooches, or
Law-Serjeants, who keep their silver rods, hung round with little chains, and
resembling children's corals, in constant motion, with the noise of which he is
attended quite into his palace. A covered chariot, rudely made, and ill carved,
but richly gift, and containing a little sopha, commonly follows the mufti, to
receive him when he is fatigued.

Afterward come the Captains of the Body-Guards, and the principal and under
equeries, who precede the led horses of the Grand Signor. These horses are
covered with very rich trappings, which trail on the ground, and leave nothing
to be seen but the head of that animal; the front of which is ornamented by a
large plume of heron feathers: they likewise each carry a horse's tail, hung to
the throat band of the bridle; and a sabre on the saddle, with a mace passed
through the circingle, both covered by a buckler. Each horse is led by two men
on foot, who hold a leathern thong, fastened to the head of the animal. Two
rows of Assekis, or detachments from the royal gardeners, immediately follow
after; and a troop of Zulustchis, or Body-Guards, with scarlet helmets, and
lances erect, walk, richly dressed, in two rows, and precede the Peisks. These,
clad after the Roman manner, carry the fasces surmounted with a silver hatchet;
and march before the Solacks, a body of left handed men who guard the Sultan's
person, and so called from being obliged to draw their arrows with their left
hand; these are armed with their bows and arrows, and bear rich helmets,
ornamented with plumes of feather shaped like a fan, the extremities of which
uniting, form two lines of these crests, between which the Grand Signor
proceeds, alone, on horseback. The plumes he bears rise above this suberb
group, and his approach inspires a melancholy silence; the Janissaries bow,
profoundly, until the line of feathers has entirely hid the Emperor from their
sight; while his Highness, on his part, has the goodness to return the salute,
by a slight motion of his head, to the right and left.

An infinite number of Tchoadars surround and follow the Grand Signior. They
encompass, at the same time, the Seliklar Aga; who carries the Imperial sabre
on his shoulder, and is clad in a habit of cloth of gold; which is the only
Turkish dress that fits the shape.

The Kislar Aga next appears, or chief of the eunuchs, followed by Kasnadar
Aga, or keeper of the privy-purse, who closes the procession, and distributes
money to the people, running after him in crowds. The Capidgilar Kiayassay, or
Captain of the Guards, and the Bostangi-Bachi, who precede the Grand Signior
whenever he goes in public, are obliged, on his return to the seraglio, to
allight at the first court, and go before his Highness. When they approach it,
they increase their pace, prostrate themselves at his horses feet, and
introduce him into the second court, walking before him to the place where he
allights, and is received by the officers of the interior apartment.

Most of the Mohammedan doctors, the expounders of the Turkish law, have
declared that the sovereign is above the laws, and may revoke his promises, and
even his oaths, when he discovers they are prejudicial to his absolute power,
and unlimited will. Each monarch, at his coronation, swears he will be the
defender of the Mohammedan religion, of its rights, customs, and ceremonies; and
of all the laws of Mahomet. There are, however, other doctors of the Mohammedan
law, who refuse to acknowledge the power of the sovereign to judge, and decide
in matters of religion; and they are nearly the same arguments, which the
Romish theologists urge, against the Imperial and royal authority.

The following anecdote, respecting this subject, merits our attention. In the
reign of Sultan Osman, a mufti, in giving judgment upon an affair which
belonged to religion, made use of words similar to those of the pope of Rome,
to express his divine authority and infallibility. But when the sentence was
pronounced to that excellent monarch, he annulled it; "I will not be a
schismatic, by acknowledging two popes. I know there is one at Rome, but I will
not allow of another at Constantinople."

In the following relation likewise of a fact, from Baron Tott, of but little
importance in itself, yet singular, and worthy to be remarked, we shall see
Sultan Osman, the late sultan, notwithstanding this arbitrary power assigned to
him, by the doctors of the Mohammedan law, obliged to employ the authority of an
officer, of very inferior rank, with a refractory Janissary, who refused
obedience to his orders.

This Janissary being drunk, and pursued by the guard, who, as we before
observed, have commonly no other arms but large sticks, availed himself of the
superiority which his Yatagan, (a kind of knife very long, and bent, which
serves as a sabre gave over them, to defend himself like a lion. He had already
driven several of his enemies from the field; and fatigued by his exertions,
prepared for a new engagement, by resting on the steps of a Khan, whilst the
guard converted the attack into a blockade. The Grand Signior, who frequently
went about the city in disguise, but which conceals him from no one, happening
to be on the spot, approached the offender, told him to lay down his weapons,
and surrender himself prisoner; but nothing could move our hero, who even dared
to look his sovereign carelessly in the face, and threaten the first person who
should approach him.

The Sultan then asked him to what Orta he belonged, and, upon his telling him,
sent for his officer, who presently arrived. "Disarm that man," said the Grand
Signior, "and conduct him to the castle." The officer directly takes off his
girdle. This girdle is of copper, and weighs fifteen pounds; with which the
officers may knock down, or kill, any Janissary. The soldiers respect this
insignia of rank very much, in those who wear it; for though of an inferior
order, they have great authority. Advancing therefore, toward the rebel, with
it in his right hand, while he held out to him his left, he said, fellow
soldier, give me your weapon and follow me; which he immediately did, with an
air of the most humble submission. So much more influence will prejudice always
have, than fear; and more power, than ever despotism.

The same sultan was soon after obliged to pay a tribute to popular custom, of
which he was himself the victim. The art of the physician had, invain,
endeavored to re-establish the health of that prince; at the same time that
the maxims of government concealed his indisposition. At length, his disorder
increasing, he was obliged to shut himself up in his palace, and reserve his
strength, to appear every Friday at the mosque. This public ceremony, which
custom has consecrated, may not be neglected without exciting great
disturbances, among the soldiers and the people.

The contradiction which appears, at first view, in a law that requires
submission to such a custom, from a person so despotic as the sultan, will
vanish, if we consider that it is necessarily dictated, by the despotism of the
multitude; which is the object of perpetual dread to arbitrary power. Secluded
from the public eye, in the impenetrable apartments of his seraglio, the sight
of him alone can prove his existence. It will likewise be perceived, that
without this precaution, a visir, possessed of sufficient art to terrify, or
corrupt, two or three persons, after the death of his master, might conceal it
long enough, to bring about some revolution in the government.

It was not therefore without exciting some very loud murmurs, that Sultan
Osman neglected, one Friday, to appear in public at the mosque; and in order to
appease the disturbances, that this mission had occasioned, he determined to go
the Friday following, with the usual ceremonies, to that of Sancta Sophia,
which is nearest the seraglio; notwithstanding the extreme state of weakness
and languor, to which his disorder had reduced him. This prince on his return,
scarce able to keep his seat on his horse, though supported by his attendants
who surrounded him, fainted away, between the two gates, which divide the
courts of the seraglio, and died in a few minutes after he was brought into the
palace.

A book of the laws of Mahomet establishes as a maxim of religion, that
mussulmen not only may, but ought to, violate, and cancel, any treaties;
detrimental to the interest of the empire, or of their rereligion. It was in
virtue of this maxim, that Mahomet* obliged to raise the siege of Mecca, and
make peace with its inhabitants, came upon them afterward by surprise, and
took the city in violation of treaty. Being asked by Abubeker, his disciple and
general, why he did not keep his word, which he had sworn to, when he signed
the treaty of peace; he answered, he had acted in that manner, to teach his
successors, by his example, that no treaties were to be kept, when the
promulgation of his holy religion, or the extension of the empire, required
they should be broke through.

Accordingly the Ottoman history abounds with examples of Turkish perfidy to
Christian princes. One only of which we will mention, as related by historians;
it being more memorable than the rest.

A treaty of peace and friendship, in 1606, was concluded, signed, sealed and
published, between Achmet the First, and Rodolphus the Second, Emperor of
Germany. While the Plenipotentiaries of the Port, and those of the Emperor,
were still at Pest, opposite to Buda, consulting together, in order to put the
last hand to some regulations arising out of the treaty; and at the very moment
when the Turkish ministers, from the Port, were giving a public dinner, to
those from the Emperor, the Turkish garrison in Buda, imagining, that at such a
time, they should find the walls of Pest defenseless, sallied out, and
attempted to take the town by surprise; the vigilance of the German troops,
however, whose officers suspected some perfidy on the part of the Turks,
prevented their base design from taking effect, and they were repulsed with
very considerable loss.

The Grand Signior is successor, both to the Califat, and the chief of the
military government. This despotism, says Tott, is founded on the alcoran, and
the interpretation of that book is exclusively possessed by the Ulemas. Every
thing must submit to the law, and every thing must submit to the sovereign.
These two powers have the same source, and it is easy to perceive the
disagreement and contention which must arise, since their right is equal, and
their interests different.

In this passage, says Peysonnel, Baron Tott destroys that complete and
dreadful despotism, against which he declaims. As soon as there exists, between
the despot and the people, an intermediary body whose authority is equal,
though its interests are different; if this body be the depositary, the
interpreter of the law, to which the sovereign is obliged to submit, no less
than the meanest of his subjects; and if this body, and the despot, are obliged
to fear and respect each other, despotism can no longer exist. And though it be
true, as is asserted by the Baron, that the monarch may with a single word,
banish, or even put to death, the mufti, and all those of his body who
displease him; it is equally true, that the professors of the law may, in an
instant, by seditious discourse, or offering Yaftas, or papers, as is
practiced, to the mosques, or in other public places, raise the people, and
dethrone, or assassinate the sovereign. Several muftis who have been banished,
have been the occasion of greatly alarming the monarch. The famous Mufti Essad
Effendi was in banishment, when from his country house on the Bosphorus, he
excited those riots against Sultan Mahmoud, which effected the destruction of
the Kisler Aga, Seuleiman Aga, and the Armenian; nor would the emperor himself
have escaped, had he not instantly determined to sacrifice those favorites.

The first person in rank, next to the sultan, is the Grand Visir, or prime
minister; his power is unlimited, and his station the highest in the empire.
The Turks call him Vizir-Azemt, which signifies chief of the council, or vicar
of the empire.

The seal upon which is engraved the name of the great seal, is in his custody;
and he always wears it in a little purse, suspended about his neck. In
consequence of this trust, he partakes of the sovereign authority; for, by
means of the impression of this seal, all the orders he issues, and which are
dependant only on his will and pleasure, are instantly executed.

This office was instituted by Sultan Amurath II. as we have already observed,
to reward one of his generals, who had conquered Adrianople. By creating this
office, he deputed to him the sovereign authority, as to the executive part of
government, and from that time, it has been handed down to our day, with some
alterations, which shall be noticed in their proper place.

The Grand Visir's court and his suite are very numerous. More than a thousand
persons attend him, when he goes to the Divan; he is always a bashaw of three
tails. The income he draws from the royal treasury is very moderate, the salary
being only 20,000 Turkish piastres; but from other resources he amasses immense
riches. Every bashaw, on his first appointment to a government, is obliged to
pay a considerable sum to the Grand Visir, and that the government of a rich
province, may not be exchanged for one of less value, the bashaws, likewise,
make him annual presents, the Grand Visir having always some political pretext
for frequent changes of the governors of provinces. When a bashaw of three
tails dies, his effects are transported to the seraglio, and thrown into the
private treasury of the Grand Signior, but they pass first through the hands of
the Grand Visir, who generally takes care to appropriate a considerable part to
himself. In short, all persons who have any business to transact with the
Port, cannot dispense with the established custom of making some valuable
present to this officer.

It is computed, likewise, that there are 12,000 common prostitutes in
Constantinople, who pay a gold ducat per week, for liberty to pursue their
infamous commerce; and this tribute is divided between the Grand Visir, the
Bostangi Bashaw, and the Agha of the Janissaries. All the public houses of
Galata, Pera, and the banks of the canal of the Black Sea, pay almost as much
as the common women; and this impost belongs solely to the Visir. Besides these
means of adding to his yearly income, he has other methods of extorting money;
so that it is impossible to form an exact calculation of his revenues, as they
depend so much on the disposition of the person who holds this high office.

CHARLES XII. of SWEDEN and the GRAND VISIR.


Darandali-Haggi Mahmet Bashaw, who was Grand Visir, under the late sultan,
only for about a year and an half, amassed, within that time, six millions of
Turkish piastres, besides jewels, rich stuffs, and other valuable effects; the
consequence of which was, that his immense riches were seized by the sultan,
who never suffers his visir to be guilty of great extortions, but that he may
confiscate the plunder all at once, under the color of public justice.

The custom of putting the Turks to death because they were too rich, is now
laid aside; so that a Grand Visir who gives up his treasures quietly, is only
dismissed, or, perhaps, banished to some island of the Archipelago.

The authority and powers of the Grand Visir, are not so extensive as in former
reigns; the chiefs of the black eunuchs, having gained the ascendant, owing to
the frequent access they have to the sultan, who passes much of his time in the
harem. He is not permitted, as formerly, to put persons to death, without the
sultan's orders. In former reigns, the Grand Visir beheaded the bashaws of
provinces, and sometimes even the favorites of their monarchs, without their
knowledge. Another loss the Visirs have sustained, is, the privilege of opening
all letters from the generals of armies, and governors of provinces, and only
imparting so much of their contents as they thought proper; by which means they
had those officers entirely under their direction, but this dangerous custom is
now entirely abolished, and the sultan obliges them to send all letters upon
public affairs, to the feraglio, where they are examined by the Kisler Agha,
and the Grand Visir is as ignorant of their contents, as the sultans were
formerly; and only receives implicit orders to answer them, in such and such a
manner, without knowing any thing further.

The Visir still retains the right of appeal from all other tribunals of
justice; and for this purpose he comes to the divan twice a week, attended by
all his own officers, and by those belonging to the other tribunals; he,
likewise, holds a divan, and administers justice in his own house. In the
general divan, where he is present, no magistrate, or judge, is allowed to sit
down, except the chief justices of Romelia and Natolia. These two have a power
of passing their own sentences, in presence of the visir, but he can, likewise,
annul them, as soon as they are passed.

All petitions presented to the Grand Signior, must be given to the visir, but
those complaining of his administration are presented to the Sultan, in his way
to, or from, the mosque: the method is, says Habesci, for the petitioner to
place his petition upon his head, and to raise himself, as much as possible,
above the crowd, so that the monarch may see him, who immediately sends an
officer to take the petition, and bring it to him.

The Spahis and Janissaries cannot be punished by the Grand Visir, unless their
commanders in chief give their consent: a revolt would be the consequence of
acting otherwise. The Grand Visir has always a Kiaga, or lieutenant, which is a
very important post, and must be filled by a person of great capacity and
experience, who is able to give the best advice to his principal.

When the visir gives audience to ambassadors and foreign ministers, he is
seated upon a corner of the Imperial sopha, alone; at his right hand, stands
the Reis Effendi, or principal secretary of state, and on his left the Kiaga;
the foreign minister is seated opposite the visir, upon a stool.

Sometimes the Grand Visir gives audience to the foreign ministers at the
arsenal, or at one of the sultan's country palaces, in which cases, neither
Kiaga, nor Reis Effendi, are present, and there is less ceremony, but more
business transacted.

Being invested almost with sovereign authority, he often heads the army, in
room of the Sultan; and is there idolized by the soldiery. Great as this
officer may appear in the eyes of his people and exalted as he may be in his
own eyes, the grand visir met with a rebuff from Charles XII. of Sweden. This
monarch having taken part with the Turks, against the Russians, and being
defeated by the Czar, at the battle of Pultawa, in 1709, he fled into Turkey;
the Turks renewed the war with the Russians and the Poles, and coming into the
grand visir's camp at the fields of Pruth; and entering his tent, just at the
time the visir had signed the articles of peace, between Russia and Turkey; and
seeing that his interests had had been entirely neglected. he reproached the
visir in very violent terms, for not having drawn more advantage from the
chance of war, and taken the Czar prisoner, when he had him in his power. The
visir replied, with an imperious air, that if all the Christian monarchs were
to be kept prisoners in Turkey, and thus kept absent from their states, who
would there be to govern? Alluding to Stanislaus, King of Poland, then a
prisoner in Turkey; and Charles flying to the Turkish camp for protection. The
Swedish monarch felt the sting of this remark; and, looking on the visir with
indignation, entangled his spurs in the visir's robes, and throwing himself on
a sopha, rent them to the bottom.

When the grand visir makes a campaign, all the records of chancery, and the
archives dependent upon it, are transported with him, and make part of his
baggage; this strange custom is still kept up, notwithstanding the
inconvenience they have found from it; by the loss of all their writings, when
they were obliged to raise the siege of Vienna, and retreat with the utmost
precipitation. During the absence of the grand visir with the army, a
substitute is appointed at Constantinople, whose authority however is very
inconsiderable; for, as the public registers are in the visir's camp, he cannot
decide any important cause, without sending to consult him for precedents. This
substitute is called the Kaimacan, and his administration is only provisional;
for the moment the visir returns, it ceases; and the persons holding this
office, are strictly forbidden to mention publicly, that they have been
Kaimacans; or to speak of the affairs of their administration. If in time of
war, whilst the grand visir is at a distance, the Sultan should be inclined to
leave Constantinople, two Kaimacans are appointed; one to attend on his person,
and the other to remain in the city: in which case there are likewise two
separate administrations. This event happened when Sultan Mahomet IV, fixed his
residence at Salonica, during the war of Candia.

There were formerly six visirs, besides the Grand Visir, and they were called
Visirs of the bench; they made a part of the cabinet council, and delivered
their sentiments freely, without being under any dread or control of the grand
visir. In the reign of Sultan Achmet III. his Grand Visir, Ibrahim Bashaw
suppressed them, under pretext of economy, but in reality, that he might not be
subject to be opposed by them in the council; and the better to silence the
pretensions of those who were then in possession of those dignities; he gave
them lucrative appointments, at a distance from the capital, which indemnified
them for their loss of power; but a revival of their office had been frequently
in agitation, which induces us to notice them.

The Defterdar is the high treasurer of the empire; an office totally distinct
from that of treasurer of the seraglio. The Defterdar collects all the revenues
of the empire, by his proper officers, of whom he has a numerous train, and is
obliged to supply all the demands of the state, as well in time of war as in
peace; his utmost attention therefore, is directed to the improvement of the
revenues, and the diminution of the expenses of the empire. When the high
treasurer is a bold enterprizing man, he is capable of doing much mischief
throughout the whole empire; and, if he be dishonest, the consequences are
severely felt by the people. In the year 1750, a defterdar, who was a native of
Georgia, and had risen to that employment from being a slave, fled from
Constantinople, attended only by two domestics, and one of his women; the
treasures he took with him consisted of 28,000 purses, each purse containing
300 Turkish piastres, and was never heard of more.

The Reis Effendi has a double employment, being both secretary of state, and
chancellor of the empire. All the affairs of foreign princes pass through his
hands. His employments are the most lucrative of any in the state; except that
of the Grand Visir. He issues all diplomas for the investiture of lands,
governments, and other public offices throughout the empire. No ship, of any
nation, can leave the port of Constantinople, without his permission in
writing; which, by the Turkish tariff, costs five piastres. This revenue alone
is very considerable, owing to the prodigious population of the city; and the
great trade it carries on with all the nations of Asia, Africa, and Europe. The
perquisites of the chancery are likewise immense, arising from the business he
transacts with all the provinces of the empire; so that if the Reis Effendi is
a covetous man, he may amass astonishing treasures, even with a fair character;
but if he be dishonest, he has a thousand ways of adding to his lawful
emoluments by extortions. But notwithstanding the great influence, and
authority of his employments, they do not entitle him to a place in the divan,
nor in the cabinet council; unless the business before them concerns his
department.

The Nissangi is commonly understood to be the keeper of the great seal, though
in fact it is always in possession of the grand visir; but the Nissangi writes,
with his own hand, the cipher containing the name of the reigning monarch;
which must be put to every order, or grant, from the Sultan; without which it
is null and void. The dispatches and public papers, of such an extensive
empire, must be almost numberless, and the Tura, or cipher, is taxed according
to the importance of the papers; those of the least consequence paying seven
piastres. He attends at the royal divan, and his place is on a collateral
bench, at the right hand of the grand visir.

The Teskeregi is a kind of vice chancellor, an office of great importance. He
has all the registers of the chancery, and all writings, belonging to that
office, in his custody; and it is his duty to see that all firmans, or royal
mandates, are well written and according to rule. He is therefore, responsible
to the Reis Effendi for the diligence, fidelity, and dispatch, of his subaltern
officers, who are very numerous; and constantly employed in the offices
belonging to the chancery. The greatest secrets of state, and the most private
conferences, are imparted to him; he is even called upon, occasionally, to give
his opinion on very weighty affairs; though he is not obliged to it by his
office, and his advice is often followed. He commonly succeeds the Reis Effendi
when a vacancy happens, either by death, or the removal of that officer. His
income depends, in a great measure, upon the Reis Effendi; and is, more or
less, according to the business transacted in the chancery.

The governors of the provinces are divided into three classes. The
Beglier-beys, the Bashaw-beys, and the Sangiacks. Their rank is distinguished
by the number of horse's tails that are borne before them, as marks of honor,
in the nature of standards, or ensigns.

The Beglier-beys have three; the Bashaw-beys two; and the Sangiacks one. It is
a vulgar error to say, Bashaw of three tails; for that dignity belongs only to
the Beglier-beys, who are princes over princes; and far superior to bashaws.
The horses' tails are as much a mark of honor, as any order, civil or
military, instituted by any of the other European sovereigns; but the account
of its origin being little known, some modern writers have turned it into
ridicule; while others have written very ignorantly on this subject. I shall
therefore first describe the standard, and then give an account of its
institution.

It consists of a long substantial pole, on the summit of which is fixed a
leaden ball doubly gilt, to which are fastened a number of horses' tails,
denoting the rank of the governor; and it is adorned with banners which descend
a considerable length from the ball, and float in the air.

It is as ancient as the time of Abubeker, who having lost a battle in Syria,
was abandoned by his troops, who fled on all sides; when one of his officers,
whose presence of mind was equal to his valor, hit upon an expedient to rally
the dispersed forces. For this purpose he took a long pole, and having nothing
proper to fasten on it, as a signal to be seen at a distance, he cut off his
horse's tail, and having fastened it on the top of his pole, he kept waving it
in the air; at the sight of this signal, which the Mahometans considered as a
token of some favorable turn in their affairs, they made the best of their way
to the standard, recovered the shock of their late defeat, attacked the enemy,
with great vigor, and gained a decisive victory: the horse's tail was highly
honored, in consequence of this successful stratagem of war, and from that
time was respected, as the most honorable ensign in the Ottoman armies. The
Tail was given to every commander, of any considerable body of troops, and
soldiers were usually inlisted under this standard; in process of time, custom
converted it into a mark of dignity; but in order to distinguish the different
ranks of commanders, they varied the number of tails; and this difference at
present denotes the rank and authority of the governors of provinces.

There are two kinds of Beglier-Beys. Those of the first order are called
Cajel-Beglier-Beys; whose revenues arise from lordships, and from all the lands
in general, within the district of their governments. The second are called
Saliani-Beglier-Beys; whose salaries are paid from the Sultan's treasury, under
the direction of the defterdar, on whom they are greatly dependant.

Next to the grand visir, the Beglier-Beys are the most respected personages in
the empire, and have the greatest authority. Their governments are always
either kingdoms, or extensive provinces; and they have several Bashaw-Beys, and
Sangiacks, besides a prodigious number of inferior officers, subject to their
will and pleasure. The wealth of the Beglier-beys is immense.

Osman, Beglier-bey of Damascus, not many years deceased, left in his treasury
twelve millions of piastres in specie, besides a great quantity of rich jewels;
and he likewise died possessed of very valuable landed property; yet Damascus
is not reckoned one of the best governments. According to the laws of the
empire, all his effects should have been confiscated, and transported to the
Imperial treasury, but his eldest son, who was Bashaw of Sayda, in Syria,
purchased from the Sultan, his father's inheritance, for 10,000 purses, with
this express condition, that the Grand Signior should give him a third tail,
and appoint him to his father's part of Beglier-bey of Damascus. The contract
was ratified, because the monarch knew he could not at that time obtain better
terms by compulsion; but after the peace was firmly established by the
Russians, the Port prosecuted him with such violence, that he was obliged to
keep a standing army for his defense; in the end, however, his government was
taken from him, and his treasures were seized; but out of regard to the memory
of his father, who was highly esteemed at Constantinople, an inferior
government in Mesopotamia was bestowed on him; but this unfortunate man always
neglecting to pay the customary tribute to the Grand Signior, and the usual
douceurs to the Vizir, he was shut up in the fortress of Siras Sebastus, and
his three tails taken from him; after some time he was released, and I saw him,
says Habesci, at Aleppo, very poor, and supported by a younger brother, who had
been a bashaw, but had abdicated his government, and lived retired in that city.

Each Beglier-bey, in time of war, is obliged to furnish soldiers for the army,
in proportion to the stated revenues of his governments, and the ratio is, one
man for every five aspres and an half: he is also obliged to furnish them with
subsistence.

In Asia, there are eighteen Beglier-beys, or princes of three tails, whose
salaries are, three or four excepted, about a million of aspres a year,
exclusive of Bassora and Bagdat, which are now united into one government, the
salary of which is 18,000 ducats, and for every ducat paid them by the Sultan,
they must provide a soldier.

In Europe there are fourteen of these Beglier-beys, their salaries are from
five hundred thousand to a million of aspres. Each of these principal
governments has its mufti, cadi, reis-effendi, defterdar, agha of the
Janissaries, and Spathilar Aghasi. The agha of the Janissaries is commander in
chief of that corpse, and the Spathilar Aghasi is commander of the provincial
troops in each province.

There is also a Beglier-bey for Grand Cairo, who has a salary of six thousand
ducats, though Egypt is in fact at present only nominally dependant on the
Grand Signior.

When they are in march against the enemy, or going to encamp, the Beglier-beys
of Natolia, Bagdat, Grand Cairo, and Romelia, have the precedence of all
others, and they give it to each other, according to the antiquity of their
respective governments, computing from the time they were conquered by the
Mussulmen.

It would be tedious and useless to enter into the particulars of the inferior
governments which depend on the principal ones, and have their mufti, cadi,
etc. yet they are all appointed by their governors, and not by the Grand
Signior, as in the chief provinces. However, some of these dependant
governments have sometimes made their principals, and even the Grand Signior
himself tremble by their insurrections, particularly those of Beylan and Pajas,
in the vicinity of Alexandretta, and of Cogni, in Natolia.

It has always been difficult to give a just idea of the political system or
constitution of monarchial governments, the whole depending commonly upon the
caprice of the sovereigns, or the private interests of those who surround him.
The history of Turkey abounds with melancholy instances of the most unjust and
bloody wars, and of the most astonishing revolutions in kingdoms, proceeding
from the slightest causes. Though property, as we have before observed, is
highly respected in Turkey, heads, says Habesci, are taken off with as little
ceremony as an English gardener would cut off a parcel of cabbages from the
stalks, and that without any apparent reason. This seems to have been the mode
of conduct in the old French government. No man could have his property taken
from him, but by a regular course of law, as in England, but his person was
liable to be imprisoned in their Bastile, at the pleasure of the minister,
though it does not appear that such orders have ever been wantonly exercised
for the last hundred years, whatever giddy brained Frenchmen may assert to the
contrary; and probably in extensive governments, like that of France, it may be
for the general welfare of the community, that such discretionary powers should
be lodged in the hands of the minister. Property seems equally sacred in
Turkey. A late Sultan, says Baron Tott, had determined to build a mosque, its
situation was fixed upon, and he seemed likely to meet with no difficulty in
making the necessary purchases; when a Jew, who possessed a house of small
value in the center of this piece of ground, refused to part with it at any
price. Large offers were made in vain; the Israelite was inflexible, and his
avarice gave way to his obstinacy. All the courtiers, accustomed to see every
opposition bow before the prince, pleased themselves with the hopes of seeing
the Jew's house erased, and himself dragged to punishment. But happy the
princes who confound not the sovereign with the man, nor believe it allowable
to use their authority to gratify their revenge. Such was Sultan Solomon; he
descended from the throne to consult the law, and wrote thus to the mufti: A
man desires to build a temple to the divinity; all the mussulmen, proprietors
of the ground on which it is to be erected, are in haste to participate in so
good a work: one only, and he a Jew, refuses all offers. What punishment does
he deserve? None, replied the mufti. Property is sacred, without distinction of
individuals; and a temple may not be erected to God, in violation of so holy a
law. It is favorable to the desire which the Jew, no doubt, has, to leave to
his children a property, the value of which they would, perhaps soon dissipate;
but it is the right of the sovereign to insist on hiring any ground for which
he has occasion. A contract, therefore, for the hire of the ground must be made
out to the Jew and his descendants, and then the house may be pulled down and
the mosque built, without fear that the prayers of the mussulmen offered up
therein should be rejected.

Habesci, himself admits, that revolutions would happen more frequently than
even in former periods of the Turkish history, if a summary justice was not
sometimes exercised as well within the walls of the feraglio, as in the city of
Constantinople, and in the provinces.

With respect to public economy, all the foresight and prudence, that can be
wished for in the most civilized countries, is observed in Turkey. A readiness
to receive, and a great care to guard and preserve the public money, is the
character of the Turkish ministers of the finances, and they have likewise an
adroitness peculiar to them, of imposing taxes that will not give disgust, and
an inconceivable alertness in suppressing them the moment any popular
discontent appears. But to counterbalance this act of prudent policy, there is
another of cruelty and injustice, not practiced in any other nation. The Sultan
is universal heir to the effects of his deceased subjects, and unless he thinks
proper, will only leave the eldest son sufficient for common subsistence. It is
true this common law is not always enforced, but it is nevertheless a
fundamental right of the sovereigns in Turkey. Though this stretch of despotism
has the appearance of public economy, as the value of the effects is paid into
the public treasury, yet its principal object is the support of the arbitrary
power of the monarch: for the right is seldom exerted, except the deceased
person was very rich, or held a considerable office under government. The
Ottoman sovereigns know very well, that great riches enable men to form
powerful parties, to make dangerous connections, and to attempt revolutions, if
they happen to be disaffected. It is for this reason principally, that they
seize the effects of rich bashaws after their decease; that their sons may not
secure themselves, by means of their numerous adherents in their fathers
governments.

There are likewise among the Mahometans, as well as among the Christians, a
set of men who fancy themselves born superior to the rest of the human race, by
inheriting noble blood; and such men in despotic governments, are greatly to be
dreaded.

Another very singular method is taken by the Sultans to reduce the great
riches of the bashaws, of whose influence in the empire they are become
jealous; and that is by marrying them to their own daughters, sisters, or
nieces, by compulsion; for they dare not refuse the proposal of being so nearly
related to their Sovereign; and they are under the necessity of making very
rich presents to the intended bride, and after the marriage must maintain them
in a manner suitable to their Imperial rank. This successful method of draining
their purses, likewise gives a different turn to the ambition of their
dangerously great men; as instead of being at the head of parties in opposition
to the Sultan, they warmly espouse the interest of their august relation, and
are the chief spies on the conduct of other bashaws not in the same
circumstances. Thus a princess is disposed of without expense, and the
tranquillity of the state at the same time further secured. As a provision
likewise against hereditary successions to nobility, the children of such
marriages are excluded by law from rising to any great office under government.

Many of these princesses have been married to fourteen or fifteen successive
bashaws. For as the principal object of the Port is to destroy that powerful
influence which exorbitant wealth creates, the Sultan obliges a bashaw of
seventy or eighty years of age, to marry a princess hardly two months old, the
husband, in that case being obliged to be at the expense of her maintenance,
and that of her household. He dies perhaps after a few months, and the princess
is transferred by marriage to a second bashaw, older and more infirm than the
first, and thus she passes from husband to husband; so that in the course of
twenty years she may easily have been the widow of a dozen husbands, whom she
has never seen; and when she is arrived at an age to be united to a man, then
they give her a husband, to whom she is delivered, and with whom she resides
constantly like other wives. These ladies are called Sultanas, and during the
premature marriages we have mentioned, a hotel is provided for them, in which
they live apart from the Port, but it must be either in Constantinople, or its
environs.

Another political maxim of the Turkish government is the frequent change of
the principal officers of state. For upon the appointment of a new officer, or
his promotion to a higher post, he is obliged to make very considerable
presents to the Sultan, and the short duration of these ministers in their
posts, does not permit them to adopt any ideas adverse to that blind obedience
and slavery which is the support of despotism. Besides, these ministers to
indemnify themselves for the great disbursements they have made in presents,
are obliged to oppress and rob the people they govern; and this has an
admirable tendency to accomplish one principal end in the Turkish system of
politics, which is to depress the spirits of the people in the provinces by
frequent vexations and extortions, that they may be accustomed to bear the yoke
of slavery without murmuring, It is well known, that no bounds can be
prescribed to the insatiable love of riches; if therefore some of the bashaws
of provinces and their sangiacks should have gone too great lengths, in order
to amass money rapidly, under the apprehension of being removed; they are
effectually removed, by having their heads taken from their shoulders, and the
Sultan thus demonstrates his love to his subjects, and fills his coffers by the
seizure of the immense riches of the criminal.

The second branch of the Ottoman system of politics, respects the interests of
the state, at home and abroad. No people ever possessed the art of
dissimulation, or, to speak in the courtly style of Chesterfield, of
simulation, in a greater degree than the Turks. They know how to make an
opportune sacrifice, even of their most darling passions, to their political
interests. It is an absurd idea, too genenerally entertained, that the Turks
are choleric and untractable; on the contrary, when it suits their purpose,
either as a nation or as individuals, no people are more pliant; they will even
submit to the grossest insults, to gain a favorite point, or an important
object.

They have the addroitness on the subject of public affairs, to publish just
what they think proper, to amuse the people, and to blend truth with falsehood,
so artfully, that it is hardly possible to discover the deceit; thus deluded,
at several periods of the Russian war, the Turks believed they were in the arms
of victory, when they were almost surrounded by the enemy, and defeated in
every quarter.

The Ottoman cabinet spares neither pains not expense, to acquire an intimate
knowledge of the views, and interests of all the other powers of Europe. And
having scarce any public ministers, at the different courts, it is remarkable
they obtain earlier, and better intelligence, from their secret enemies, than
is received, or transmitted home, by the whole corpse diplomatique. A memorable
proof of this was given at Constantinople, upon the death of the late King of
France, Louis XV. The Grand Visir notified this event publicly, five days
before the courier from France brought the intelligence to the Marquis de St
Priest, the French ambassador, at Constantinople. These emissaries are either
Greeks or Jews, and they find the means of conveying intelligence to the Port,
much sooner than any minister. The policy of the Turks in this article, says
Habesci, is admirable; for the dignity of the Sultan is never committed by any
act of these emissaries; whereas if a declared minister receives an insult, his
royal master is obliged to resent it; or if he commits any gross error, at the
court to which he is sent, his master must be responsible. Such emissaries
likewise mix freely with the people, and thereby gain information which would
never be given to an avowed minister. So well served is the Port by these
agents, that Habesci, who was secretary to a late grand visir, asserts he has
seen, upon the visir's table, exact lists of the military forces of the
principal powers in Europe; with calculations of the utmost amount of ships,
and troops, they could possibly assemble for particular purposes; details of
their reciprocal misunderstandings; interesting anecdotes of the internal
administration of their respective governments, and delineations of the ruling
characters of their prime ministers.

What shall we say then of a court so well informed, where the major part are
soldiers, and where the want of success in their generals is punished with
death; in fine, where measures are so well concerted, before a war is
commenced, when we see its empire hastening to dissolution; but that despotism
and avarice, on the part of its rulers; and cowardice and indolence, on the
part of the people, uniting with superstition and voluptuousness, are
undermining its foundation? It is possible however, some man of genius may
start up, and, availing himself of the docility, and flexibility, of his
countrymen, train and lead them on to victory, to conquest, and deliverance
from the dreaded yoke of the Russians.

Another article of domestic policy in Turkey is, to secure a constant supply
of the necessaries and conveniences of life, on easy terms. The Turkish
government merits much praise for its strict attention to the articles of
provision; of which there is always very great abundance, at Constantinople;
notwithstanding the immense number of its inhabitants, exceeding that of any
other capital in Europe. The markets are daily supplied, not only abundantly,
but on more moderate terms than in any other city; and the variety is so great,
that the most luxurious appetite may be easily gratified. For this purpose, the
government takes care to keep up a good understanding with all those places,
from whence provisions, or other conveniences of life, are brought to
Constantinople; they will suffer indignities, outrages, and even seditions,
without resentment, from the Tartars of the Crimea; because they furnish the
city with vast quantities of provisions, forage, etc. It is for the same reason
the Turks are so careful to preserve to themselves, the navigation of the Black
Sea.

CHAP. XVI. Laws and Revenue.
ALL law proceedings, in Turkey, are reduced to the deposition of witnesses; no
other proofs are admitted, or required; and witnesses, according to Habesci,
are to be purchased at any rate. The judge has it always in his power to
declare which are false, and which are true witnesses; this opens the door to
private interest; for the best witnesses are generally those, whose employers
can make the richest presents to the judge; and when the partiality and
oppression of those judges have stirred up the people, to carry their
complaints to the foot of the throne, the Sovereign, the above author adds,
most graciously condescends to open the Imperial treasury, to receive the
riches they have amassed, as fines for the false judgment they have given, and
to appoint new judges, as venal as their predecessors.

Fortunately for the dismissed judges, they belong to a corpse dreaded by the
sultans, and therefore are permitted to wear their heads in obscurity the
remainder of their lives.

It is scarce possible to give credit to the severity of the punishments
inflicted in Turkey, or the rapidity of executing them. The Turkish government
hardly makes any distinction of offenses; for it punishes equally with death
those violations of the law, however trifling, which happen through negligence
or inattention, as well as the most atrocious crimes. In an empire like the
Turkish, this extreme severity is almost essential to its preservation. The
frequent changes of the governors of provinces, and other great officers of
state, who are generally promoted to answer the particular views of the Sultan,
or grand visir, without any regard to abilities or merit, is the fruitful
source of many evils, which frequent and sudden executions are supposed in some
measure to remedy.

With respect to the military, the same severity being extended to every rank
of officers, it is remarkable that instances of cowardice or misconduct in
Turkish generals happen very seldom; on the contrary, the dread of punishment
has made them perform the most heroic actions. The rigor of the laws, and the
certainty of being put to death for violating them, affects all orders of men
throughout the empire. It obliges them who hold public offices to be attentive
and diligent in the discharge of their important duties, and produces in the
mass of the people that humility and moderation, which is not to be met with in
the common people of any other country.

In fact, it is very astonishing that in so large and populous a city as
Constantinople, inhabited by persons of different nations and religions, a
murder or a robbery is scarce ever committed; it therefore most assuredly owes
its public tranquillity and good order to the regulation of its police, which
we have already noticed.

The Grand Visir, the Capitan Pacha, the Agha of the Janissaries, and the
Bostangi Bashaw, are the only ministers who have the right of inflicting
condign punishment each in their respective departments. But the grand visir is
absolute in this particular, over all manner of persons whatever, including
even the other ministers just mentioned; for he is the executor of the supreme
will of the Sultan, unless he chooses to draw the hand of justice himself, a
circumstance which frequently occurred in the early part of the Ottoman
history, but of which there is no instance of late date; the Turkish sovereigns
having imitated the examples of Christian powers, by throwing the burden of
every act of cruelty and oppression on the head and shoulders of their
ministers or political porters. The inferior officers of justice may inflict
pecuniary punishments, imprison and chastise by corporal pains.

The modes of execution in Turkey, not practiced in the Christian nations of
Europe, are impaling, suffocations, and strangling; but of late years beheading
with the scimitar is the most prevailing; and with respect to great men, and
upon sudden emergencies, after the fatal mandate is issued, it is executed in
the most speedy manner possible, the capigi bachi, or the executioner,
frequently coming with his attendants upon the person he is ordered to
dispatch, by surprise, in his house, or in his gardens, or on the highway, and
according to the situation in which he finds him to be, sometimes laying him
across the knees of one, while another strikes off his head at a blow; at other
times when sitting upon his sofa, smoking his pipe, or taking his coffee, off
goes the head of the person whom the capigi bachi was orders to put to death,
at a moment when such a catastrophe was least expected; the warrant having been
shown to his attendants by the executioners in their way to his apartments,
imposes profound silence, and an implicit obedience from the dread of their own
personal safety being endangered if they make any noise. In cases of
resistance, which proceed only from the unforunate victim himself, or perhaps
the zeal of some devoted slave, a horrid mangling ensues; the executioner, who
has made himself expert in his office, by throwing up apples in the air, and
cutting them in half as they descend, aims at the neck as well as he can, but
missing his mark, makes dreadful havoc in destroying his victim.

These Capigi Bachis, says Baron Tott, are a kind of chamberlains, who
introduce all those persons, who have audiences of the Grand Signior, into his
presence. They are likewise to execute all the orders of the Sultan, of what
nature soever they may be. To collect provisions, levy troops, confirm a pacha
in his post, drain him of his wealth, cut off his head, conduct him into exile,
or poison him on the road, make a part of the office of Capigi Bachis.

When the Port wished formerly to dispatch any powerful bashaws, one of these
Capigi Bachis were sent to him, who came under the mask of friendship; but
their attempts having frequently miscarried, they have been obliged, says the
above writer, to adopt the resource of assassinating or poisoning those
officers they have resolved to punish. In this case, the person employed,
disguises himself as well as he can; and furnished with an order which he
carefully conceals, endeavors to get at the person proscribed, chooses if
possible, the opportunity when the divan is sitting, of killing his man,
presents his order, and runs no further risk if he has been sufficiently
dextrous not to fail in his blow.

To render robbers on the highway punishable, they must be taken in the
commission of some daring crime. The legislator of the Arabs, says Tott,
thought, no doubt, he owed this complaisance to a nation which lived only by
rapine. If any murders are committed in a village, the cadi repairs there and
lays a fine on the inhabitants, without troubling himself to take the
offenders. On this account the country people are but too apt to conceal the
crimes that have been committed from the judge, whose presence is more
dangerous to them than that of the thieves, who like tradesmen in our cities,
not having taken up their freedom, are punished when found at work; but when
rich, quit their occupation, recount the feats they have performed, are
honored with respect, and arrive at employments in which they have again
opportunity to exercise their abilities.

It is a shocking truth, adds the above author, that murders are suffered to be
pardoned in Turkey, at the intercession of the nearest relations of the party
murdered. Of this Baron Tott gives a very remarkable instance. A Turk in haste
to inherit, had murdered his father, and was condemned on the strongest proof
to lose his head. One of his friends, the companion of his debaucheries,
hastened to the judge, with a large sum of money, where he was informed that
the sentence had already been pronounced. Not discouraged at this information,
he continued to press the Cadi, whom the sight of such a bribe had already won
over to his interest. I cannot, said he to his client, acquit your friend
without a stronger proof of his innocence than the evidence on which he has
been convicted. Be bold enough to declare yourself the murderer of his father,
procure two witnesses, and I will condemn you to undergo the punishment to
which he has been sentenced; he will be immediately re-instated in all his
rights, and have the power to grant you a pardon. The undertaking was
hazardous, no great confidence could be placed in a parricide, however he
consented. The convicted criminal was accordingly released, pardoned the
pretended murderer, and this villainy. conducted in due form of law, says the
Baron, was completely successful.

Besides the processes which are caused by judicial informations, verification
of title, and appeals to superior tribunals, all private quarrels and
accusations are, in the first instance, brought before the judge, without the
other party daring to refuse his appearance, if the dispute has taken place in
presence of a number of people.

At the very name of justice, the multitude will always take part against him
by whom it has been refused: it is sacred among all nations; it is the central
point of the human mind; it may be mistaken, we may endeavor to elude it, or
deceive others, but we cannot deceive ourselves.

He who gains the day, always pays the costs; the fear of losing what they
have, cannot therefore repress the desire of defrauding others; and the
punishments denounced against false witnesses in Turkey, to be led through the
streets on an ass, with the face turned toward the tail, are rarely executed;
according to the above author, the judges to whose interest they contribute,
owe them too much respect.

A Turk, adds the Baron, was desirous of dispossessing his neighbor of a
field, of which he was the legal possessor. He began by procuring a sufficient
number of witnesses to depose that the field had been sold him by the
proprietor; he afterward applied to the judge, and remitted him 500 piastres,
to engage him to authorize his villainy. This measure sufficiently proved the
subtlety and wickedness of his claims, and excited the indignation of the cadi;
he dissembled his anger however, and gave a hearing to the parties. The lawful
owner of the field dwelt on the insufficiency of the other's title. You have no
witnesses then said the judge? No matter, he adds, I have five hundred for you
which depose in your favor. He then produced the purse he had received as a
bribe, and drove away the false claimant.

This anecdote, says Baron Tott, though it does honor to the integrity of the
judge, does none to the law; which is always the same, namely that if one party
denies, the other is permitted to prove by witnesses. For instance, says the
Baron, if I am sued by a man I have never seen, for a debt I never owed, I
shall be obliged to pay him, on the deposition of two Turkish witnesses, who
shall affirm their knowledge of the debt.

Peysonnel, in this part of his strictures on Baron Tott's memoirs, remarks,
that instead of reciting the laws, the Baron only relates how they are abused.
Had he taken the trouble to turn over their Mulleka, which is their written
order, and contains all the precepts of their religious worship, and the whole
of their jurisprudence, both civil and criminal; if he had consulted Durer and
Kalebi, its two principal commentaries; if he had examined the collections of
the Fetfas, or sentences of the most celebrated muftis; and especially those of
Ali Effendi, he would have found a multitude of wise and well digested laws and
decisions no less equitable than ingenious. He would have published them, and
with reason declaimed and thundered against those unjust judges who had
rendered them of no effect. Far be it from me, says Peysonnel, to attack, or
even support, the integrity of Christian magistrates. But if any one should
weigh, in the balance of equity, the inconveniences of the two systems of
judicature; if, without speaking of the corruption, favor, cabals, intrigue,
solicitations, and influence of men in power, were he only to put into the
other scale, in opposition to the defects of Mohammedan justice, the ceaseless
litigations which in the courts of Europe last from generation to generation;
the hydra of forms; the labyrinth of rights, and customs; the privileges of
nobles, cities, and corporations; and the enormous expenses of justice, which
have often amounted to ten times the property in dispute; it would be difficult
to decide which scale outweighed the other.

Instead of giving an abridgment of the ordinances of Soliman the Great, which
extend to every part of the civil, feudal, and military juridiction, as well as
to the expenditure of the revenue, and which give a determinate and accurate
idea of the extent of the power of the Sultan, of the bounds prescribed him by
the laws, and of that portion delegated by him to the Visirs, Agas, and the
subaltern officers in the provinces, he has contented himself with asserting,
that these visirs and pachas, are so many rascals, who derive from each other
the power of oppressing and arbitrarily plundering the people, and that the
fruits of these numerous extortions and villainies, all flow into the reservoir
of the despot, which swallows up the entire wealth of the subject. He, with
other writers, loudly declaims against the proofs by witnesses, by which all
causes are decided in the Turkish tribunals; he likewise declaims against the
number of false witnesses, which are but too easily procured for money, without
considering that the testimony of witnesses is the basis of all criminal
proceedings in every country, and that false witnesses are unhappily every
where but too numerous, while the truth or falsity of their assertions can only
be discovered by the sagacity of the judge.

The Baron has certainly cited several instances not very honorable to Ottoman
justice. But would it be equitable, in order to give an idea of the justice
exercised in the higher courts of France, to cite as examples the proceedings
against sorcerers, or the condemnatlon and unjust punishment of Marshall de
Marillac, of Calas, or of many others. Ought not a writer on such subjects to
distinguish between the nature of the law and its abuses, which proceed from
ignorance, error, prevarication, or tyranny? The Turks have, no doubt, like
other nations, their moments of relaxation and insanity, in which the laws lose
their force, the people their understanding, and the government its authority;
in which there is no counterpoise to the tyranny of the monarch, the avidity of
those in office, or the rapacity of subalterns, in which all good institutions
are neglected, and every thing is plunged in confusion and anarchy. But would
an author be thought to give a just idea of the French monarchy in selecting
the reigns of Charles VI, VII, and that of Louis XI, or by describing the
massacre of St. Bartholomew, or the commotions of the League, or the Fronde? A
nation, which in the last century, carried its victorious arms to the very
walls of Vienna; and even in the year 1789, triumphed over the united efforts
of the Russians and Germans, and concluded, after a brilliant victory, the
glorious peace of Belgrade. How unjust in modern writers to represent such a
people as a swarm of lawless barbarians, without order, justice, manners, or
character, and ignorant of the first principles of every science. Trials in
Turkey, remarks Thevenot, except in some very intricate cases, seldom last
above four or five hours, so that the laws delay cannot be complained of in
this country.

To prevent murders and robberies during the night, no person is permitted,
says the above author, to walk the streets of Constantinople after it is dark,
except in the month of Ramazan. Should the under bashaw, who is captain of the
watch, and walks his rounds in the night like our constables, meet with any
person transgressing the law, he is carried before the cadi, who examines him;
and if he cannot give sucient reason for being in the streets, after the night
has set in, though it should be even moonlight, he is fined and bastinadoed;
and though he should be dismissed without any punishment being inflicted on
him, it is considered as a disgrace to have been even taken up and carried
before the judge.

Le Brun likewise observes, that if any person is found murdered, and it is not
known who committed the murder, the person opposite to whose house the murder
was committed, if in the streets, is fined to the amount of three hundred
crowns. From this law however, the Franks are exempted. If the murderer be
taken, and the next of kin are minors, he who committed the murder must remain
in prison till they are of age.

It is the office of the Bostangi Bachi, to give the torture to those
unfortunate persons, from whom they endeavor by this cruel expedient, to force
a confession of whatever they may suspect to be concealed. The place in which
it is inflicted is called the oven of the Bostangi Bachi, which name is given
it from its situation. Immediately on entering the walls of the seraglio, are
the barracks of the Bostangis; near which is an oven used by the bakers to bake
bread and biscuits for their use. On one side of this oven is the prison, in
which those unhappy persons who are to undergo the torture are confined. After
the prayer Yatson, which is at two in the morning, when the Bostangis are
retired to rest in their barracks, the prisoners are conducted to a place at
some distance, to avoid the intercession of the Bostangis, who are sometimes
moved with pity at their sufferings, and there the Bostangi Bachi inflicts on
these unfortunate wretches several different kinds of torture. When any one
therefore is delivered into the hands of this terrible officer, the common
people say, he is in the oven of the Bostangi Bachi.

The principal punishments in Turkey, for lesser crimes, are the bastinado,
which is a certain number of blows given on the soles of the feet. For this
purpose there is a kind of engine made of very thick wood, in the middle of
which are two holes, about twelve inches apart, into which they put the feet of
the person who is to receive this punishment. He is then laid on his back, and
his legs are tied to this engine, called by the Turks a Falacca. Two persons,
upon this, lift the Falacca so high, that he who is to be punished touches the
ground only with his shoulders, which prevents his moving or making any
resistance. Two others then come with short sticks, or rather laths, about half
an inch in thickness, and give him the number of blows that he is sentenced to
receive. This punishment is very severe, and will sometimes prevent a person
from having the use of his feet for several weeks or months, if it has been
received to the number of three or four hundred blows for any great crime. But
five and twenty or thirty strokes, the usual number, are thought nothing of,
and will not prevent a person from walking about as before. Some travelers
mention their having seen persons receive the bastinado for selling articles of
the most trifling value a little short of weight; nay even for endeavoring to
impose upon children, though it might be only to the value of a farthing or
two; so rigid are the Turks in their adherence to justice.

The bastinado is sometiems inflicted on the breech, but then the drawers are
not taken off. In this manner likewise the women are punished. This correction
is considered even more severe than that inflicted on the soles of the feet,
especially if a great number of strokes are given; as the putrefied and dead
flesh is afterward obliged to be cut off with a razor, to prevent its turning
to a mortification, and the persons who have undergone this chastisement, will
be sometimes confined perhaps for many months to their bed. The Turks are
allowed to inflict the bastinado upon the soles of the feet on their slaves,
the dread of which makes them extremely attentive and submissive in their
obedience to their masters. Schoolmasters likewise do not whip their scholars
as we do in England, but correct them on the soles of their feet.

One apparent good property of the civil law among the Turks, is what we have
in part before noticed, which is the right every individual has of pleading in
his own cause. But of what advantage, says the Baron, is this privilege in a
country where the judgment is arbitrary? Hence it arises that the Jews, the
Armenians, and the Greeks have invested their chiefs with a kind of civil
jurisdiction, to which they sometimes submit, to avoid having the property for
which they contend devoured by the Cadi, who decides the cause. But except
among the Jews, who pay more obedience to the Kakam, than the Christians to
their patriarch, it is very common for those adjudged to have been in the
wrong, to refer the matter to the Turkish judges. A sufficient proof, we think,
that the Turkish courts of law, are neither so arbitrary nor so corrupt as the
Baron would wish to insinuate.

The law respecting slaves is another proof of the humanity and wisdom of the
Turkish legislature; it not only requires the master to part with his slave, if
the slave be dissatisfied with his situation and treatment, but it likewise
refuses to admit the evidence of a slave either for or against his masters.

The Emperor's council of state is called Galibe Divan, and meets twice a week
in the sultan's palace, on Sundays and Thursdays. The Grand visir sits as
president, with the two judges of Romelia, and Natolia, one at his right, and
the other on his left hand. When the Sultan convenes a general council, to
which all the grand persons of the empire are summoned, such a divan is called
Ajak Divani; the whole assembly standing.

The high court of justice is generally held in a large hall of the grand
visir's palace, called Divan Chane. The grand visir is obliged, says Busching,
to sit four days in this hall, to administer justice to the people; unless,
which seldom happens, he should be prevented by affairs of a very important
nature. In this case, his place is supplied by the Chiaux Bachi, or the master
of requests. The bills or representations of the parties are read, and the
assistant judges generally give their opinion of the cases laid before them: if
their verdict be agreeable to the grand visir, it is written on the arzuhal,
and the grand visir subscribes it; if he disapproves it, he himself pronounces
a decree, and orders a copy of it to be given to the parties. By this means
suits are soon brought to an issue in Turkey. The same mode of administering
justice holds through all the provinces.

As to the revenues of the Turks, it is very difficult for a stranger, says
Habesci, to obtain a just account of them. For this reason, he adds, I have
undertaken to satisfy the reader on this head, having myself been employed in
those departments.

All the revenues of the Ottoman empire are divided into two departments, one
in the seraglio, and the other in the city. The principal is called Miri, and
the second Kasna. The Miri is the treasury of the empire and the Defterdar
directs it, who has under him twelve officers, to which all the revenues of the
empire arising from tributes, customs, etc. are returnable; and from these the
army is paid. The treasurer is allowed the twentieth part of all the money
brought into the treasury, which brings him in near fifty thousand pounds
sterling a year; one fourth of which he is however obliged to pay to the grand
visir's commissary. The money of the treasury is called Deitulmali Muslimin;
or, the public money of the mussulmen; and it is not to be touched by the
Emperor, but in cases of the greatest immergency, much less for private
occasions.

The revenues of the empire paid into the Imperial treasury, says Habesci,
amount to thirty millions of Turkish piastres, without reckoning the produce of
the gold and silver mines. This income of thirty millions is drawn from various
resources. In the first place, from the Karag, which is the capitation-tax that
the Christians and Jews pay, women excepted; and likewise those who are under
the protection of the foreign ambassadors. Every male, at the age of fourteen,
must pay this tribute: it is divided into three classes; the highest pays
eleven piasters, the middle class half that sum, and the lowest only a fourth
part of it. If the state is urgent for supplies, this tax is then doubled. When
the tax is only single, it amounts one year with another, to about six millions
of piasters. The salt pits and the fisheries produce about four millions more.
The disposal of particular places under government, brings in another three
millions. The public funds produce five millions or more, and the customs eight
millions; the three principal Custom-houses are those of Constantinople,
Smyrna, and Salonica; were the duties paid in these three places under the same
regulations as the customs in other countries, says Habesci, they would bring
in four times as much. The taxes paid on tobacco, coffee, spices, and some
other articles, amount to four millions more, which make in all the thirty
millions abovementioned.

The disbursements of the Imperial treasury are for the fleet, the pay of the
Janissaries, and other landforces; the salaries of the officers of state,
judges, etc. with other incidental charges, which altogether greatly exceed the
revenues. This bank, says Habesci, is at present in a very bad state, besides a
debt of sixteen millions, which it owes to the Grand Signior's treasury; it is
likewise in arrears to the Janissaries for their pay, and to many of the civil
officers for their salaries and pensions.

The revenues of the Kasna, or private treasury of the Grand Signior, are of
two kinds. The tributes paid by different nations, which are certain and fixed;
and the incidental revenues which are much more considerable. These incidental
ones, are derived from the inheritance of the bashaws who die without heirs,
from pecuniary punishments, from the tenth of all sorts of acquisition, and
from a part of the produce of the mines. The silver ones situated in the
neighborhood of Erzerom, which formerly yielded a very great revenue, now
bring in little or nothing; because there is no wood in the environs, and the
carriage of it becomes too expensive. Those of Diarbekir, which were very
abundant in the finest gold, do not produce the sixth part of what they brought
in formerly; the people who worked them having been driven away by the
continual incursion of troops.

Notwithstanding these disadvantages, the Grand Signior's treasury is in a very
flourishing state. The plunder of so many rich bashaws has brought in immense
funds, and the sultans have for many years back reformed their household, and
limited their expenses: they have also lessened the salaries of their servants,
and even the ornaments of their women, on which the sultans of former times
bestowed immense sums. As for the personal expenses of the Sultan, such as
buildings, clothes, and gallantry, they are defrayed, says Habesci, by his
ministers.

The Grand Signior is the sole dispenser of this immense treasure, and it is
with the utmost difficulty he can be induced to lend any sum to the treasury of
the state, if its wants are not uncommonly pressing. The ministers also, on
their part, avoid as much as possible, having recourse to him, to shun the
reproaches of a bad administration, or the mortification of seeing their
Sovereign chagrined at such an application.

But when necessity obliges them to apply for relief, which has frequently been
the case of late years, the Grand Signior, who was of a timid disposition, has
instantly complied with their request; but at the same time taken every
precaution to be reimbursed as soon as possible, and even with interest. There
are also certain political maxims in the seraglio for the management of this
treasury, which make the sultans deem it prudent to refuse, as far as it lies
in their power, to part with any very considerable sums; well knowing that with
money they can at any time appease tumults that may chance to arise, and
prevent revolutions.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Crimea.
THE Crim peninsula, Chersonesus Taurica, called in the Turkish maps, says
Busching, the Crim island, is of the same figure with the Morea, and by the
ancients reckoned to be nearly of the same extent. It is environed by the Black
Sea, and the sea of Asoph, except at the very narrow neck of land which joins
it to the continent.

In treating of Tartary, we have already said some thing of the Crimea, but it
being a province wrested MAP of the CRIMEA etc From D'Anville.
map of Crimea from the Turks by the Russians, and now in their possession,
having rather a better opportunity here of describing it more fully, we shall
do it.

The Precopite Tartars, inhabitants of the Chersonnesus, now called the Crimea,
or Little Tartary, between the Wolga and the Tanais, were till lately in
alliance with the Ottoman Port; there existing between them and the Port a
reciprocal convention, that if the male line of the Ottoman emperors should
fail, the Khan of Crimea was to succeed to the empire of Turkey; and in default
of male issue in the Khan, the Ottoman monarch was to inherit the Crimea. This
convention was the cause of that union which subsisted so long between them,
and for the same reasons the Tartars suffered patiently that their Khans should
be elected by the sultan of Turkey, who however could not choose any person
that was not of the blood royal of the Khans. In former times the eldest son of
the Khan was required to reside at Constantinople, as a hostage of the fidelity
of the Crimea: but for many years back, this compact was not executed on the
part of the Tartars, they conceiving it unjust. The present state of the Crimea
however, is very different from what it was only a few years ago; for in the
last war between the Ottomans and the Russians, the latter nearly conquered the
whole country. It is true that, at the conclusion of the peace, every thing was
restored nearly to its former state; but a short time after, the quarrels of
the royal family of the Khans occasioned infractions of the treaty. Upon the
death of the reigning Khan, several pretenders laid claims to the vacant throne
of the Crimea. A principal article of the peace was, the free and absolute
independence of the Crimea, and of the election of their Khans; but of the two
chief candidates, one was partially supported by the Port; of which the
Russians complained as an infraction of the articles of independence. The
memorials of the court of Petersburgh were not listened to; upon which the
Russians supported vigorously the party of the other competitor, whose name was
Sabil Guerai, and immediately sent a body of troops into the country to his
assistance. Under this mask, Russia seems to have accomplished the grand
project of Peter I.

The enemies of Guerai were overpowered, he was elected Khan, the Mussulmen
Tartars were massacred, and Russia actually reigns in the Crimea, in the name
of the prince she has protected.

All the fortresses in the Crimea, are in the hands of the Russians, Kaffa not
excepted; of which city, by an ancient agreement with the Tartars, the Turks
were allowed to keep possession; and all their efforts since, to drive them out
of the Crimea, have been ineffectual. This country therefore at present may be
said to be neither subject, tributary, allied, or even friendly to the Ottoman
Port. The interest of Russia is so well established in the Crimea, that it is
said many Tartars have been baptized by the Russian priests, and one or more of
their princes have even received an order of knighthood from the Empress.

Lady Craven, who has given a short, but scientific history of the inhabitants
of the Crimea, from the earliest ages, prefaces her intended expedition into
that country from Petersburgh, with saying: -- I am told, that the air is
unwholesome, that the waters are poisonous, and that I shall certainly die, if
I go there; but as in the great world, a new acquired country, like a new
beauty, meets with detractors, I am not in the least alarmed; for a person, not
a Russian, who has been there on speculation, has given me so charming a
description of it, that I should not be sorry to purchase a Tartarian estate.

I will now, continued she, endeavor to show by remote and past ages, that the
Taunde must naturally become a treasure to posterity. -- Long before Homer, the
first inhabitants of it, as far back as can be traced, were the Cimmerians, a
numerous and warlike people, descended from the Thracians; during their
incursions into Asia Minor, they were robbed of their territories by the
Scythians, but preserved the Crimea longer than the rest. The Scythians,
however, drove them from the flat country in the sixth century, prior to the
birth of our Savior; but they remained concealed in the mountains, calling
themselves Taourians, and from thence the peninsula took the name of Taourica,
Taourinia, or Tauris.

About 480 years before the birth of Christ, the people from Mitylene founded a
monarchy in the Crimea, which was governed forty-two years afterward by
Spartaeus. This king and his successors, we are told, favored the Greeks, and
in a great measure drove away the Scythians, who were afterward entirely
exterminated by the Samaritans. At this period the Taourians from the mountains
molested the new monarchy; till Mithridates, king of Pontus subdued them, and
made himself master of the whole peninsula. About the birth of Christ, the
Alains made the kings, who were possessors of the Bosphorus, his tributaries,
and drove away the Taourians. These new masters held their power about a
century and a half. In the second century the Goths succeeded them; and it was
under their dominion that Christianity was first introduced into the Crimea.
The Goths were afterward obliged to submit to the Huns, and like all other
possessors of the Crimea, when driven from the plains, they in their turn took
refuge in the mountains, where they had their own sovereigns, who were
Christians. In this manner they remained with separate principalities, till the
sixteenth century; being tributary sometimes to one prince, and sometimes to
another; when they were finally subdued by the Turks, and garrisons placed in
all the principal cities. They likewise drove the Genoese from Kaffa, the
principal town in the Crimea, where they had carried on a very extensive
commerce for two or three centuries; and forced the Tartars, who had taken
possession of the plains, to be for some time tributary to them.

The great market for Circassians, of which we have heard so much, and know so
little, says Lady Craven, was at Kaffa; where they came and sold their children
to Greeks, Genoese, Jews, or Armenians, who sold them in their turn at
Constantinople; but that was before the Turks had extended their power over the
Crimea.

When the sovereignty of the peninsula passed to Mengheli-Gherai, chief of the
Tartars, there were but few Tartarian inhabitants; but the wars he was engaged
in against them, on the borders of the Volga, gave him an opportunity to bring
back with him into the Crimea many thousand Noguais, whom he obliged to fix
there. He was followed in this method of peopling the country by his
successors, who furnished the Kouban, and the country between the Don and the
Dneister, with their prisoners.

It was in the thirteenth century, that the inhabitants of the plains in the
Crimea were subdued by the Mongouls, or Tartars, who were governed in clans by
their princes, till Mengheli-Gherai converted the Crimea into a kind of state.
The Goths paid a tribute to these people, as they had before done to the
Polouses, who were settled in the plains, and whom the Tartars had conquered.
In the first part of the Tartarian reign, a number of Kafes, or Circassians,
established themselves in the Crimea; with whom the Tartars carried on a great
trade in the town of Krim, from thence the peninsula took its name, by which
only it is known to the Orientals at this hour. While the Latins were masters
of Constantinople, they carried on a considerable trade there, as did likewise
the Venetians. But the Genoese having, by a treaty with one of the Greek
emperors named Paleologus, obtained an exemption of all duties in the Grecian
states, and a free navigation of the Black Sea, they began to monopolize all
the trade of the Crimea. Bloody wars ensued, in which they were almost
constantly victorious; and they rebuilt, with the consent of the Mongoul Khan,
the town of Kaffa, made it the chief repository of their commerce, and at last
of such consequence that Kaffa for a time was the name by which the peninsula
was called. It is true, they paid tribute to the Mongouls, while these
preserved their power; but when their own intestine divisions had weakened it,
the Genoese shook off their yoke, and the Mongoulian or Tartarian princes were
even elected, or deposed, as the Genoese thought fit. At this period, the trade
from India to the Crimea was divided into two branches by the Amon, the Caspian
sea, and Astrachan; one ended at Tana; the other proceeded by Bagdad and
Tauris, to Travespond and Savastopolis. Tana belonged to the Genoese and
Venetians, under the supremacy of the Mongouls; the Genoese having consuls at
these two latter places.

The Crimea was for a long time a formidable power to the Russians and Poles,
till these nations became improved in military science. Until the peace of
Carlowitz, both these countries were obliged to pay to the Khan* to the amount
of 100,000 rix-dollars annually, to insure their countries from the incursions
of the Tartars. Russia, however, has gained ground by degrees, and by arms and
policy master of the peninsula; the last Khan has a pension from the Empress,
and is retired to live as a private gentleman. Long before he resigned his
sovereignty; the Turkish cabinet on one side, and the crafty policy of the
Russians on the other, left him no peace; even some hordes of Tartars insulted
his tottering power. At present there are about 30,000 of the Empress's troops
in that country, besides about 5,000 Cossacks in her pay; and the Khan's
palaces, with some houses of the Tartarian nobles, are fitted up for her
reception, in case she should choose to visit that country.

The meteors, which the heavens here continually present, as well as the
whiteness of the Aurora Borealis, prove the purity of the atmosphere. We may
also attribute, what we may venture to call its ethereal qualities, to the
immense dry plains, which extend on the north of this country, and to the
neighborhood of Mount Caucasus; the heights of which attract and absorb all
the vapors which rise to the west.

Regular seasons, which gradually succeed each other, contribute with the
goodness of the soil, to produce the most abundant vegetation. The same kind of
black land, mixed with sand, extends from Leopold, in Red Russia, as far as the
Peninsula. The heat of the sun fructifies every kind of grain with very little
labor from the husbandman, who does nothing but plow the land he means to sow.
Melon-seed, with peace and beans mixed, are scattered by a man who follows the
plough. They do not even cover the grain, but depend upon the rain to labor
for them; and the soil is abandoned to chance till harvest-time, when they
endeavor to clear the crop of the confusion which this mixture of seed renders
inevitable.

Among the numerous productions which spontaneously overspread the face of the
Crimea, asparagus, walnuts, and filberts, are distinguished by their size. The
abundance of flowers is equally remarkable. Entire fields covered by the small
tulip, form, from the variety of their colors, the most agreeable pictures.

The manner in which the vine is cultivated in the Crimea, serves not to
meliorate the quality of the grape; and we see with regret, says Baron Tott,
that the finest situations in the world cannot determine the inhabitants to
prefer them to the valleys. The slips are planted in furrows of eight or ten
feet diameter, and four or five feet deep. The superior part of these ditches
serves to sustain the branches; which thus supported, cover the whole orifice
with foliage, under which hang the grapes, that by this means are hid from the
sun; they are likewise abundantly fed by an ever humid soil, and moreover are
often steeped in the rainwater there collected. They strip off the leaves a
month before the vintage, after which they take care to cut the vine near the
ground, and the vineyards remain, during winter, under water, owing to the
inundation of small rivers.

Peysonnel, in a stricture upon Baron Tott, who complains of the badness of the
bread in the Crimea, says, during the four years he resided at Bagtcheserai,
one of its principal towns, he eat very good bread, which was all made by a
Tartarian baker. This bread was in cakes near an ell long, very thin, very
light, and perfectly well tasted. I drank also an excellent white wine, says
he, of the growth of the country; great quantities of which are brought every
year by the Cossacks of the Ukrain, and the Russians, and may be compared with
our vin de Chabli. I also found there in great abundance, and extremely cheap,
turkeys, fowls, pullets, geese, and all sorts of poultry. I cannot conceive,
says the above author, what were become of the hares, partridges, wild ducks,
bustards, wood-pigeons, plover, lapwings, snipes, quails, and thrushes, with
which we were so surfeited, as frequently to prefer butchers meat, and even
salt provisions to these dainties; nor where were the fresh cod and oysters,
with which Kaffa so frequently and abundantly furnishes the inland towns; the
fish of Baliklava, the trout of the river Katchi, and the fine lobsters of the
brook Boulganak, the melons and water-melons, finer and better than those of
Provence; the excellent and enormous cucumbers, as large as our long gourds,
the artichoaks, or the asparagus, the largest and sweetest in the world. The
man who is dissatisfied in the midst of such plenty, ought only to accuse his
own abstinence. or want of care. His reproaching the Tartars with not being
able to make butter, is the more unjust, because butter is one of the principal
articles of their commerce. The Crimea produces, annually, about three or four
thousand quintals of this commodity, which are equal to five thousand of our
quintals. Nearly as much is made by the Noguais of Djamboilook, and the same
quantity by those of Kouban. The best sort, called the flower of butter, in the
Turkish language, is that with which the Grand Signior is supplied; and a man
must be no less unfortunate to want butter, in the Crimea, than to be unable to
procure wine in Burgundy, or oil in Provence. Lady Craven likewise testifies to
the excellence of the butter in the Crimea.

Among the various species of those birds, which abound in the Crimea, says
Tott, the most remarkable is a kind of wild-goose, with larger legs than ours,
and a plumage of a bright brisk color. The Tartars pretend the flesh of this
animal is exceedingly dangerous. I tasted it, says the Baron, and only found it
good for nothing.

No country, he adds, has more quails than the Crimea, and these birds,
dispersed during the fine weather, assemble at the approach of autumn, to cross
the Black Sea over to the southern coast, whence they afterward transport
themselves into hotter climates. The order of this emigration is invariable.
Toward the end of August, the quails, in a body, choose one of those serene
days when the wind, blowing from the north at sunset, promises them a fine
night. They repair to the Strand, take their departure at six or seven in the
evening, and finish a journey of fifty leagues by break of day. Nets are spread
on the opposite shore, and the sportsmen are in waiting for their arrival to
take tithe of the emigrants.

Though the quantity of water is great in the Crimea, it forms no considerable
rivers; the proximity of the sea suffers no current to be more than a brook;
the strongest heats, never leave the channels dry, and the inhabitants, every
where find limpid streams, which meander agreeably through the meadows, and
wander among the rocks. The Italian poplar flourishes here, and are numerous
enough to make us suppose it a native of the Crimea, if the Genoese
establishments did not indicate by whom it may have been transplanted.

The first observation of natural curiosity which presents itself in the
Crimea, is the uniformity of a bed of rocks, which is found on the tops of all
the mountains of the same level. These rocks, which rise more or less to the
surface, afford indisputable traces of water, and bear the character of those
which are at present exposed to the efforts of the sea. They are likewise
apparently interspersed with fossil oysters, but so enveloped as not to be
procured but by the aid of the chissel.

Among the fossils, which adhere to these rocks, there is likewise the Echinus
marinus, or sea urchin; the living species of which is peculiar to the Red Sea.
The valleys of that part of the Crimea contain extensive beds of univalve
fossils, and almost all of the species called Chinese bonnets. These fossils
differ from those found in the Mediterranean, by the superior thickness of the
shell. So abundant are these shells in some valleys, that they absolutely
stifle vegetation. They are mixed with fragments of soft gravel, infoliated and
herberised, the principal bed of which is seen in the bottom of little gutters.

The plains of the Noguais, which extend along the continent of the Crimea, are
almost on a level with the sea, whereas the isthmus is from thirty to forty
feet more elevated. This superior plain occupies the northern half of the
peninsula, after which the land, intersected by rocks, and loaded with
mountains, running from west to east, is overlooked by the Tchadir-Daegue, or
the Tent-mountain. This mountain, placed too near the sea, for its base to add
much to its elevation, can only be classed in the second order of mountains.
But if we cast an eye over the map, we shall perceive in it that chain which
connects the Alps with Mount Caucasus. In fact we behold a branch of the
Apennines, which traverse Europe from west to east; separate Germany from
Italy, Poland from Hungary, and Wallachia from ancient Thrace; and after
plunging in the Black Sea, re-appear in the same line, on the southern coast of
the Crimea; scarcely leaving a passage for the communication of the sea of
Asoph, and the Euxine; then continuing their route to the Caspian sea, under
the name of Caucasus, take afterward that of Thibet, and extend themselves to
the very eastern borders of Asia.

These researches into pristine geography, while they assert the progress of
knowledge, will no doubt cast a new light on an argument which the spirit of
system has long since sustained. The learned, who shall be curious to know the
first aspect of our globe, will find it by following the same level, the traces
of which are every where distinct. The highest mountains will afford them those
levels which were first abandoned by the waters.

The towns of most note in the Crimea are, Kaffa, Bachtcheseray, the ancient
residence of the Khans, and Perekop, or Orcapi, a fortified place on the
isthmus, which joins the peninsula with the main land.

It is probable that the town of Kaffa, which is still the center of commerce
in the Crimea, was likewise the place of greatest trade among the Genoese. Yet,
considering the port of Baluklava, and sometimes of ancient edifices to be seen
there, one is led to suppose they did not neglect the advantages it possesses.
The inhabitants of Kaffa, consist of Greeks, Turks, and Jews, but the Greeks
constitute the majority, and enjoy a perfect freedom of religion, even under
the Khans. Here are still several descendants of the old noble families of
Genoa. This town is the largest of all the Crimea, and contains between five
and six thousand houses. North west of it, are some very high mountains, at the
foot of which this town stands in a very delightful situation. It retains a
great deal of its ancient beauty, and the walls that were built by the Genoese,
are yet remaining, in many parts of which are to be seen their Latin
inscriptions. The finest Christian churches, most of which were built likewise
by the Genoese, have been converted into mosques. Their arms still appear upon
many of them, as likewise the painted pieces of their saints, but their statues
and altars have been destroyed by the Greeks.

Bactcheserai is the residence of the Cham of the Tartars, and though now
considered as the capital of the Crimea, was formerly only a country seat,
called the palace of the gardens. the sovereigns having fixed their residence
in this place, attracted inhabitants to it; and the city preserving its name,
has usurped precedence over the ancient town, which is now only a poor village,
the former importance of which can only be gathered from its tombs.

This town lies on the west side of the peninsula, near the sea, and is
situated between two hills, which serve to defend the place instead of walls.
This town, says Lady Craven, is situated in so steep a valley, that some of the
hanging pieces of rock seem ready to fall and crush the houses.

In my way hither, says she, I dined at the Cossack's chief post, and my
entertainment was truly Cossack; a long table for thirty people, at one end a
half-grown pig roasted whole; at the other, a half-grown sheep, whole likewise;
in the middle of the table, an immense tureen of curdled milk; there were
several side-dishes made for me and the Russians, as well as the cook could
imagine to our taste.

The old warrior, with whom I dined, would fain have made me taste above thirty
sorts of wine, from his country, on the borders of the Don; but I contented
myself with three or four, all of which were very good. After dinner, from the
windows, I saw a fine mock battle between the Cossacks; among which were three
Calmucks, the ugliest fiercest looking men imaginable, with their eyes set in
their head, inclining down to their nose; and having uncommonly square
jaw-bones. These Calmucks are so dexterous with bows and arrows, that one
killed a goose at a hundred paces, another broke an egg at fifty. The officers
of the Cossacks sung and danced, but their tones were equally insipid, and void
of grace and harmony.

When a Cossack is sick, he drinks four milk for a few days; and this is the
only remedy they have for a fever.

At night I lodged at a house that had belonged to a noble Tartar, where there
is a Russian post, with about twelve hundred of the finest men I ever saw, and
uncommonly tall. A Tartarian house has always another building at a little
distance from it, for the convenience of travelers or strangers, whom the
noble Tartar always treats with the greatest hospitality. The palace inhabited
by the Khan, built first in the Chinese style, and afterward repaired in the
Turkish, preserved some of the beauties of its first construction. It stands on
the outside of the town, and is surrounded by very high rocks, where water
abounds, which is distributed through the Kiosks and the gardens, in a very
agreeable manner. This situation has one defect; it presents no other prospect
than barren rocks, and the Khan is obliged to walk to the neighboring heights,
in order to enjoy a landscape, but the most beauteous and variegated.

The palace is an irregular building; the greatest part of it is one floor,
raised upon pillars of wood, painted and gilt in a fanciful and lively manner;
the arch, or last door-way, has very fine proportions, and a large inscription
in gilt letters as its principal ornament. Court within court, and gardens
within gardens, make a variety of apartments through which the Khan used to
walk from his own residence to the Harem, which is spacious and higher than the
other buildings. What had a very pretty effect was, that several of the square
courts under these apartments were paved with marble, and have fountains in the
center continually playing. The room allotted for my apartment, says her
Ladyship, was a square of more than forty feet, having two rows of windows, one
above the other, on three of its sides; and it was with difficulty I found a
place in it to put up my bed.

This town contains about five thousand inhabitants. A great trade is carried
on here for blades of swords, hangers, and knives, many of which are so well
tempered as not to be distinguished from those of Damascus. Among the other
excellent productions of the Crimea, there is in this neighborhood a mine of
earth, exactly like soap, reckoned very good for the skin, of which the Turkish
ladies at Constantinople use a great quantity. The profits of this mine, which
are very great, are enjoyed by a Tartar, who is married to the Kaima Khan, or
prime minister of the Khan.

With this lady I was invited to dine, whose Harem, with her husband's house,
is situated in a very romantic manner, at the foot of some very extraordinary
rocks, from which many clear springs issue, that supply the houses of this
town, and her baths, with perpetual fresh water; on the summit of these rocks
there is a very singular appearance, places where immense cables have certainly
passed and been tied. The Tartarians insist that the sea once lay at the foot
of them, and that ships were fastened to them. We dined in the husband's
apartment; a very dirty shabby place for so rich a man. Tartarian cookery
consists in much grease and honey. After dinner the Kaima Khan walked across a
court, and I was desired to follow. I did so, into another court, where four
women and some young girls met us, and last of all his sister. Her dress was
magnificent, particularly her girdle, in the front of which were two circles
like bracelet lockets, and in the centres of them were two fine emeralds. She
offered me a large goblet, which held two quarts, of sherbet, a very
indifferent kind of lemonade; after that coffee, and last of all sweatmeats. We
conversed very well by signs, she appeared neither old nor ugly; but how is it
possible to judge of a countenance hid under bad painting, and eyebrows which
join into one straight line, drawn across the nose?

I wore a chemise of two rows of very fine lace, at the bosom, that I thought
would surprise her; but lace and every magnificence which is not gold, silver,
pearls, or diamonds, I am told, passes unnoticed. Linen is not much in use:
their shifts, and the shirts of the men, are generally made of very thin silk,
or silk mixed with cotton, which is seldom changed; but the very frequent use
of baths makes this custom less loathsome than it would otherwise be.

When she had quitted the Harem, her brother staid behind a little, and
afterward came up to me, kissed the bottom of my gown, and presented me a very
beautiful handkerchief of his sister's embroidery, which I was told I must
accept. It was of muslin, the borders embroidered with different colored silks
and gold, and, what I could not comprehend, both sides are the same.

Perekop, situated on the isthmus, in the Sclavonian language, signifies a cut
made through any place, being derived from the ditch, dug here in very remote
ages, across the neck of land at the entrance of the Crimea, for the security
of the peninsula, and which has been from time to time repaired, and of late
fortified.

Baron Tott, in his description of this place says, we arrived here in
tolerable good time, and passed the moat over a bad wooden bridge that joins
the Counterscarp to a vaulted gate at the entrance of the platform, the porter
of which every night keeps the peninsula of the Crimea under lock and key.
Nothing can have a grander effect than the fortifications of Orcapi, another
name given to the entrance of this celebrated peninsula. The works indeed, are
somewhat of the gigantic, but I know no place where nature has been better
seconded by art. The solidity of the entrenchments may be warranted, it
intersects the isthmus three quarters of a league in extent; two seas serve it
for epaulment; it overlooks the plain beneath, about the height of forty feet,
and will long resist the utter negligence of ignorance. No marks indicate the
time of its construction, but every thing proves it anterior to the Tartars, or
at least that they were formerly better instructed than they are at present.
The Russians, in the last war, could only penetrate the Crimea, by passing a
small marshy arm of the sea, and gaining the point of a very narrow neck of
land, which runs parallel to the eastern coast. The same route had been
successfully attempted by General Munick, in the campaigns of 1736, and 1737;
yet this could not inspire the Tartars, either with the means, or the desire to
preserve themselves hereafter from a like misfortune, by defending the
extremity of that neck of land, where the least resistance must have stopped
the enemy's march.

The salt pits of this place make part of the sovereign domains, and are farmed
out either to Armenians, or Jews; and these two commercial nations, always
rivalling each other, mutually raise the produce of the tax by this contest.
They are equally unskilful in managing their works to the best advantage, and
their avarice is always the dupe of their ignorance. They have sheds to
receive, dry, and preserve the natural salt, formed in the salt-lakes. Hence
the abundance of one year, cannot compensate the deficiences of another, when
the rains wash away a produce so rich, and so easy to stow in safety.

We cannot quit the topographical description of the Crimea, without noticing
the harbor of Sevasticopolis; from whence Lady C. took shipping for
Constantinople.

The singularity of the coast of the harbor, says Lady C. is unlike any other
I ever saw: it is a long creek that is formed by the Black Sea, between two
ridges of land so high, that the glory of the Catharine, one of the largest
ships in the Russian navy, which was at anchor here, could not be seen from the
land, on the shore, being above the pendant. The water is so deep, that this
ship touched the land. All the fleets in Europe would be safe from storms, or
from enemies, in these creeks, or harbors, for there are many of them. At the
upper extremity stands Inkerman; which must have formerly been a very
considerable town; at present the only remains are rooms hewn out of the rock.
Here is a large chapel; the pillars, and the altar of which, are extremely
curious: the stone is whitish, and not unlike marble. I climbed up a
staircase, continues our author, and crept in and out of very extraordinary
spaces, that were large and commodious; I entered at the bottom of these
singular habitations, and, like a chimney-sweeper, came out at the top; and
though it cost me not a little trouble, in turning and climbing up so high, I
had no idea of having mounted so much, till, on looking about me, I turned
quite giddy, in seeing the bay of Inkerman, and all the Black Sea, at least two
hundred and fifty feet, beneath the place where I stood.

It is upon this southern part of the peninsula that vines are cultivated, and
grow wild in great abundance; at present only a few private people have
vineyards. The Empress has indeed a Frenchman here, who seems however to care
more about the strength of the wines, being sufficient to make brandy, which he
distills in great quantities, than in teaching the culture of the vines to the
Russians. The fine turf, the excellent soil, the orchards, the climate, are
alone sufficient inducements to make any one partial to this country. One very
particular thing I took notice of was, a small pink flower, that spread like
network over the turf -- and asking what it was, found they were peach-trees;
which, when very young, being nipped by the sheep, grow into little bushes.

Can any rational being see nature, without the least assistance from art, in
all her grace and beauty, stretching out her liberal hands to industry, and not
wish to do her justice. Yet I confess, concludes her Ladyship, I wish to see a
colony, establishing manufactures such as England produces, and returning the
produce of this country to ours -- establishing a fair and free trade from
hence, and teaching industry and honesty to the insidious, but oppressed Greeks
-- waking the indolent Turk from his gilded slumbers, and carrying fair
liberty, with her swelling sails, as she passes through the Archipelago and
Mediterranean, to our dangerous, happily for us, our dangerous coasts.

CHAP. XVIII. Wallachia.
THE ancient Dace, which always had the highest reputation for the courage and
valor of its people, consisted of the three provinces of Transylvania,
Moldavia and Wallachia. All these three provinces were overrun by the Germans,
Polonese and Turks; and not being able to hold out against such powerful
neighboring enemies, they were forced to buy the protection of the Ottoman
Port, by means of an annual tribute. Transylvania, from the advantage of its
situation, upon the frontiers of the territories of the House of Austria,
settled with the Germans, by an an annual tribute of 6,000 gold ducats. At
present it is incorporated with the other hereditary domains of the German
empire, and the Transylvanians are very happy, in comparison of the inhabitants
of Moldavia and Wallachia. The other two provinces remain subject to the Port,
which sends them governors elected by the Grand Signior, from amongst the
ancient Greek families, residing at Fanari. To these governors the Port grants
the title of Vayvodes, and of Beys, and the honor of two tails, which are
carried before them, when they come out of the divan of the grand visir, after
their appointment; and pass through the principal streets, with a numerous and
splendid retinue, on their way to the capitals of their respective
principalities. Their principal occupation, in their government, is collecting
the tribute, which is generally paid to the Port.

Wallachia formerly paid no more than sixty thousand piastres a year. But after
the rebellion of the inhabitants of this province in 1665, against the Port, a
rebellion which was only suppressed by a bloody victory; the annual tribute was
greatly augmented, and now amounts to two hundred and forty thousand piastres,
or about fifty thousand pounds sterling.

For this province, says Habesci, it is a very adequate sum, and the
inhabitants would be happy if they could enjoy tranquillity, upon paying even
double, or treble that amount. But the extraordinaries which they oblige them
to pay, sabre in hand, are exorbitant. The Vayvode always keeps a grand court,
and a magnificent retinue. His residence is at Buccorest; no inconsiderable
town, says Lady C. the situation of which is delightful. To obtain the
government, he unavoidably contracts great debts, which he must draw from the
province; but this is not all: in order to keep himself in place, by favor of
his protectors at Constantinople, he must make them annual presents, and he
will take care to amass sufficient treasures apart for himself, against a
removal from his government, if he is so fortunate to leave it without losing
his head. To compass all these ends, the most horrible cruelties, and
extortions are constantly practiced. The inhabitants are reduced to the utmost
misery; and, not being able to live any longer under such a yoke, seek for
refuge in some more humane country. This humanity they experience in the
territories of the House of Austria.

The former governors of Wallachia could supply all the charges of their
election and investiture with less than an hundred purses; in our days they
must levy twenty times as much; such is the Ottoman avarice and Greek ambition.
If the governors have the good fortune to be dismissed from their employments
with their lives, they have always the title of Bey, and their sons the same.
There are several of these beys at Constantinople, and the richest of them
scarcely better than a poor man; but they possess, in the place of money, a
very great share of pride and contempt.

The Wallachians, considered as inhabitants of the country, are descended from
the old Roman colony, settled here by the Emperor Trajan. This is evident not
only from their language, which is a barbarous Latin, intermixed with several
foreign words; but likewise from their customs and their diet; their thick
pottages and onions, of which they are very fond; their dress, and attachment
to the Italian language; as also to the Italians themselves, and to whatever
comes from their country.

Buccorest, or Bucharest, the usual residence of the Prince, is a large
straggling town, of a very peculiar form; the outward parts are very mean,
consisting of houses, the greater part of which are under ground, like our
cellars, and covered on top with straw, or bark of trees. The better sort of
houses are near the Prince's palace, and covered with handsome wooden tiles,
though the walls are built of very substantial stone; having spacious
court-yards, and gardens to them, enclosed by trunks of oaks, set as near as
possible to each other. The streets appear like a continued bridge, being
floored from side to side, with massy planks of ten yards long, and as many
inches thick; which work, how expensive soever it may seem, is continued
through all the buildings of the place, for an extent of some miles. The
prospect of the city is pleasing at a distance, on account of the houses of the
nobility, the palace of the Prince, and the number of churches and convents.
These last are all of one form, regularly built, and rising with cupolas.

About two miles from the town is a convent, called in the Wallachian language,
the Catrochan; which is accounted the most beautiful of several in this
province; and therefore a short account of this, may serve as a specimen for
the rest.

It is situated on the Dembowctza, which washes it on two sides; while the
other two are adorned with a grove of lovely, close and shady oaks. The
neighboring pastures afford an entertaining prospect; whereas the parts near
the convents, are disposed into regular, well-ordered vineyards and gardens.
The fabric itself is an oblong quadrangle, built of regular and massive stone,
divided into cells for about forty monks, with lodgings for the abbot, a common
refectory, kitchen and other public apartments. But in the middle of the area
is erected the chapel, of the exact figure of the ancient Greek churches, that
is distinguished into the porch, outward chapel, body of the church, chancel,
and altar; the several parts being regular and stately, supported with pillars,
and covered with cupolas. The ornaments of painting, gilding and embroidery,
are excceding rich; and the pictures so numerously disposed, as to possess
every part of the church, in the inside, as well as the outside of the front.
Here also are kept the two horses' tails, allowed by the Turks to be carried
before this prince; together with the bandier of the province, and another
called the paschal colors, in which the Holy Trinity is profanely
represented; and God the Father expressed by the image of a reverend old man,
looking over the body of our Savior, as it hangs upon the cross.

The air of this province is temperate, the soil very fruitful, particularly in
grain, with which it is obliged to furnish the market of Constantinople, when
there is a scarcity in Egypt. The wines of this province, says Chishull,
especially about Tergovist, are exquisitely fine. It is likewise in great
repute for its most excellent horses. The province is well watered by a
considerable number of large and small rivers, which discharge themselves into
the Danube, and which makes it so luxuriantly rich, and abounding with woods
and pastures, though but thinly inhabited; and that in caves and huts, rather
than houses. Its chief income proceeds from wax, honey, hides, horses,
salt-mines, and the customs on some places of the Danube. By these it is able
to maintain its prince and barons splendidly; besides paying a yearly tribute
to the Turk, which is settled at three hundred and twenty purses, equal to
thirty-two thousand pounds sterling; besides three times that sum, extorted
beyond the compact. The lands of the province are entirely in the hands of the
prince and barons; the rest, who are peasants, being all either slaves or
servants, whose persons or service are at the disposal of the several nobles,
on whom they depend.

The prince has all the rights of sovereignty, except that of declaring war,
and coining his own money. Justice is here performed according to the ancient
laws of the province, which are agreeable to the Roman law. The power and act
of pronouncing sentence, is wholly in the breast of the prince; after which, as
in Turkey, the execution immediately ensues. For the better adjustment of
tribute, and other common duties, the whole province is divided into seventeen
counties, of which each is to furnish its respective proportion. In time of war
it ordinarily maintains twenty thousand men, of which about the fourth part
continues in pay, in time of peace.

The Wallachians profess the eastern Greek religion, and, as in their writing,
they use the same letters with the Russians, so they agree with them in using
the same religious ceremonies. The commonality are most wretchedly ignorant,
and even the highest seize at which the ecclesiastics aim, seldom goes
beyond reading and singing well.

The churches of each parish, as well as the chapels of many monasteries, which
are seen here, are usually very pleasing to the eye, well built, richly
adorned, profusely painted, and for the most part furnished with bells, though
in some places may be seen the wooden plank, common to the Greek churches in
Turkey, where bells are not permitted. The porch of their churches is generally
daubed with superstitious representations of the punishments of hell; and
oftentimes the inside of these churches is profaned with some inconsistent
corporeal image of the Holy Trinity; a thing permitted here against the
professed principles and declarations of the Greek church. The government of
them is subject to the patriarchs of Constantinople.

Persons of rank, among the Wallachians, are so fond of the Italian language,
that they apply themselves to it more than to their mother tongue; and
generally send their sons to the university of Padua. Great numbers of the
Mahometans live also intermixed with the Wallachians.

I visited the press of this place, says Chishull, where I found them printing
some pieces of devotion in Arabic, under the care of the patriarch of Antioch,
to be by him distributed about his diocese. Besides this, they were undertaking
to print a large folio of the famous Maximus Hieromanachus, being the course of
the several Sundays throughout the year. On this occasion, I bought several
Greek books, lately printed in this province, one of which contained all the
liturgies, hymns, rituals, lessons, and other devotional tracts, used on all
occasions in the Greek church, through the course of the whole year.

Such of our fashionable female readers as roam in imagination to foreign
courts, may probably not be a little amused and delighted with Lady Craven's
magnificent reception at the court of the prince of Wallachia. A coach, says
her Ladyship, made, I believe, in the year 1, came to the door, with six
brown-bay stone-horses, that seemed to spurn the earth they trod on, and with
grooms walking by the side of each of the horses. A kind of chamberlain, with a
long flowing robe, embroidered all over with gold, and a white staff in his
hand, accompanied by the prince's private secretary, attended to conduct me.
The whole town, by this time, was got round the equi-page, and we proceeded
very slowly to the first court of the palace, in which I went through a double
row of guards, some of them Janissaries, and the others Arnauts and Albanians.
In the second court there was another double row of the same guards that
extended up a large flight of steps, leading to the audience chamber; in the
corner of which, a space was divided off with cushions, upon which sat the
prince, dressed and attended a la Turque; over his head were ranged the horses'
tails, the great helmet and feather, the magnificent sabre, and other arms,
with which I had seen him parade the streets of Constantinople. Coffee and
sweetmeats were served on my entrance; after having partook of which, and
remained some time in conversation, I rose to take my leave; when one of his
chamberlains desired me, in a whisper, to set down again; my ears were then
immediately assailed with the most jarring noise I ever heard. Upon which, with
a very grave loud voice, the secretary said, "c'est pour vous Madame, c'est la
music du Prince," and the prince desired me to look out into the court. There
I saw trumpets of all kinds, brass plates striking together, and drums of all
sizes; some of which, not larger than breakfast cups, were ranged on the
ground, and the strikers of them squatted on the ground to beat them. Each
musician was endeavoring to drown the noise of his neighbor, by making a
louder, if possible; I do not know that my nerves were ever so tried before.
This scene however, did not last long, I was then called to have an audience of
the princess. She was sitting a la Turque, with three of her daughters by her,
who were about nine, ten, and eleven years old. The princess might be about
thirty, she had a very handsome face, something like the Duchess of Gordon,
only the features and countenance of the latter have more softness, and her
skin and hair are fairer. Her person was rather fat, and she was above six
months advanced in her eighth pregnancy. She took my hand and seated me by her.
There were twenty ladies, in the room, one of whom instead of a turban, had a
high cap of sable put behind her hair, that was combed up straight over a kind
of roll. This head-dress was far from being ugly or unbecoming. The princess
told me, it was a lady of Wallachia, and that the cap was the dress of the
country. After the princess had asked me all those questions usually put to
travelers, I was desired to sup with them, to which I consented, but requested
I might return to my lodgings, to write to Constantinople. I scarcely had got
home, when two of the prince's people, with the secretary came in, followed by
many more of his household. The secretary desired me to go and look over a
gallery that surrounded the back court of the house; I did so, and saw a
beautiful Arabian horse, in the midst of a great mob, with two Turks holding
his bridle. The secretary told me the prince hearing I was fond of horses,
desired me to accept that, which a bashaw of three-tails had given him, a few
days before, and he hoped I should accept it with the regard with which it was
presented. I gave him as civil an answer as I could imagine, and very handsome
presents in money to the grooms, and to the whole set of stable-people.

The supper was served in a more magnificent manner than I should have
imagined; a table upon legs, and chairs to sit on, were things I did not
expect. The prince sat at the end of the table, his wife on one side, and I on
the other. Several ladies sat down to supper with us. The princess had nine
females behind her chair to wait upon her. Several silver things were set upon
the table accidently, the produce of England, such as salt-sellers, cruets,
etc. etc. but there were four candlesticks that seemed to be made of alabaster,
set with flowers composed of small rubies and emeralds, that were very
beautiful. Detestable Turkish music was played during the whole supper, but
relieved now and then by Bohemians, whose tunes were quite delightful, and
might have made the heaviest clod on earth desire to dance. The prince saw the
impression this music made upon me, and desired they might play oftener than
the Turks. It seem, says Lady Craven, these Bohemians are born slaves, the
property of the reigning prince of Wallachia. There are, as he told me, five
thousand of them left; formerly there were five and twenty thousand. About half
past eleven, I rose to take my leave, and received from the princess several
very beautiful embroidered handkerchiefs, and was obliged again to excuse
myself from staying only a twelvemonth with her, which she said would be a
great amusement to her, as my presence was full of graces. I retired with all
the attendants I had before, only with the addition of, I believe, a hundred
flambeaux, and all the Turkish and Bohemian music playing by the side of the
large gold coach.

This horrid discord and comical procession got the better of my gravity; and
though the secretary was there, I laughed all the way to the Consul's house,
where apartments were prepared for me. Mr. V's ideas of good breeding, a
gentleman in the carriage with me, were so discomposed by my laughing, that he
assured the secretary the perfection of my ear for music was such, that the
least discord in it made me laugh; and he repeated this in all the ways he
could turn it. I said, Oh! oui, c'est bien vrai; but between while, I said in
English, what would you have me do, I feel like punch parading the streets,
with all these trumpets and this mob about me.

CHAP. XIX. Bessarabia, Oczakow, Tartary, etc.
THE country comprised under the name of Little Tartary, contains, according to
Baron Tott, not only the Crimea, but the Kouban; a part of Circassia, and all
the lands which separate the empire of Russia from the Black Sea. This circuit
continued from Moldavia, almost to Taganrog, is from thirty to forty leagues
wide, and nearly two hundred long. From east to west, it includes
Yetitchekoolai, Dgamboylook, Yedesan, and Bessarabia. This latter province is
inhabited by Tartars; who, as well as those of the Crimea, have fixed
habitations in their villages; but the inhabitants of the three other provinces
have only felt tents, which they carry wherever they please.

Those people called Noguais Tartars, are settled in the valleys that traverse
their plains from north to south, and their tents, ranged in a single line,
form there a kind of villages of thirty and thirty-five leagues in length,
which distinguish the different hordes.

It may be presumed that the rustic, frugal life, which these people lead,
favors population; as it is observed that the people are less numerous, under
the roofs of the Crimea, and in the provinces of Bessarabia, than in the tents
of the Noguais. The best calculation we can make is, from a view of the
military forces which the Cham is able to assemble. This number, says Baron
Tott, during his residence in that country, amounted to 200,000 men; and the
Baron adds, that the Cham was able to raise double that number, without
prejudice to the necessary labors of the state.

The revenues of the Cham, notwithstanding the numerous armies he can bring
into the field, scarce amounts to 25,000 pounds sterling, for the maintenance
of his household. The raising of forces is no expense to him. All estates are
held by military tenure. Neither does the Sovereign support any expense of
justice; he decides all disputes, throughout his states gratis; as each
jurisdiction does, in its respective districts.

The Cham of the Crimea, though sovereign over these provinces, is only so in
the nature of Lord Paramount. These provinces have their nobility, whom the
Cham is obliged to convoke, on all extraordinary occasions; the government
retaining the old feudal system, established in Europe some centuries back, and
to which it is supppsed these Tartars gave rise.

The towns of most note in these provinces are Bender, a Turkish fortification
on the Dniester, famous for the retreat of Charles XII. in 1709, after the
battle of Pultawa, where he remained four years; and Oczakow, taken from the
Turks, in the last war between them and the Russians.

Oczakow is a very strong place, situated at the influx of the Dnieper, into
the Black Sea. It receives its Turkish name from the Dnieper, by the Turks,
called Ozi, and lies on the declivity of a mountain, with a castle above it.
When Count Munich sat down before it in the year 1737, its fortifications were
in excellent order, and its garrison consisted of a large body of chosen
Turkish forces; but the Count, compelled by want of fodder for the horses and
other cattle, risqued an assault, and carried it the third day after opening
the trenches. The Russians held the place till the following year, when they
evacuated it, after having demolished the works.

This fortress, says Baron Tott, occupies a small declivity, which leads to the
river. A fosse, and covered way are the sole works, which defend the place. It
has the form of a parallelogram, inclined length-ways; and here may be seen,
says the Baron, a numerous artillery, each piece of which, ill-mounted, is
enfolded by two enormous gabions, which, serving for merlons, form the
embrasures.

The Boristhenes, the ancient name given to the Dnieper, the entrance of which
river this citadel is meant to defend, is confined and narrow toward its
mouth, by a projection of land on the opposite shore, called Kilboornoo, by and
within which, a kind of lake is formed, lengthened toward the north, from
whence the river descends. Its width is more than two leagues from Oczakow to
the opposite fort, situated on the sandy point, in which direction it is usual
to cross the Boristhenes. The vessels used on these occasions, carry sail when
the wind is favorable, and are pushed also with boat-hooks, owing to the
shallowness of the water, which is never too deep to make use of them, except
for a few fathoms toward the middle.

After three hours of this tiresome navigation, says Tott, who crossed this
river in his way to the Crimea, we landed at Kilboornoo, opposite the castle.
Its artillery, destined to cooperate with that of Oczakow, in defending the
river, could not send its fire to a sufficient distance, but must always permit
an entrance through the middle. Were batteries situated on Kilboornoo point,
and others on the opposite shore, they would constantly secure the entrance of
the river against every kind of vessel.

The country, between the Dniester and the Dnieper, by some called Yedesan, and
by others Oczakow Tartary, is inhabited only along these two rivers, and near
the sea, the other parts being quite waste, and therefore called Dzike Pole, or
the desert plain. It affords, however, good pasture, but has not a single tree
upon it. In the year 1709, after the unfortunate battle of Pultawa, Charles
XII. traveled over it in his road to Turkey, suffering inexpressible hardships
by the way.

Such is the only information we have been able to collect respecting this
fortress, the retention of which Russia thought a sufficient equivalent for the
successes of a glorious war; it was, however, so strongly opposed on the part
of the Turks, by the mediatory powers of Prussia and England, before it was
consented to be yielded up to them, as nearly to have embroiled all Europe in
war; and which nothing perhaps prevented, being more strongly contested by the
mediating powers, but the unwillingness of the lower class of people in this
country, to our being engaged in a war with Russia.

The importance of this fortress to Russia, must be very evident, when it is
considered that it commands the entrance of a river, in which are her principal
docks for building ships, to navigate the Black Sea; and from whence all her
naval stores must descend to furnish the harbors of the Crimea.

Ismahel, says Tott, a town of Bessarabia, on the left of the Danube, near its
mouth, serves as a magazine for the sending corn down the Danube, and further
adds a species of industry peculiar to itself; which is the manufacturing of
shagreen skins, called by us, Turkish shagreen. Here are places round the town
set apart for dressing them. At first they are worked like parchment, and are
sustained in the air horizontally, by four poles, so disposed that they may
receive the impression of a very astringent little grain, with which they are
covered; after standing a certain time, they are found perfectly prepared and
finished.

Notwithstanding the barren picture which these countries constantly offer, and
the facility with which a comparison might be drawn between this soil, and that
of Moldavia and Poland, yet such is the force of of habit, that it vanquishes
all sensations. The Noguais conceive it impossible to traverse their plains
without envying them their possession. You have traveled a great way, said one
of the Tartars to Baron Tott, but did you ever see a country like ours?

The plains we crossed, says Baron Tott, in the memoirs of his journey from
Moldavia into the Crimea, were so level and open, that no irregularity could be
seen, not so much as a tree or a shrub. It was now near sunset, says the
Baron, and I saw nothing before me but a vast melancholy plain, when I suddenly
felt my carriage descend, and beheld a file of tents to the right and left,
extending further than the eye could see.

These valleys which intersect the plains from north to south, are about eight
or ten fathoms deep, and though more than thirty leagues long, are but half a
quarter of a league wide. Muddy rivulets run through the middle of them, and
terminate toward the south in lakes, which communicate with the Black Sea.

On the borders of these rivulets are the tents of the Noguais, as well as the
sheds meant to give shelter, during winter, to the numerous flocks and herds of
these pastoral people. Each proprietor has his own mark, which is burnt into
the thighs of horses, oxen, and dromedaries, and painted with colors on the
wool of sheep. The latter are kept near the owner's habitation, but the other
species united into herds, are toward the spring driven to the plains, where
they are left at large till the winter, when they seek them out, and drive them
to their sheds.

What is most singular, is, that the Tartar employed in this search, has always
an extent of plain, which from one valley to another, is ten or twelve leagues
wide, and more than thirty long, yet does not know which way to direct his
search, nor troubles himself about it. He puts up into a bag six pounds of the
flour of roasted millet, which is sufficient to last him thirty days. This
provision made, he mounts his horse, stops not till the sun goes down, then
clogs the animal, leaves him to graze, sups on his flour, goes to sleep, awakes
and continues his route. He neglects not, however, to observe as he rides, the
mark of the herd he happens to see. These discoveries he communicates to the
different Noguais he meets, who have the same pursuits, and in his turn
receives such indications as help to put an end to his journey. It is certainly
to be feared, says the Baron, that a people so patient, may one day furnish
formidable armies.

No appearance of culture is to be seen on any route, because the Tartars avoid
the cultivation of frequented places. Their harvest, on the side of roads,
would serve only as pasture to travellers' horses. But if this precaution
preserve them from this kind of depredation, nothing can protect their fields
from a much more fatal scourge. Clouds of locusts frequently alight on their
plains; and, giving the preference to their fields of millet, ravage them in an
instant. Their approach darkens the horizon; and so enormous is their
multitude, as to hide the light of the sun. When the husbandmen happen to be
sufficiently numerous, they sometimes divert the storm, by the agitation of
their cries; but when these fail, the locusts alight on their fields, and these
form a bed of six or seven inches thick. To the noise of their flight, succeeds
that of their devouring activity; it resembles the rattling of hailstones; but
its consequences are infinitely more destructive. Fire itself eats not so fast;
nor is there a vestige of vegetation to be found, when they again take their
flight, and go elsewhere to produce fresh disasters.

The shores of the Pontus-Euxenus, toward the Bosphorus of Thrace, are
sometimes covered half leg deep, with their dry remains. Curious to know the
true cause of their destruction, says Tott, I sought the moment of observation,
and was witness of their ruin by a storm, which overtook them so near the
shore, that their bodies were cast upon the land, whilst yet entire. This
produced an infection so great, that it was several days before they could be
approached.

No people, says Baron Tott, are more abstemious; millet and mare's milk are
their habitual food; and yet they are exceedingly carniverous. A Noguais might
wager, that he would eat a whole sheep, and gain his bet, without danger of
indiscretion. But their appetites are restrained by their avarice; which is so
great, that they generally debar themselves of every thing they can sell. If
any accident should kill one of their cattle, says the Baron, they then only
regale upon his flesh; and this not unless they find it time enough to bleed
the dead animal. They follow this precept of Mahomet likewise, with respect to
beasts that are distempered; carefully observing each stage of the disease,
that they may seize the moment when, in their avarice, condemned to lose the
value of the beast, their appetite may still afford them some consolation, by
killing it an instant before its natural death.

The fairs of Balta, and others established on their frontiers, are the
emporium to which they annually bring their immense flocks and herds. The corn
they grow, in such abundance, finds a ready vent by the Black Sea, as well as
their fleeces. To these objects of commerce, are added some bad hides, and
great quantities of hare-skins.

These different articles united, annually produce the Tartars considerable
sums, which they only receive in ducats of gold, Dutch or Venetian; but the use
they make of these annihilates every idea of wealth. They are continually
augmenting, without turning any part of their store into circulation. Avarice
seizes and engluts these treasures, while the plains in which they are buried,
afford not the least indication or guide, to future research.

Notwithstanding the avarice of the Noguais Tartars, the hospitality of the
inhabitants of Bessarabia appears to have been equally in the extreme. We
arrived, before dark, at a village in Bessarabia, says the above author, at
which my conductor intended we should sleep. He stopped in the midst of an open
place, surrounded by houses, where I remarked each inhabitant stood at his
door, with eyes fixed on us; while the Tchoadar, looking round, examined them,
one after another.

Where are we to lodge? said I; I do not see that any one cares. You are
mistaken, answered he. Every one is waiting, and wishing for the preference;
whosever house you shall wish to fix upon, you will make the master happy.

During this discourse, I observed an old man, standing singly, before his
door. His venerable air interested me. The lot fell upon him; and no sooner was
the choice made, than all the inhabitants re-entered their houses. The ardour
of my new host expressed his satisfaction; and, as soon as he had shown me into
a clean lower apartment, he brought his wife and daughter, both with their
faces uncovered; the first carrying a basin and a pitcher, and the second a
napkin; which she spread over my hands, after I had washed them.

Pre-informed by my conductor, I submitted, without difficulty, to what
hospitality dictated to these good people. After ordering supper, and leaving
the care of preparing it to the women; the old man, who till then had supposed
me a Tartarian nobleman, undeceived by the Tchoadar, came immediately, to beg I
would excuse the small means he had of receiving me properly. My answer made
him easy; and, as I wished to question him on the surrounding objects, I
obliged him to sit down, smoke, and partake of some coffee, which my servant
had brought.

This little civility, which a Tartarian nobleman would certainly not have paid
my host, confirmed him in his inclination toward me. I then desired him to
tell me why, with a view solely of exercising hospitality, they subjected
themselves to a custom, the inconvenience of which he at present found; and
which might ruin the most wealthy individual; if, by chance, the choice of
travelers should frequently light on him only.

Old Man. I feel, in the preference you have given me, nothing but the pleasure
of having obtained it. We consider the exercise of hospitality as a benefit;
and should any one constantly enjoy that advantage, he could only make others
jealous; but we do not permit the use of any means, which might determine the
choice of travelers. Our eagerness to come to our doors, is only to prove that
our houses are inhabited; their uniformity preserves an equality, and my good
star alone, has procured me the happiness of of having you for my guest.


Baron. Pray tell me, would you treat the first comer with the same humanity?


Old Man. The only distinction we make is, to go and meet the wretched, whom
misery always renders timid: in this case, the pleasure of assisting him is the
right of the first person who arrives.


Baron. The law of Mahomet cannot be fulfilled with greater exactitude; but the
Turks observe not the alcoran so faithfully.


Old Man. Nor do we believe that, in exercising our hospitality, we obey this
divine book. We are men before we are Mahometans. Humanity has dictated our
customs, and they are more ancient than the laws.

My host, at his departure, showed himself faithful to his principles; it was
impossible to make him receive the present, with which I would gratefully have
acknowledged the reception he had given me.

The Baron, who aims to prove that Europe was originally peopled by Tartars,
and not by Goths and Vandals, as is generally supposed, notices the furniture
under this hospitable roof; which was a four-post bedstead, with a tester, bed,
chairs and tables; and enquired if these were Tartar-furniture.


Old Man. We know of no other.


Baron. I am the more astonished at that, since the Moldavians and Turks have
not such furniture; and I scarce can conceive by what route these European
customs have arrived here. Why have you not adopted, as well as your brethren
of the Crimea, the furniture of the Turks?


Old Man. You may see some customs here, unknown to our ancestors; but
depravity cannot make the same progress in these parts, as in the Crimea; where
our sultans set the example of Turkish effeminancy, to which they have been
accustomed in the capital of the empire.


Baron. I perfectly feel this distinction; but it throws no light on the origin
of the European furniture I see here.


Old Man. Yet nothing can better mark that origin. This family-furniture cannot
be European; we are the root of the tree; it is your furniture which is
Tartarian.


This answer served but to excite my curiosity, and multiply my questions; and
I had the pleasure to hear my host repeat, all I had myself conjectured on this
subject. He informed me also, that the Tartars near the Caspian Sea, and those
beyond it, preserve the same customs.

The form of the Tartar-beds above cited, as well as the throne of the Grand
Signior, which always represents a four-post bedstead, have a similarity, which
may appear interesting. If we consider that the first governments were
necessarily paternal; and that the Tartars afford, in this, as well as in many
other matters, the most ancient annals, we shall not be astonished that the
form of the bed, on which their elders ought naturally to give judgment, has
been adopted as a model for the throne of the east. If we add to this remark,
the invasion of all Europe, by people originally Tartars, we shall find an
explanation of the term, Bed of Justice; always employed in France, when the
power of sovereign majesty is fully exerted.

Peysonnel, in reply to these conjectures, says, that the Goths, whose
emigrants followed those of the Vandals, were like these latter, Celtic and
Teutonic nations, and had neither the same origin, nor came from the same
countries as the Tartars; and yet the Tartars, known by the name of Huns, did
not overrun the western part of the continent, till long after the Goths, and
even the Sclavi. The language of the Vandals and Goths, was the Celtic or
Teutonic, the mother of the German; that of the Sclavi, whom we must not
confound with the Vandals, is the mother of the Sclavonian, Russian, and
Polish; and and the Tartar language, from which the Turkish is derived, has not
the least similitude, or analogy, with the two others. The Goths came from the
North, and originally inhabited those countries, which lie between the Northern
Ocean, and the Baltic Sea. The Huns, under which general name are comprised all
the Tartar tribes, who have extended themselves toward the West, came from the
East; and from that flat high land, which extends to the North; and the chain
of the mountains Caucasus and Tibet, continued almost as far as the peninsula
of Corea.

The following particulars relative to their architecture, may, says Tott, be
of some utility to those who are interested in rural economy, though not to the
disciples of Vitruvius; we beg leave to add, if sufficiently intelligible.

Pillars placed on the points which determine the angles and openings, kept in
a perpendicular position by a beam, on which uprights are fixed, form the first
plan, and are disposed so as to receive and support the roof. This
accomplished, other perpendicular pillars, but smaller, at twelve-inch
intervals, are erected, round which hazel twigs are twisted in the manner of
basket-work. This kind of wicker-work they fill with mud, mixed with cut straw,
which they plaster with hair-mortar, within and without, and the whole
white-washed and painted on the pillars, bases, doors and windows, gives the
building an agreeable aspect.

This manner of erecting is infinitely more solid than it appears to be in
description; and is certainly more healthy, than the mode of building among our
peasants, in the remote parts of the country. I am likewise convinced that
landholders who wish, either from interest, or motives of benevolence, to build
cottages, in hopes of favoring population, would be every way gainers, by
adopting this new method of construction. The expense is small, and they would
thus give each cottager, the means of easily repairing his own habitation.

The simple and easy mechanism of their tents likewise deserves to be
described. The Tartars habitually encamped, ought consequently to have brought
the art of making them to perfection. The whole force of their faculties is
employed on this the first of necessities, to a nation which has never known
the luxuries of indolence, and which has therefore bent all its powers toward
those things, in which the exercise of the body, the chase, and the implements
of war are concerned.

A light paling, which can easily be packed and unpacked, forms a little
circular wall of four feet and an half high. Its two extremities, kept near
three quarters of a yard distant, make the entrance into the tent. A score of
small rods, which join at the upper ends, and, at the lower, have a leathern
ring, by which they hook to the paling, form the dome, and support the roof;
which consists of a cowl, or covering of felt, that descends, and spreads over
the walls, which are lined also with the same stuff. A girdle includes the
whole, and some earth, or snow, thrown up round the bottom of the tent*
prevents the air from penetrating, and makes it perfectly solid, without post
or cordage. Others of a nicer construction, have the cones circularly open at
top, which apertures give passage to the smoke, permit fires to be lighted in
the tents, and render them inaccessible to the intemperance of the most
rigorous climates.

The tent of the Cham was of this kind, but so large that more than sixty
people might commodiously sit round a wood fire. It was lined with crimson
stuff, furnished with some cushions, and had a circular carpet.

The best education of the Tartars goes not beyond reading and writing, but
though the education of the Mirzas, or Tartarian nobility, is neglected, they
are eminent for their easy politeness. This is the effect of their familiar
habits of living with their princes, without ever failing to pay them a proper
respect.

There is no country where crimes are less common than in Tartary; their
plains, where malefactors might easily escape, yield but few temptations; and
the peninsula of the Crimea, which affords more objects to rapidity, is daily
shut up, and leaves not the culprit the smallest hope to escape punishment.

Having already said a great deal of the different tribes of Tartars, when
speaking of Siberia, etc. we will pass on to other matters.

CHAP. XX. Moldavia.
IT has been already observed, that Moldavia is sometimes comprehended under
the name of Wallachia, considered in which light, that part of it lying on this
side the mountain, is called Wallachia. This country takes the name of Moldavia
from the rivulet Moldau, which runs from the upper parts into the country,
mingling itself with the river Sereth. Its length extends from west to east;
that is, from the river Sereth, to the Dneister, between thirty and forty
Hungarian miles; and the breadth is about seventy.

Its principal rivers are the Sereth, the Pruth, and the Dneister, which form
the boundary toward the east and north. All these three rivers receive several
smaller streams in their course, and the first two fall into the Danube, which
is the boundary to the south; but the latter discharges itself into the Black
Sea.

The soil we traversed, says Baron Tott, in his description of this province,
drew all my attention; new landscapes, equally interesting by a rich
cultivation, and a vast variety of objects, presented themselves at every step,
and I should have compared Moldavia to the province of Burgundy, if this
Grecian principality had possessed the advantages which result from a moderate
government.

But, alas! the condition of Moldavia is not better than that of Wallachia. It
is governed by a Greek, who procures the appointment by the same means; and
having the same interested views, the consequence is clear, that he must make
the subject suffer equal oppressions.

The sums paid to obtain the government, and for the investiture, cannot be
ascertained; it depends more or less on the number and character of the
candidates, and upon the honesty of the members of the divan. If these two
provinces were governed as they should be, they would be well peopled, and very
rich, no soil being more fertile; for, at present, though the ground is almost
uncultivated, yet it yields even in those years not the most plentiful, an
hundred for one in wheat, and all other sorts of grain. There are very
commodious rivers for rendering commerce easy; their lands produce various
articles to carry it on to advantage; such as wine, wool, leather, honey, wax,
and large and small cattle. But the rivers are no longer navigated; the country
wants inhabitants, those in easy circumstances have not courage to cultivate
the earth, because they would only labor for others. We see tracts of land,
the best and most fertile perhaps in Europe, of ten leagues in extent, entirely
uncultivated.

Long ruled by their princes, according to the faith of treaties, these people
ought still to have been free from the effects of despotism; and so they might,
had not their princes been removable at the pleasure of the Ottoman Port.
Liable at first only to a very small tribute, Moldavia, as well as Wallachia,
at that time, enjoyed a share of liberty. In the persons of their princes, they
beheld, if not men of merit, at least men of illustrious families, whom the
conqueror respected. But all was presently confounded; the subjected Greeks
beheld themselves slaves, and emulation and distinction were lost among them.
The trader was elevated to a principality; every factious pretender put in his
claim; and these unhappy provinces, frequently set up to sale, presently
groaned beneath the most cruel vexations.

The town of Yassi, the capital of this province, situated in a boggy soil, is
surrounded by hills, which every where present rural prospects, and on which
might be built the most agreeable country houses; instead of which, a few
cattle are scattered over them; and, if we except the houses of the Boyards, or
great landholders, and those of the Greeks, who come from Constantinople, in
the suite of the prince, all the other habitations of the capital bespeak the
utmost misery.

The Boyards represent, with great arrogance, the grandees of the country,
though in reality they are only rich proprietors of lands, and cruel
tax-gatherers. Seldom do they live in amity with their prince, but generally
are intriguing against him, and Constantinople is the center of their factions.
Hither does each party carry his complaints and his money, and the Sultan
Seraskier, of Bessarabia, affords a ready refuge to those Boyards, whom the
Port thinks proper to sacrifice to its tranquillity. The Tartar prince gives
safety to the Boyard, and under his protection he is often re-established; but
for this protection he must pay.

These various expenses which the Boyards reimburse themselves by oppressing
individuals, added to the taxes which the prince imposes to pay his annual
tribute, over-burden Moldavia so much, that rich as is its soil, it is scarcely
sufficient. This province, as well as Wallachia, when they submitted to Mahomet
II. on condition of both being governed by Grecian princes, and only subjected
to a moderate taxation, did not make so good a bargain as the authors of the
treaty imagined. It was not foreseen, that the vanity of the Greeks would put
the government up to auction; they were equally blind to the fatal consequences
of that clause, by which the Grand Signior reserved the right of removing them
at pleasure. It is evident, this power of removal cannot fail of carrying
taxation to the most grievous excess; and that universal depredation must be
the necessary consequence; and thus we find that the whole art of these
subaltern governments consists in seizing, and employing every means which can
accelerate this devouring rapacity.

Nothing can display the oppressed state of the inhabitants of this province
more than the violence exercised toward them, in order to procure provisions
by the milkmanders, or conductors, whose office it is to precede and prepare
the way for ambassadors and others who travel at the expense of the Port.

A family instantly dislodged to make room for us, (says Baron Tott, who had
one of these conductors appointed to attend him through Moldavia,) two sheep
killed, roasted, eaten, and not paid for, and blows unnecessarily distributed,
put me out of humor with my conductor, who set off the same evening to prepare
the means of transporting my carriage across the Pruth. This stream separates
the Pachalick of Kotchim from Moldavia. Ali Aga, the name of the milkmander,
had on the evening before swam to the opposite shore; where, with the
assistance of his whip, he had assembled three hundred of the Moldavians,
employed them the whole night in forming trunks of trees into a crazy raft, and
had repassed upon it to our side. My conductor, proud of having constructed so
great a work, invited me to re-mount my carriage. And how, said I, will you get
it safely down to the edge of the river? Or how will you afterward keep it on
your rickety raft, scarcely big enough to contain it, and which must sink under
its weight. -- How? By the help of this, said he, showing me his whip, and
above a hundred bony peasants, whom he had brought from the other shore. Be
under no apprehensions, I would make them carry the universe on their
shoulders; if the raft sinks, these merry fellows can swim, and I will sustain
it; should you lose so much as a pin, I would hang them every one.

The name of God, first pronounced, followed with a plenitude of lashes, were
the signals to begin. They unharnessed, and brought the carriage in their arms
to the edge of the precipice. There I beheld them, not without shuddering,
ready to be crushed beneath the weight of my Berlin. Arrived at the water's
edge, the next thing necessary was to set the raft a-float, which the hundred
Moldavians at length accomplished, guiding it, (some wading, some swimming)
with long poles to the other side, where buffaloes, ready prepared, were
harnessed to the carriage; and in a twinkling, I saw it on the summit of the
opposite cliff.

It may easily be imagined, that Ali Aga was triumphant, and that having been
transported with my suite on the other side, by a second return of the raft, I
did not depart without giving some five or six guineas to the workmen; but what
may not be readily supposed, and what I had not foreseen myself, was, that my
conductor, ever attentive to all my actions, and my most trifling gestures,
stayed some time behind to reckon with these unfortunate laborers, for the
small salary they had received.

He came up to us in about an hour, and posted on to prepare our breakfast,
about three leagues further, where we joined him, while he was providing food
for us, by means of the same tool, with which he constructed our raft. Had he
not made a too frequent use of this weapon, I should have liked him very much,
says the Baron, I therefore undertook to correct this battering propensity.

Baron. Your dexterity, and the good cheer you procure us, would leave me
nothing to wish for, my dear Ali, were you not to beat these miserable
Moldavians so often, or were you to beat them only when they were disobedient.


Ali Aga. What matters it to them, since I must beat them, whether it be before
or after? And is it not better to proceed to business at once, than after loss
of time?


Baron. Loss of time! And is your time then well employed in beating wretches
who have not offended you; and who, with the utmost submission, alacrity, and
good will, execute things almost impossible?


Ali Aga. What, Sir! have you lived at Constantinople, do you speak our
language, and know the Greeks, and yet are ignorant that the Moldavians will do
nothing unless you first give them a good threshing? Do you suppose your
carriage would have passed the Pruth without the exercise I give them all
night, and till you arrived at the side of the river.


Baron. Yes; I believe that without being beaten, they would have done every
thing you ordered them, through the fear of it. But be that as it may, we have
no more rivers to cross, the post-houses must furnish our horses, and we shall
only want provisions, which articles I am most interested in; and let me be
frank with you, my dear Ali; the morsels you cut for me, with the lashes of
your whip, stick in my throat. Leave me to pay for what I have; that is all I
desire.


Ali. You would certainly take a good method to avoid indigestion; for your
money would not even procure you bread.


Baron. Be that my concern; I will pay so liberally, that I will have every
thing of the best kind, and with greater speed than you can procure it.


Ali. I can assure you, that you will not get so much as bread. I know the
Moldavians; they insist upon being beaten: besides I am ordered to defray your
expenses every where; and these infidel-rascals are rich enough to support the
heaviest imposts. This they will think a light one, and will be satisfied,
provided they be well beaten.


Baron. I beg, my dear Ali, you will grant my request; I am willing to pay for
every thing; and I will engage that they will be willing to be paid, as well as
to be kindly treated; only suffer me to manage this matter.


Ali. But we shall be famished.


Baron. No, no; I have taken it into my head, and must make the experiment.


Ali. Well, you are positive, and so be it; but, remember it is not just that I
should go without my supper; and when your oratory and money have failed, you
will no doubt let me take my own method.


Baron. Certainly; and these stipulations being agreed to, I must beg that when
we approach the village, where we are to sleep, the mayor may be sent to me,
that I may treat with him amicably for provisions, etc.


In that case, said Ali, there is no occasion for my going before. He then
ordered one of his people to ride on, and do what I had desired; and again
repeated, smiling, that he would not go without his supper.

Faithful to his engagement, my conductor, when we alighted, went toward the
fire, sat himself down, silently enjoying my approaching disappointment. I, on
my part, was not less eager in my hopes of procuring nourishment. I asked for
the Mayor, they pointed him out; I approached, laid down ten crowns upon the
ground, and spoke to him, in Turkish and in Greek, in the following Terms.

Baron. Here my friend, here is money to buy the provisions we want; I have
always loved the Moldavians, and cannot bear to see them ill-treated; I beg you
will immediately procure me a sheep and some bread. Keep the remainder of the
money to drink my health.


N. B. A good live sheep is worth half-a-crown. Moldavian. He not know
understand.


Baron. How! Not understand! Don't you understand Turkish?


Moldavian. No Turkish; he not know understand.


Baron. Well, let us talk Greek then. Bring me a sheep and some bread, that is
all I ask.


Moldavian. No bread -- Poor -- He not know understand.


Baron. What! have you no bread?


Moldavian. No Bread -- No.


Baron. Unhappy people, I am sorry for you; but you will escape beating at
least, and that is something. It is disagreeable, no doubt, to lie down
supperless; you, however, are a proof that this misfortune happens to many
honest people. -- You hear, my dear Ali, and must own, if money can have no
influence, neither could your stripes. These poor creatures have no food; for
which I am more sorry, than for my own momentary necessities. We shall have the
better appetite tomorrow.


Ali. Oh no; for my part, I assure you it will not be better to morrow, than it
is tonight.


Baron. It is your own fault. Why did you let us stop at so wretched a village,
where they have not so much as bread? Fasting must be your punishment.


Ali. A wretched village! Sir, if the darkness did not conceal it, you would be
enchanted. It is a small town, where every thing is to be had in great
abundance, even cinnamon.


N. B. The Turks are very fond of this spice, they put it into all their
sauces, and compare it to every thing that is most exquisite. Baron. So, so, I
suppose your whipping-fit is come on you again.


Ali. By no means, Sir; it is only my supping fit; which certainly will not
leave me. And, in order to satisfy my appetite, and prove to you that I know
the Moldavians better than you, permit me to speak.


Baron. And will your flogging abate your hunger?


Ali. Most undoubtedly. If you have not an excellent supper, in a quarter of an
hour, you shall repay me every stroke I bestow.


Baron. I take you at your word; but remember, if you punish the innocent, I
will most certainly return your favors; and wi^h a hearty good will.


Ali. As heartily as you please; do you only remain as silent, during my
negotiation, as I did during yours.


Baron. That is but reasonable; I will take your place.

Ali Aga (rises, hides his whip, and taps him on the shoulder.) How goes it my
friend, how goes it? -- Why do not speak? What, do thou not know thy
friend, Ali Aga? -- Come, come, speak.


Moldavian. He not know understand.


Ali Aga. He not know understand? -- Ah ha! This is astonishing! But sincerely,
my friend, do thou not understand the Turkish language?


Moldavian. No; he not know understand. Ali Aga (knocks him down with his fist,
and keeps kicking him while he rises.) Take that, rascal, take that then to
teach thee.


Moldavian. (in good Turkish.) What do you beat me for? Do you not know very
well we are poor people, and that our princes scarcely leave us the air we
breathe.


Ali Aga. (to the Baron.) Well, Sir, you see I am an expert master; he speaks
Turkish already, miraculously. We shall now be able to have a little
conversation together. (To the Moldavian, leaning on his shoulder.) Since it
appears, my friend, thou understandest the Turkish tongue, tell me, how fares
it with thyself, thy wife, and thy children?


Moldavian. As well as it can with people, who are often in want of necessaries.


Ali, Pshaw, thou art joking, friend, thou art in want of nothing, except of
being well basted a little oftener; but all in good time. Proceed we to
business. I must instantly have two sheep, a dozen of fowls, a dozen of
pigeons, fifty pounds of bread, four oques, or ten pounds of butter; with salt,
pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon, lemons, wines, sallad, and good oil of olives, all in
great plenty.


Moldavian. (weeping.) I have already told you we are poor creatures, without
so much as bread to eat. Where must we get cinnamon?


Ali. (taking his whip from under his habit, and beating the Moldavian, till he
runs away.) You have nothing, have you, infidel knave? I will make you rich in
a trice, the same way I made you find your tongue.

(The Greek flies, and Ali Aga returns, and sits by the fire.) You see, Sir, my
recipe is something better than yours.


Baron. To make the dumb speak, I grant, but not to get a supper; for which
reason I believe I am a quantity of stripes in your debt; your method of
procuring provisions being no better than mine.


Ali. Oh there will be no want of provisions. If in one quarter of an hour,
precisely, all I have ordered does not arrive, here is my whip, take it, and use
it as I have done.


In fact, the quarter of an hour was not expired, before the mayor, assisted by
three of his brethren, brought all the provisions, without forgetting even the
cinnamon.

After such a proof, says Baron Tott, how could I continue to plead in behalf
of humanity? My error was inconceivable, I submitted; and, in spite of my
feelings, left my conductor to provide food, in future, without disputing about
the means.

CHAP. XXI. Bulgaria.
THIS province is bounded on the North by the Danube; on the East by the Black
Sea; on the South by Mount Haemus, which separates it from Romania; and on the
West by Servia. It is thus named from the Bulgarians; a branch of the Sarmatae,
and was formerly called Lower Mysia. The Danube, which runs through this
country, for the space of eighty miles, receives the Ister at Axiopolis. It has
another river, Ischar, which rises in Mount Haemus, and falls into the Danube,
near Nicopolis.

At the foot of the mountain, which divides Bulgaria from Servia, is a warm
bath, where the water gushes out in a stream, about the size of a man's body;
and but sixty paces from it, in the same valley, is a spring as cold as ice;
the smell however, manifests that they both contain nitrous, and sulphurous
particles. On this mountain is a Greek convent, for monks of the order of St.
Basil. In the frontiers of Servia, between the mountains of Suha, and the river
Nessava, are several warm baths, whose waters are of a sulphurous quality, and
issue from the mountain, being deeply tinged with the red sands and stones
which it contains. At the foot of mount Witoscha, a few miles on this side
Sophia, toward the borders of Romania, are also four warm baths of great
repute in this country; and the mountain, exclusive of its iron mines, is
covered with villages, corn-lands, meadows, and vineyards.

The country in general may be said to be very mountainous, but the levels and
valleys are extremely rich and fruitful, producing wine and corn, even to
superfluity. The mountains too are also far from barren, affording excellent
pasturage; in particular that of stara plamina, which reaches as far as Widin,
being toward its summit quite bare and desolate; but in the middle and lower
part extremely fertile.

This province, says Chishull, however decried by Ovid, and disparaged by our
modern geographers; for the richness of its soil, variety of rising and falling
ground, elegance of prospect, and a competent provision of wood and water, is
perhaps not to be paralleled by any other spot in the universe.

Among the natural curiosities of this country, are also to be reckoned the
vast number of large eagles in the neighborhood of the town of Bababagi, where
the archers all over Turkey supply themselves with feathers for their arrows,
though these feathers are in number only twelve, and those only in the tail of
this bird, each of which are commonly sold for a crown.

As an instance of the longevity of the people of this province, Chishull
mentions having seen an old Bulgarian Christian, named Staon, aged one hundred
and twenty years; who told him he had all his life been subject to great and
continual sickness, and had three times changed his teeth; once in his infancy,
and twice in his old age. They were now for the most part entire, says
Chishull, his senses of hearing and tasting very lively, and his sight but
little decayed; his beard and his eyebrows had of late become perfectly black,
but the hair of his head was milk-white, and the skin of his breast like the
bark of an old weather-beaten beech.

The Great Balcan, formerly called Hoemus, is a chain of mountains, which rise
to a great height, one upon another, and extending themselves first from east
to west, take afterward another direction from north to south, which separates
part of Thrace from the Sardian territory of Dacia.

In crossing the highest chain of the mountains of Balcan, says Tott, the
aspect of their different strata, the variety of the rocks, which nature seems
to have broken with effort only to afford indications of the treasures she
there incloses, present at each step, those great characters which extend our
ideas on her origin, and lead us to contemplate her works with still greater
ardour and interest.

The ascents over these mountains are very steep, says Lord Baltimore, and lie
in the midst of great woods; the road, or rather track, is in as bad a
condition as can be conceived; one high hill is no sooner surmounted, than you
descend rapidly into a deep valley full of rocks, mud and water.

Chishull gives a more pleasing account of his passage over these mountains.
From Dobral, near which place is a large town famous for dying and preparing
the fine purple and yellow leather, which it vends in great quantities; we
begin to ascend the foot of Mount Hoemus, where the road winds so artificially,
as to take away the difficulty of ascent. Here crossing a rapid river, which
forms its channel, in the body of the mountain, and through a variety of
diverting shades and clifts, we arrive at length at an open plain on the top of
the hill; and there at a true country paradise of Bulgarian Christians, called
Challikcavack; and here, says Chishull, I happily attained that wish of Virgil,
-- O, qui me gelidis in vallibus Hoemi
Sistat, and ingenti ramorum protegat umbra.
GEOR. LIB. ii. v. 488. "Oh, that I were in the pleasant valleys of Hoemus,
"Reposing under the lofty shades of its trees."


The damsels of the parish entertained us with a dance, which though performed
with no great art, or variety in the steps and figure, had a certain plainness
and simplicity which was very pleasing. The ornaments of their dress were a
sort of cravat, consisting of various silver coins, and large bossy silver
bracelets, and we were dismissed the next morning, with corn strewed in our way.

On the top of the hill, we proceeded for some time in a level road, through a
stately grove of oaks; after which the road begins to descend, and being
shortened by the pleasure of the shady scene on each side, leads unexpectedly
into the adjoining plain. In this we travel about an hour, near the foot of the
delightful Hoemus, and then find our quarters ready to receive us at a
Christian village called Tragoe. And indeed all the villages we had hitherto
passed from Adrianople, were entirely inhabited by Christians; who, by nation
are Bulgarians, but by their faith, of the Greek communion.

Near this village is Eski Stambol, a name given by the Turks to the remains of
an ancient city (possibly the Oescus Triballorum) which, at the foot of Hoemus,
shows the entire tract of two walls; the inward one square, and about a mile in
circumference; the outward, almost circular, and containing the compass of five
miles. But besides these it has no relics of carved work, or any inscription
that may give light to the true name or history of the place. In one corner
only, of the inward wall, are several crosses, and an image of the Virgin
mother, barbarously cut with two or three rude lines of modern Greek
characters. By the abovementioned walls runs a small river from the Hoemus,
now called by the Italians, Monte Argentato, and by the Turks, Batkan.

It should be remarked, that the above author was then in the suite of our
ambassador, which may account for his superior accommodations to those of a
private individual. I was informed, says Lord Baltimore, we should have a view
of the Adriatic and Black Seas, at once, from the summit of the Great Balcan,
but I suppose, we did not mount sufficiently high; though I was often struck
with the immensity of space and prospect around us.

We suffered a deal of fatigue, adds his Lordship, in passing these mountains,
and were very near losing all our baggage; which, together with ourselves, was
often preserved by the strength and care of our attendants.

We crossed one river more than sixty times, which meandered through the woods
between stones and stumps of trees, rendering the passage very dangerous and
rugged. These woods are very dangerous to pass, says his Lordship, even as far
down as the banks of the Danube, being full of thieves and straggling parties
of libertine Crim Tartars, who are very civil and friendly to strangers in
their own country; but abroad, are the greatest villains and thieves
imaginable. So much are they so, that a very little while before we passed
through Moldavia, they had plundered great part of it, carrying away men,
women, children, cattle, and whatever else they could lay their hands on; and
this they do, notwithstanding their strict alliance with the Grand Signior, who
does not think it prudent to attempt to chastise them; but partly by threats,
and partly by presents, persuades them to desist.

The journey we have made hither, says Lady M. from Belgrade, to Adrianople,
cannot possibly be passed by any person not in a public character. The desert
woods of Servia, and the inaccessible parts of Mount Hoemus, are the common
refuge of thieves, who rob fifty in a company, so that we had need of all our
guards to secure us; and the villages are so poor, that only force could extort
from them necessary provisions. Indeed, the Janissaries had no mercy on their
poverty, killing all the poultry and sheep they could find, without asking to
whom they belonged; whilst the wretched owners durst not put in their claim,
for fear of being beaten. This is literally and exactly true, however
extravagant it may seem; and such is the natural corruption of a military
government, their religion not allowing of this barbarity any more than ours.

In that part of Mount Hoemus, or the Great Balcan, which borders on Romania,
there are but two passages; one of which it is said was made by the Emperor
Trajan, and capable of being defended by a small force, against a very numerous
army.

The Emperor Trajan's gate stands among hills, says Busching, where the steep
rocks, and dreadful precipices, scarce admit of any access. It was erected by
that emperor, in commemoration of his marching an army through this country,
having made himself a road through places before impervious. It consists of two
stone pillars, with an arch over them, representing a large open gate. This
building is now very ruinous, and is composed of hewn stones and bricks. The
curious in subjects of antiquity, have been too busy in taking off the stones,
which has greatly defaced this stately monument.

The other pass is near a little river, called by the Bulgarians, Saltiza; this
passage is not so strait and narrow as the other, but being full of rocks and
dangerous precipices, may be defended by a small force.

Nor are those parts which lie on the confines of Macedonia more easy of
access; for when Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, had fortified those
passes against the Romans, it was believed, says Florus, there was no passage
left for the enemy, unless they fell immediately from heaven. What renders the
passage of these mountains still more difficult for an army, is the excessive
cold felt on their summits, and which has been the destruction of many
thousands, few constitutions being able to pass suddenly from extreme heat to
that of cold, without being incommoded.

The towns of most note in this province is Sophia, one of the most beautiful
towns in the Turkish empire, and the capital of the province. It is also famous
for its hot baths, that are resorted to both for pleasure and health. Each
house has a garden, well planted with trees and shrubs. The river Ischa, in
some places, takes its course through the town, and in others winds along the
environs. It is the residence of a Beglier-bey, and was built by the Emperor
Justinian, out of the ruins of Sardica, which was its ancient name. The more
modern one of Sophia it is supposed to derive from the empress Sophia, wife of
Justinian. This town, says Lady M. is situated in a large beautiful plain, on
the river Ischa, and surrounded with distant mountains, which affords such a
fine coup d'oeil, that it is hardly possible to see a more agreeable landscape.
The city itself is very large, and extremely populous.

Silistria is likewise a town frequently mentioned in history, a large and well
fortified town on the Danube. At no great distance are the remains of the wall
erected by the Greek emperors, against the incursions of the barbarians. Very
few of the inhabitants of this place are Turks. Its great antiquity is evident
from the walls, which have all the appearance of Roman, and not Turkish
architecture.

The inhabitants of the plains in this district, who derive their descent from
Tartarian emigrants, are noted for their singular hospitality; which is so
great, that when a traveller, of any religion or country whatever, passes
through any of their villages, all their housekeepers of both sexes come out
to salute him; entreating him in the most obliging manner to take up his
lodgings with them, and kindly accept of what God has been pleased to bestow on
them. The person whose invitation the traveller accepts, entertains him and his
horses, if they do not exceed three, for the space of three days; and that too
with a cordiality and cheerfulness, which can scarce be paralleled.

On the confines of these plains, and on the borders of the Black Sea lies
Varna, the place where it is said Ovid was sent into banishment; but the chief
part of his time was passed at Tomi, in this province, to the west of Varna.
The borders of a lake, where he often walked, have become famous, says Lady C.
and the gentleness of his manners, and the sweet tone of his voice, have been
recorded down to the present inhabitants. He represents the inhabitants as
covered with the skins of beasts, and characterises them by the breeches they
then wore, braecataque turba Getarum. He describes Tomi as a town fortified
with walls, where he was obliged to keep close, for fear of the barbarians, who
used to take advantage of the Danube being frozen over, to plunder the opposite
shore.

Varna lies about two days sail from Constantinople, with a fair wind. By this
route Lady Craven returned to Vienna, passing through Wallachia and
Transylvania. The mountains we have already described, over which she must
otherwise have passed, being then infected with such a large body of robbers,
that a whole regiment of soldiers would scarce have been a sufficient escort.

The inhabitants of this province, according to Lord Baltimore, are of the race
of Scythian Tartars, who speak a dialect of the Sclavonian language. They came
originally from the oriental Scythians, who inhabit the banks on the other side
the river Wolga, to the north of the Caspian Sea. They are Christians, and are
said to have adopted that religion from the discourses and miracles of certain
bishops, whom these barbarians in their incursions into the Roman empire, had
taken prisoners.

The habitations of the peasants are of a conic form, in the shape of
sugar-loaves, white-washed within side, but having neither chimnies, windows,
nor furniture in them.

This province, says Busching, is divided into four sangiakships, or
governments of officers, next in rank to a bashaw of two tails. The
Beglier-bey, who has under him twenty-four of these sangiaks, in this and the
adjoining provinces, resides at Sophia.

CHAP. XXII. Macedonia,
IS bounded on the North, by the river Nessus, or Nestus, east by the
Archipelago; on the south it joins Thessaly and Epirus, and on the west
Albania. The figure of it is very irregular, but the situation very
advantageous, and the air clear, sharp, and healthy. The soil is in general
fertile, and the maritime coasts in particular abound in corn, wine, oil, and
every thing that can be desired, either for use or pleasure. In the inland
parts are several uninhabited wastes. It had mines formerly of almost all kinds
of metal, but particularly of gold. Among the many high mountains in this
country, is that chain of the Scardi, which traverses the northern part of it.
Pangaeus was formerly noted for very rich silver and gold mines. The mountains
of Hoemus join the Scardi, separating this country from Romania. Mount Athos is
one of the most celebrated mountains in the whole world, and shall be
particularly described in the sequel. Of woods, and all kinds of timber, here
is great plenty; and the many fine bays in this province are a great
convenience to trade. The most remarkable of these are the Golfo di Contessa,
(sinus strymonicus Golfo di monte santo, (sinus singiticus) and the Golfo di
salonico, (sinus Thoermaeus). The principal rivers are the Platamone,
(Aliaemon) which runs into the bay of Salonichi; the Vistriza, (Erigion) which
mingles with the following, viz. the Vardar, (Axius) the greatest river in all
Macedonia, taking its rise in the Scardian mountains, and falling into the bay
of Salonichi.

The Strymon rises in Romania, or Thrace, and discharges itself into the Golfo
di Contessa.

Besides the bays formed by the Vardar and Strymon, there are some others of
note.

Macedonia having been formerly inhabited by several nations, had a great
number of towns. The most remarkable places in it now are Salonica, anciently
Thessalonica, situated at the bottom of a bay in the Aegean sea, to which it
gives its name, between two and three hundred miles west of Constantinople; and
Mount Athos, commonly called Monte Santo, on which are twenty-two convents,
besides a large town well fortified, the residence of the bashaw.

Mount Athos lies on a peninsula, running out into the Aegean sea, and is,
indeed a chain of mountains, extending the whole length of the peninsula, being
seven Turkish miles long, and three in breadth; but it is only one single
mountain, that is properly called Athos. Its uncommon height appears from the
account of Plutarch and Pliny; who affirm, that when the sun is at the summer
solstice, probably a little before its sitting; the mountain casts its shadow
as far as the marketplace of Myrrhina, in the island of Lemnos, which in the
best maps is fifty-five Italian miles distant; whence the height of Mount Athos
may be inferred to be about eleven stadia. On it are twenty-four convents of
Caloyers, or Greek monks, of the order of St. Basil, besides a great number of
cells or grottos, with the habitations of no less than six thousand monks and
hermits; though the proper hermits, who live in grottos, are not above twenty;
the other monks are Anchorites, or such as live in cells: It is evident from
Aelian, that anciently the mountain in general, and particularly the summit,
was accounted very healthy, and conducive to long-life; whence the inhabitants
were called Macrobii, or long-lived. We are further informed by Philostratus,
in the life of Apollonius, that numbers of philosophers used to retire to this
mountain, for the better contemplation of the heavens, and of nature; and after
their example it unquestionably was that the monks built their cells. These
monks, who are called inhabitants of the holy mountain, are so far from being a
slothful set of people, that, besides their daily offices of religion, they
perform all manner of work, cultivate the olive and vineyards; are carpenters,
masons, stone-cutters, cloth-workers, tailors, etc. They live also a very
austere life, their usual food, instead of flesh, being vegetables, dried
olives, figs, onions, fruit, cheese; and on certain days, Lent excepted, fish.
Their fasts are many, and severe; which, with the healthfulness of the air,
renders longevity so common there, that many of them live above a hundred
years. In every convent are two or three studying monks, exempted from manual
labor, but who use exemplary diligence among the many celebrated writings of
antiquity to be found in their libraries. Here it is the Greeks chiefly learn
their divinity. The monks are in high esteem for the orthodoxy of their
doctrine, and the sanctity of their lives. These convents and churches have
bells, which are rarely allowed to the Greeks; and are also environed with high
and strong walls planted with cannon, against any surprise from corsairs.
Besides churches and convents, the mountain also has a town, called Kareis;
inhabited also by monks, and the residence of the Turkish commander, who is
appointed by the Bostangi-bachi, to defend the place against the corsairs. In
this town a market is held every Saturday, among the monks and anchorites,
which last bring hither knives, and little images, in order, by exchanging them
for money, to purchase bread; but the monks, more indolent, carry them about
every where, and receive alms for them. This mountain is under the protection
of the Bostangi-bachi, to whom it annually pays twelve thousand dollars; and a
much larger sum is paid at Salonica, to the use of the Grand Signior. This
heavy tribute is discharged by alms, and the liberal contributions of Russia,
and the princes of Wallachia and Moldavia. No fowls or cattle are kept upon
this mountain, though on paying a certain consideration, graziers are allowed
to fatten their cattle here.

Some narratives, says Tott, have pretended they possess a collection of
valuable manuscripts; but it is much more certain they do not read them. It is
equally true, that the books of the ancient Thessalonica, as well as those of
Constantinople, have been since the conquest of those places, locked up; and
that the barbarians have poured melted lead into the locks, so that the remains
of Grecian literature, delivered into the hands of superstition and ignorance,
are so carefully concealed, by those enemies of learning, that we can scarce
flatter ourselves we shall ever be able to recover any fragments of it from
their tyranny.

The town of Salonica is situated at the bottom of a gulf of the same name,
from whence it extends to the foot of an adjoining mountain. It is defended by
three old castles toward the sea, which are but in a ruinous situation, and
there are two more in the upper part of the city. Its circumference may be
about five or six miles, and it is surrounded by a strong wall. The houses are
wood, painted red, and toward the top, black, where are generally inscribed
some verses from the alcoran, or some lines of eastern poetry, in gilt letters.
Most of them are ornamented with terraces, and the court-yards frequently
contain cypresses, the favorite tree with the Turks, who are naturally of a
melancholy cast. The streets in general have wooden projections from the
houses, to screen passengers from the heat of the sun, which impedes the
circulation of air, and of course makes the town less healthy.

This city was anciently called Halia and Therma, but Cassander having rebuilt
it, called it by the name of his queen Thessalonica, who was sister to
Alexander the Great. To its admirable situation for trade is perhaps owing all
the regard which the several conquerors of Macedonia have shown it. The
advantages derived from it are such as are scarce to be met with elsewhere; and
as it attracted the admiration of the ancients, so it has the encomium of the
moderns. Nor is it distinguished only by the greatness of its traffic, but it
is also very remarkable for the stately remains of its ancient grandeur; such
as triumphal arches, churches of an extraordinary beauty and stateliness, now
converted into Turkish mosques; particularly that of St. Demetrius, which
consists of one church built over another, and having in it above a thousand
pillars of jasper, porphyry, etc.

In this and other churches are the monuments of several celebrated personages;
and without the city are great numbers of antique fragments, with inscriptions.
Numbers of coins are also frequently found here. It is the residence of a
Turkish bashaw, and likewise of a Catholic and Greek archbishop, who has eight
suffrages under him. In the year 1313, the city was sold to the Venetians, who
were dispossessed of it about eight years after, by Amurath the second. The
Christians were so very considerable formerly in this city, that St. Paul has
addressed two of this epistles to them.

This town, says Bisani, to which Cicero was banished, at the instigation of
his antagonist Verres, still contains some remains of antiquity, both sacred
and profane. In the mosque of St. Sophia is a pulpit of verd antique, from
which St. Paul, according to tradition, preached to the Thessalonians. The
Turks hold this monument in great veneration. At some distance from this
mosque, which was formerly a Greek church, may be seen an amphitheatre, half
sunk into the earth, ornamented with bas-reliefs. In another part of the city
is the portico of an ancient temple, though the columns and figures of it are
mutilated; some of them are finely executed, and particularly a Leda. Scarce
any of the streets are without columns and pieces of marble, with Greek
inscriptions, which the Turks have employed in the construction and ornamented
of their houses.

The burial places are out of the town, near the seashore. Every grave has two
stones, as at Constantinople, one at the head and the other at the foot of the
grave. Near some of them, says the above author, I saw fountains, with wooden
bowls placed in a kind of niche, for the convenience of those who chose to
drink.

In the upper part of the town is the burial place allotted for those who have
been victims to the plague. While we were absorbed in these melancholy, but
useless reflections on the innumerable calamities which afflict mankind, says
Bisani, some Turkish children were amusing themselves by pelting us with
stones, thrown from slings; and saluting us with the usual compliments of being
infidels, a title with which they are accustomed to distinguish the Franks.

In returning home, we met with a very pretty Turkish girl, between fifteen and
sixteen. Her eyes, the only thing we could distinguish, were inexpressibly
fine. When we were near her, one of our party had the imprudence to make signs
to her, which is a sure means of being assassinated. A little boy, who
accompanied her, was extremely angered at this mark of disrespect, and looking
at us with all the fury of a child, he put his hand to his poignard, and
muttered something to us in Turkish, which we could not understand. Not choosing
however, that any other Turks should come up and explain it to us, we thought
it most advisable to turn down a different street, and decamp.

The street^ swarm with sparrows, doves, crows, ravens, storks, dogs and cats,
which no person dares to modest, much less to kill; as the Turks would, in that
case, put them to death, like the Egyptians of old.

They reckon about eighty thousand inhabitants in this city; the Jews, who have
several synagogues here, make above one fourth of this number; the Greeks and
the Franks another fourth part, and the Turks the remainder. If a Turk stands
in need of the services of a Jew, he generally honors him with the title of
pimp, cuckold, or some such pleasing appellation. It is true they do not mind
being buffeted or ill-treated, provided they are paid for it.

While we remained at anchor here, says Bisani, we had Turkish visitors every
day to see our vessel; who expressed themselves full of rapture with every
thing they saw, while they kept counting their beads. The petit-maitres carry
about with them in Lent, chaplets; the beads of which are made of very fine
transparent stones. and fastened by a silver chain to their girdles. They have
gold watches; and the hilts of their sabres, which they all wear, are
ornamented very curiously with embossed silver. We had also some Greek peasants
who came to visit us, whose dress was very singular. Over a woollen robe, the
ground of which was white, and worked with a variety of colors, they wore a
kind of short cassock, without sleeves, which covered only part of their neck;
while the remainder was imperfectly concealed by necklaces of Turkish money,
intermixed with antique medals. Their hair, which was divided into ringlets,
hung loosely down their shoulders. In this manner they formed a circular dance,
placing the musician in the middle; who, while he played, imitated the
different steps they were to perform, and sung different couplets, which they
repeated.

It is well known that idiots make their fortunes in the Mohammedan countries;
or at least that they live at their ease, without being obliged to work for
their livelihood. In the corner of a coffee-house, in this city, says Bisani,
we saw a negro woman lying on an old matt, with scarce any covering on her; who
was old and ugly as the very devil, though she did not seem to be sensible of
it. She would swallow down any thing, even snuff and tobacco; which showed she
had entirely lost that reason which the gods are said to have given us in their
anger. Yet she lives free from care, and has no wants; which the piety of true
believers, a name by which the Mussulmen distinguish themselves, have not
anticipated and provided for, above these ten years. I saw another idiot
amusing himself in the streets with caning some of the Janissaries. This
respect, which the Mahometans have for fools, is carried sometimes even to
adoration. Of which the following is an instance: -- A Caliph of Bagdad, having
heard there was a fool who called himself God, sent for him one day to examine
if he was really a fool, or an impostor. When he was come, he told him there
had been a person brought to him the other day, who counterfeited the fool, and
said he was a prophet sent by God. I ordered him, says the Caliph, to be put in
prison, and he was tried, condemned, and hanged. The fool replied, you acted
right, and did then what it was incumbent on one of my faithful servants to do:
this action of yours pleases me much, for I had not bestowed the gift of
prophecy on that wretch, and he acted without any order or mission from me. On
this the Caliph was ready to worship him; for the Turks believe these people to
be agitated by the spirit of God. This idea of things, however, is very
ancient, and in a certain degree is found among civilized nations, as well as
among savages.

The nature of the Turkish government is well displayed at Salonica, by the
opposition which despotism experiences from the soldiery. The turbulent spirit
of the military, which always increases, when opposed by feeble measures, and
seizes all the authority of which it can deprive the sovereign power, has
usurped the government of Salonica. Many Pachas have successively been its
victims; but this opposition to despotism, far from destroyings its effects,
only serves to increase its tyranny; and the Janissary Aga, the officers who
command under him, and every private Janissary, are so many tyrants, whom the
Port opposes with caution, the Pacha fears, and who are the terror of the
whole country.

The practice usual with the Turks of keeping permanent garrisons, added to the
want of discipline among the troops, give them in some sort the property of the
place at which they are stationed; they there exercise rights consecrated by
custom, which they unite to maintain, though entirely opposed to the good order
of the state.

It is on this principle that the Galiondgis monopolize the sale of lambs at
Constantinople, and force people to buy them. The Turkish soldiers, in every
city, enjoy privileges of the same nature; and their union gives fresh force to
the spirit of fraud, which attacks the treasury. This knavery prevails over all
the coast of the Archipelago, where the exportation of corn is the principal
article of clandestine commerce.

The prohibitions of the Grand Signior, so much the more severe, as he is
himself the monopolizer of this commodity, are of no effect; and the commanders
of the galliots, employed to prevent the exportation, are the first to promote
it, for a proper consideration paid them in advance. They then fix the station
of the galliot, and that where the ship shall take in its illicit loading; with
the time to be allowed for that purpose. The country boats bring the corn from
the coasts, and Grecian and Turkish vessels are employed in the same service;
nothing of which is noticed by the galliot; and covetousness, taking advantage
of negligence, gives itself up to every kind of fraud.

The cutting of wood upon this coast, says Tott, is equally an object of
pillage. The most powerful individual of the country assumes the right of
disposing of this property; and the navigator who buys fraudulently, and
endeavors to better his bargain, necessarily encourages this spirit of rapine,
which annihilates all good order, and causes the state, which furnishes him
with sailors, to suffer inconceivable losses.

About thirty miles south-west of Salonica, lies Janniza, anciently Pella;
which, though now an inconsiderable town, was formerly the residence of the
Macedonian kings, and the place which gave birth to Alexander the Great.

Philippi, a village having but few houses, stands near the ruins of the
ancient celebrated town of that name. Its inhabitants consist only of a few
poor Greeks; yet it is the residence of a Grecian bishop, who styles himself
metropolitan of Philippi and Drama, and has seven bishops under him. The city
of Philippi stood on a hill, between the rivers Nessus and Strymon, on the
borders of Thrace, to which in its most ancient times it belonged. It was at
first called Crenides, or spring-town, from the many springs issuing out of the
hill on which it stood; afterward Dathos, or Thasus, from the Thasii, who
built it; and lately Philippi, from Philip of Macedon; who, after having
reduced it to ashes, rebuilt it with considerable improvements; and from that
time it belonged to Macedonia. Near this town was fought the memorable battle
between Brutus and Cassius, on one side; and Augustus and Anthony, on the
other; in which the latter were victorious. Under Julius Caesar and Augustus,
it was a Roman colony. At present it lies waste; though still boasting some
curious remains of antiquity, particularly the ruins of a noble amphitheatre.
The Apostle Paul has written one of his epistles to the Christians of this
place.

Of all the religions existing, says Lady M. W. M. that of the Arnounts,
inhabitants of this province, seems the most singular; they are natives of
Arountlinch, the ancient Macedonia, and still retain the courage and hardiness,
though they have lost the name of Macedonians, being the best militia in the
Turkish empire; and the only check upon the Janissaries. They are foot
soldiers, and are all armed and clothed at their own expense; they are dressed
in clean, but coarse white cloth, carrying guns of a prodigious length, which
they run with on their shoulders, as if they did not feel the weight of them;
the leader singing a sort of rude tune, not unpleasant, and the rest making up
the chorus. These people living between Christians and Mahometans, and not
being skilled in controversy, declare that they are utterly unable to judge
which religion is best; but, to be certain of not entirely rejecting the truth,
they very prudently follow both. They go to the mosques on Fridays, and to the
church on Sundays; saying, for their excuse, that at the day of judgment they
are sure of protection from the true prophet; but which that is, they are not
able to determine in this world. I believe there is no other race of men, adds
Lady M, who have so modest an opinion of their own capacity.

CHAP. XXIII. Albania and Thessaly.
ALBANIA, or Arnaut, comprehends the old Grecian ^^lyricum, and Epirus. The
former was added to Macedonia by Philip; the word Epirus signifying the
continent. It is to Epirus that Italy owed its first apricots, whence it
accordingly called them mala Epirotica. This province is bounded by Servia on
the North; by Macedonia on the East; by Achaia on the South; and by the Ionian,
and Adriatic Sea, toward the West. The inhabitants of this province make very
good soldiers but have scarce any notions of learning among them; yet they are
very skilful in making aqueducts; and, without any mathematical instruments,
will measure distances, with all the exactness of a geometrician. Their method
of treating hernia is also remarkable, but very rough.

The chief towns in this province are, 1. Scutari, called, by the Turks,
Iscodar; a large and fortified town, situated upon a lake of the same name. It
lies about five and twenty miles from the gulf of Venice. This city is
supposed to have been the residence of the ancient kings of Illyricum, and it
is still the sea of a bishop, though subject to the Turks.

2. Alessio, in Latin Lyssus, a town on the river Drin, not far from where it
discharges itself into the Adriatic gulf; is famous for being the sepulcher of
Scandenberg, who died here about the year 1467, He resisted the whole force of
the Turkish empire, for a great number of years, with a very inconsiderable
army; and is said to have defeated them, in no less than two and twenty
different engagements.

3. Durazzo, Epidamnus, or Dyrrachium, a small port, on a peninsula, having a
pretty good harbor and castle. Its first name Epidamnus denotes the corruption
of its inhabitants, who were so infamous for fraud, treachery, and
voluptuousness; that the Romans, when they became masters of the town, changed
its name to that of Dyrrachium, whence its present name is derived. This is the
celebrated port, or gulf, of Venice, to which the Romans sailed, who went from
the South-east parts of Italy, into Greece. It is likewise famous for having
been the place of Cicero's banishment; and affording a retreat to Pompey, when
he fled from Caesar at Brundusium.

The province of Thessaly, now called Janna by the Turks, derives its name from
king Thessalus; but was more anciently called Oemonia, from Oemon, father of
Thessalus. It is bounded by Macedonia, on the North; the Archipelago, on the
East; by Achaia, toward the South; and by Epirus, toward the West. It was
some time annexed to Macedonia, and at others divided from it. The celebrated
Mount Pindus separates it from Epirus, or a part of present Albania. Among its
once celebrated twenty-four mountains, the most celebrated is Olympus; which,
for its uncommon height, is celebrated by the ancient poets, and made the
residence of the gods. The poets have feigned that it reached up to heaven, and
yet it is not above an English mile in height. Pelion and Ossa are likewise
among the number of mountains in this province. Here also are situated, the
plains of Pharsalia; and between the mountains Olympus, Pelion and Ossa, is the
delightful valley of Tempe; which was so adorned with the gifts of nature, and
so delightfully watered, by the gently winding streams of the Peneus, now the
Salampria, that it was reckoned the garden of the muses. This country is
certainly fertile to exuberance, and seems to exceed all other parts of Greece.
It produces oranges, citrons, lemons, pomegranates, grapes of an uncommon
sweetness, excellent figs and melons, almonds, olives, cotton, etc. and
chestnuts take their Latin name from the town of Castanea, in Magnesia; whence
they were first brought into the colder climates of Europe. It was noted
anciently for its breed of cattle and horses; from which, and the extraordinary
skill of the Thessalians, in horsemanship, in all probability, the fable of the
Centaurs, who are said to have been half men, and half horses, took its rise.
The modern Thessalonians are a well-made people. The most remarkable places in
this province are,

Larissa, by the Turks named Genisakar; the capital, situated near Mount
Olympus, on the river Peneus, and in a hilly, and very delightful part of
Thessaly. It is a good trading city, and the sea of a Greek bishop. Here the
celebrated Achilles was born.

The situation, say Brown, is very pleasant; the city being built on a rising
ground, on the upper part of which stands a palace of the Grand Signior, who
kept his court here in 1669, in order to be near Candia, which was at that time
the seat of war; and likewise for the convenience of hawking and hunting; the
country, about Larissa, being well adapted for those recreations.
Notwithstanding the extreme height of Mount Olympus, in the imagination of the
poets, it seems, according to the above writer, that no snow was to be seen on
its summit, in the month of September; whilst on the Alpine, Pyrenean and
Carpathian mountains, it lies all the year.

Farsa, said to be the ancient Pharsalus, and famous for the battle fought near
this city, between Caesar and Pompey, lies thirty miles to the South of
Larissa; though Cluverius places these celebrated plains more to the westward.

Janna, from whence this country takes its present name, is a well built town,
about forty miles to the north of Lepanto.

Tornoso, east of the above, is a spacious pleasant city, in which are eighteen
Greek churches, and three Turkish mosques. The present bishop is under the
archbishop of Larissa.

Armiro, or Etraria, is supposed to have been the port from whence the
Argonauts set sail.

With respect to the persons, of the inhabitants of this province, Brown
relates that the men are tall, and well proportioned, with black hair and eyes,
and rubicond complexions; the women likewise are celebrated for their beauty.
The Macedonians, who inhabit the mountains to the northward, are much more
rough and weather-beaten, in their appearance; whilst the natives of the Morea,
to the southward, have swarthy complexions, compared with theirs; so that this
province, whether we consider the sweetness and temperature of the air, the
fertility of the soil, the variety of pleasing landscapes, or the beauty of the
inhabitants, seems preferable, in these respects, to every other part of
Greece; and justly to have merited the character the ancients gave of it.

CHAP. XXIV. Livadia
THE province of Livadia, which comprises ancient Greece, properly so called;
and to which belonged the little kingdoms of Acarania, Aetolia, Locris, Phocis,
Doris, Boeotia, Megara and Attica; is bounded by Thessaly on the North; by the
Archipelago, or Aegean Sea, toward the East; by the Morea, or Peloponnesus, on
the South; and by the Ionian Sea toward the West. The principal rivers in this
country, which is for the most part mountainous, are, the Sionapro, anciently
called the Achelous, separating the Arcaranians from the Aetolians, the
Cephisus and the Ismenus, which latter river discharges itself into the
Archipelago.

The most remarkable places in this province are

Athens, according to Busching, now called Setines. This ancient capital of
Attica, is situated near the gulf of Engia, about forty miles to the East of
the isthmus of Corinth; and about the same distance from Cape Raphaei, the most
eastern part of Livadia. It stands in the center of a large and beautiful
plain; making up for what it may be deficient in fertility, by the healthiness
of its situation. This city was at first called Cecropia, rom Cecrops, its
founder; but afterward known by the name of Athens. Exclusive of its power,
grandeur and opulence, it was highly celebrated for the incorruptible fidelity
of its citizens; and for being the nursery of the most eminent philosophers,
statesmen and orators: for its multitude, likewise, of great commanders, no
city has ever equalled it. It was governed at first by kings, then by archons;
but afterward fell, successively, under the power of the Persians, Macedonians
and Romans. In latter times it came under the dominion of the Turks, from whom
it was taken by the Venetians. In the year 1455, the Turks again took it. In
1687 the Venetians recovered it. But in the last wars, between these two
powers, the Turks again got possession of it. These many vicissitudes have
greatly diminished its splendour; but even in its present state, are many
remains of its ancient grandeur, which give ocular demonstration of the great,
and astonishing perfection of the Athenians, in sculpture and architecture. The
inhabitants, at this time, are reckoned about ten thousand; three-parts of whom
are Christians, and have a great number of churches, and places of worship. The
Turks also have here five mosques.

Among the many great, and small remains of ancient and stately edifices, those
more particularly worthy of notice, says Busching, are, the temple of Jupiter
Olympias, and, above all, the Parthenian, or magnificent temple of Minerva; now
converted into a Turkish mosque, and accounted the finest piece of antiquity in
the world. In the last Venetian war, this building suffered very much by the
cannon. The two rivers, Ilyssus and Eridanus, that water the plain in which
Athens now stands, are very small; the former being diverted into several
canals for watering the olive plantations, and the latter lost in the many
branches through which it is conveyed over the country.

Athens had anciently three ports, of which Phalerum and Munichia lay to the
eastward, and Piraeus to the west, of a small cape. The latter being an
enclosed spacious harbor, with a narrow entrance, is still much resorted to;
and, by the Greeks, called Porto Drago; but, by the Italians, Porto Leone, from
a pillar there in memory of a lion, which was carried from hence to Venice.

The city was not more than two miles and a half from the sea, by Phalerum, but
perhaps the distance is increased.

Phalerum was said to have been named from Phalerus, a companion of Jason, in
the Argonautic expedition. Theseus sailed from it for Crete; and Menestheus,
his successor, for Troy; and it continued to be the haven of Athens, to the
time of Themistocles. It is a small port, of a circular form, the entrance
narrow; the bottom of a clear fine sand, visible through the transparent water.
The farm of Aristides, and his monument, which was erected at the public
expense, were by this port. Munychia is of a different form, or oval, and more
considerable; the mouth also narrow.

The traveller, accustomed to deep ports and bulky shipping, may view Phalerum
with some surprise; but Argo is said to have been carried on the shoulders of
the crew; the vessels, at the siege of Troy, were drawn up on the shore, as a
bulwark before the camp; and the mighty fleet of Xerxes consisted chiefly of
light barks and galleys. Phalerum, though a basin, shallow and not large, may,
perhaps even now, be capable of receiving an armament, like that of Menestheus,
though it consisted of fifty ships.

The capital port was that called Piraeus. The entrance of this is narrow, and
formed by two rocky points. Within were three stations for shipping; Kanthanu,
so named from a hero; Aphrodisium, from a temple of Venus; and Zea, the resort
of vessels laden with grain. The wall was begun by Themistocles, and completed
as the importance of the place deserved. This whole fortification was of hewn
stone, without cement, or other materials, except lead and iron, which were
used, to hold together the exterior ranges, or facings. It was so wide that
loaded carts, could pass on it in different directions; and it was forty cubits
high, which was half what he had designed. The bones of this great man, when
transported from Magnesia, by the Moeander, were, with propriety, deposited in
the Piraeus, near the biggest port, called Kantharus; by which were the
arsenals. "When you are got within the elbow, (says Pausanias) which projects
from the promontory of Alcimus, where the water is smooth, you are near the
site of his tomb." It was in shape like an altar, or round, and on a large
basement.

The Piraeus, as Athens flourished, became the common emporium of Greece.
Hippodamus, an architect, celebrated, besides other monuments of his genius, as
the inventor of many improvements in house-building, was employed to lay out
the ground. Five porticos, which uniting, formed the long portico, were erected
by the ports. Here was an Agora, or marketplace; and, farther from the sea,
another called Hippodamia. By the vessels were dwellings for the mariners. A
theater was opened, temples were raised, and the Piraeus, which surpassed the
city in utility, began to equal it in dignity. The cavities, and windings of
Munychia, were filled with houses; and the whole settlement, comprehending
Phalerum, and the ports of Piraeus, with the arsenals, the storehouses, and
the famous armoury, of which Philo was the architect, and the sheds for three
hundred, and afterward four hundred, triremes, resemble the city of Rhodes,
which had been planned by the same Hippodamus.

It was the design of Themistocles to annex the Piraeus to the city, by long
walls. The side descending to Phalerum was begun. Pericles completed it, and
erected the opposite wall.

The Piraeus was reduced, with great difficulty, by Sylla, who demolished the
walls, and set fire to the armoury and arsenals. In the second century, besides
houses for triremes, the temple of Jupiter and Minerva, with their images in
brass, were erected; and a temple of Venus, a portico, and the tomb of
Themistocles.

The port of the Piraeus has been named Porto Leone, from the marble lion seen
in the chart; and also Porto Draco. The lion has been described as a piece of
admirable sculpture, ten feet high; and as reposing on its hinder parts. Near
Athens was another lion, posture couchant, probably its companion. Both these
were removed to Venice, by the famous General Morisini, and are to be seen
there before the arsenal.

At the mouth of the port are two ruined piers. A few vessels, mostly small
craft, frequent it. Some low land, at the head, seems an encroachment on the
water. The buildings are, a mean custom house, with a few sheds; and, by the
shore, on the east side, a warehouse belonging to the French, and a Greek
monastery, dedicated to S. Spiridion.

It was the boast of the early Athenians, says Chandler, that their origin was
from the land which they inhabited; and their antiquity coequal with the sun.
The reputed founder of their city was Cecrops; who, uniting a body of the
natives then living dispersed and in caves, settled on the rock of the
Acropolis. He was there secure from inundation; a calamity much dreaded after
the deluge, which had h^pp^ned one hundred and ninety years before. The hill
was nearly in the center of his little territory; rising majestically in the
middle of the plain, as if designed by nature for the seat of government. The
town, and its domain, was called Cecropia; but the name of the former was
afterward changed in honor of Minerva. A wandering people, called Pelasgi,
were first employed to level the summit of the rock, and to encompass it with a
wall, which they completed, except on the south; where the deficiency was
supplied by trunks of olive trees, and pallisadoes. The entrance was by nine
gates. Afterward Cimon, son of Miltiades, erected the wall on the south side,
with the spoil he had taken in the Persian war.

The tyranny of Pisistratus was established by his getting possession of the
Acropolis, or citadel; from which he could command, and overawe the town
below. His son Hippias was expelled; and then followed the invasion by Darius,
and the battle of Marathon. Thirty-three years after this, Athens was taken,
and set on fire by Xerxes; and, in the next year, by his general, Mardonius;
but, on the victories of Plataea and Salamis, it emerged from ruin, to superior
luster, and extended dominion. The Peloponnesian war then ensued; the long
walls were demolished; and it was even proposed to raze the city, and lay waste
the plain.

The victory obtained over the Thebans, at Mantinea, left Athens at leisure to
indulge in elegant dissipation. A poet was preferred to a general, and vast
sums were expended on plays, and public spectacles. At this period Philip of
Macedon was aspiring to the empire of Greece and Asia, Alexander, his son,
sacrificed a hecatomb to Minerva, at Athens; and fortified the Piraeus to keep
the city in subjection. On his death, the Athenians revolted, but were defeated
by Antipater, who garrisoned Munychia. They rebelled again, but the garrigarchy
were re instated. Demetrius, the Phalerean, who was made governor, beautified
the city, and they erected to him three hundred and sixty statues; which, on
his expulsion, they demolished, except one in the Acropolis. Demetrius
Poliorcetes reduced the garrison, and restored democracy; when they deified
him, and lodged him in the back part of the Parthenon, as a guest to be
entertained by their Minerva.

Philip, son of Demetrius, encamping near the city, and laying the territory
waste, the Athenians were reduced to solicit protection from the Romans, and to
receive a garrison, which remained till the war with Mithridates; when the
tyrant Aristion made them revolt. Archelaus, the Athenian general, unable to
withstand the Roman fury, retreated into the Piraeus, and Munichia. Sylla
burned both places, and defeated the city and suburbs; not sparing even the
sepulchers.

This city now became dependent, more or less, on the different Roman emperors,
till the time of Alaric, king of the Goths; who, under the emperors, Arcadius
and Honorius, overran Greece and Italy; sacking, pillaging and destroying.
Then the Peloponnesian towns were overturned, Arcadia and Lacedemon were laid
waste; the two seas, by the isthmus, were burnished, with the flames of
Corinth; and the Athenian matrons were dragged in chains by barbarians. The
invaluable treasures of antiquity, it is related, were removed; the stately and
magnificent structures converted into piles of ruins; and Athens was stripped
of every thing, splendid or remarkable. Synesius, a writer of that age,
compares the city to a victim, the body of which had been consumed, and the
hide only remained.

After this even Athens became an un-important place, and as obscure, as it had
once been famous. MAP of GREECE etc.
map of Greece A chasm, of near seven hundred years, ensues in its history,
except that about the year 1130, it furnished Roger, the first king of Sicily,
with a number of artificers, whom he settled at Palermo; where they introduced
the culture of silk, which thus passed into Sicily.

Athens, as it were, re-emerges a little from oblivion, in the thirteenth
century; till toward the latter end of the fifteenth, by being made the seat
of war, between the Greek and Turkish emperors, it sunk again. In 1464 it was
taken by the Venetians.

It is remarkable, that after this conquest Athens was again, in a manner,
forgotten. So lately as about the middle of the sixteenth century, the city was
commonly believed to have been utterly destroyed, and not to exist; except a
few huts of poor fishermen. Crusius, a learned and inquisitive German, procured
more authentic information, from his Greek correspondents residing in Turkey,
which he published in 1584; to awaken curiosity, and to promote further
discoveries. One of these letters is from a native of Nauplia; a town near
Argos, in the Morea. The writer says, he had been often at Athens, and that it
still contained things worthy to be seen; some of which he enumerates, and then
subjoins, "but why do I dwell on this place? It is as the skin of an animal
which has been long dead."

The walls of Athens, when the city was in its prosperity with the Piraeus,
were twenty-four miles in circumference. In its present state, says the above
writer, this city is certainly, by no means inconsiderable, either in extent,
or in number of inhabitants. It is placed, by geographers, in fifty-three
degrees of longitude. its latitude was found, by Mr. Vernon, an English
traveller, to be thirty-eight degrees, and five minutes. It enjoys a fine
temperature, and a serene sky. The air is clear and wholesome, though not so
delicately soft, as in Ionia. The town stands beneath the Acropolis, or
citadel; not encompassing the rock as formerly, but spreading into the plain.
Corsairs infesting it, the avenues were secured; and in 1676, the gates were
regularly shut after sunset. It is now open again, but several of the gateways
remain, and a guard of Turks patrole at midnight.

The houses in this city are mostly mean and straggling; many with large areas,
or courts, before them. In the lanes, the high walls on each side, which are
commonly white-washed, strongly reflect the heat of the sun. The streets are
very irregular; and anciently were neither uniform, nor handsome. They have
water conveyed, in channels, from mount Hymettus; and in the Bazar. or
marketplace, is a large fountain. The Turks have several mosques, and public
baths. The Greeks have convents for men and women, with many churches, in which
service is regularly performed; and, besides these, they have numerous
oratories, or chapels; some in ruins, or consisting of bare walls, frequented
only on the anniversaries of the saints, to whom they are dedicated. A portrait
of the owner, on a board, is placed in them on that occasion, and removed when
the solemnity of the day is over.

Besides the more stable antiquities, of which we shall give an account in the
sequel, many detached pieces are found in the town, by the fountains; in the
streets, the walls, the houses and churches. Among these are fragments of
sculpture; a marble chair or two, which, probably, belonged to the Gymnasia, or
theaters; a sun-dial at the catholicon or cathedral, inscribed with the name of
the maker; and, at the archiepiscopal house, close by, a very curious vessel of
marble, used as a cistern to receive water; but once serving, it is likely, as
a public standard, or measure. Many columns occur, with some maimed statues and
pedestals; several with inscriptions, and almost buried in earth. A custom has
prevailed, as at Chios, of fixing in the wall, over the gateways and doors of
the houses, carved stones; most of which exhibit the funereal supper. In the
courts of the houses lie many round pillars, once placed on the graves of the
Athenians; and a great number are still to be seen, applied to the same use, in
the Turkish burying grounds, before the Acropolis. These generally have concise
inscriptions, containing the name of the person, and of the town and tribe, to
which the deceased belonged. Demetrius, the Phalerean, who endeavored to
restrain sepulchral luxury, enacted, that no person should have more than one;
and that the height should not exceed three cubits. Another species, which
resembles our modern head-stones, is sometimes adorned with sculpture; and has
an epitaph in verse. We saw a few mutilated Hermae. There were busts on long
quadrangular bases, the heads frequently of brass, invented by the Athenians.
At first they were made to represent only Hermes, or Mercury, and designed as
guardians of the sepulchers, in which they were lodged; but afterward the
houses, streets and porticos of Athens, were adorned with them, and rendered
venerable, by a multitude of portraits of illustrious men and women, of heroes,
and of gods; and it is related, Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus, erected them in
smaller towns, and by the road-side; inscribed with moral apothegms, in elegiac
verse; thus making them vehicles of instruction.

The Acropolis, or citadel, which was the city of Cecrops, is still a fortress,
with a thick irregular wall, standing on the brink of precipices; and enclosing
a large area, about twice as long as broad. Some portions of the ancient wall
may be discovered, on the outside, particularly at the two extreme angles; and,
in many places, it is patched with pieces of columns, and with marbles taken
from the ruins. The garrison consists of a few Turks, who reside there with
their families, and are called by the Greeks, Castriani, or soldiers of the
castle. These hollow nightly from their station, above the town, to approve
their vigilance. Their houses overlook the city, plain, and gulf; but the
situation is as airy as pleasant; though attended with so many inconveniences,
that those who are able, and have the option, prefer living below, when not on
duty. The rock is lofty, abrupt and inaccessible, except the front, which is
toward Piraeus; and, on that quarter, is a mountainous ridge, within
cannon-shot. It is destitute of water fit for drinking, and supplies are daily
carried up in earthen jars, on horses and asses, from one of the conduits in
the town.

The Acropolis furnished a very ample field to the ancient virtuosi. It was
filled with monuments of Athenian glory, and exhibited an amazing display of
beauty, opulence and art; each contending, as it were, for the superiority. It
appeared as one entire offering to the deity; surpassing in excellence, and
astonishing in magnificence. Heliodorus, named Periegetes, the guide, had
employed on it fifteen books. The curiosities of various kinds, with the
pictures, statues, and pieces of sculpture, were so many, and so remarkable, as
to supply Polemo Periegetes with matter for four volumes; and Strabo affirms,
that as many would be required in treating of other portions of Athens and
Attica. In particular, the number of statues was prodigious. Tiberius Nero, who
was fond of images, plundered the Acropolis, as well as Delphi and Olympia; yet
Athens, and each of these places, had not fewer remaining in the time of Pliny.
Even Pausanias seems here to be distressed by the multiplicity of his subject.
But this banquet, as it were, of the understanding, has long since been
withdrawn; and is now become like the tale of a vision. The spectator views
with concern, the marble ruins, intermixed with mean, flat-roofed cottages, and
extant amid rubbish; the sad memorials of a nobler people; which, however, as
visible from the sea* should have introduced modern Athens to more early
notice. They who reported it was only a small village, must have beheld the
Acropolis through the wrong end of their telescopes.

When we consider the long series of years which has elapsed, and the variety
of fortune which Athens has undergone, we may wonder that any portions of the
old city has escaped; and that the site still furnishes an ample fund of
curious entertainment.

Atticus is represented by Cicero, as receiving more pleasure, from the
recollection of the eminent men it had produced, than from the stately
edifices, and works of art, with which it then abounded.

It was the fortune of Athens, whilst flourishing in glory, dominions and
revenue, to produce Pericles, a man as distinguished by the vastness of his
ideas, as by the correctness of his taste; and as eloquent as splendid. His
enemies declaiming against his temples and images, and comparing the city, with
its gilding and painting, to a vain woman hung with jewels, he took occasion to
show, it was wisdom to convert the prosperity of a state, sufficiently prepared
for war, into a perpetual ornament, by public works, which excited every
liberal art, moved every hand, and dispensed plenty to the labourer and
artificer, to the mariner and merchant; the whole city being at once employed,
maintained and beautified by itself. "Think ye, said he, it is much I have
expended? Some answered, very much. Be mine then, he replied, the whole
burden, and mine the honor, of inscribing the edifices raised for you."

The architects, employed by Pericles, were possessed of consummate skill in
their profession; and Phidias was his overseer. The artificers, in the various
branches, were emulous to excel the materials, by their workmanship. To
grandeur of proportion, were added inimitable form and grace. The vigor of one
administration accomplished, what appeared to require, the united efforts of
many; yet each fabric was as mature in perfection, as if it had been long
finishing. Plutarch affirms, that in his time, the structures of Pericles
alone, demonstrated the relations of the ancient power and wealth of Greece,
not to be romantic. In their character was an excellence, peculiar and
unparalleled. Even then they retained all their original beauty. A certain
frankness bloomed upon them, and preserved their fame un-injured; as if they
possessed a never-fading spirit, and had a soul invincible by age. The remains
of some of these edifices, still extant in the Acropolis, cannot be beheld
without admiration.

The Acropolis has now, as formerly, only one entrance, which fronts the
Piraeus. The ascent is by traverses, and rude fortifications, furnished with
cannon; but without carriages, and neglected. By the second gate is the station
of the guard; who sits cross-legged, under cover, much at his ease, smoking
his pipe, or drinking coffee; with his companions about him in like attitudes.
Over this gateway is an inscription, in large characters, on a stone turned
upside down, and black from the fires made below. It records the present of a
pair of gates.

Farther up are the ruins of the propylea; an edifice which graces the entrance
into the citadel. This was one of the structures of Pericles. It was completed
in five years, at the expense of two thousand talents. It was of marble, of the
Doric order, and had five doors, to afford an easy passage to the multitude,
which resorted on business, or devotion, to the Acropolis.

While this fabric was building, the architect, whose activity equalled his
skill, was hurt by a fall, and the physicians despaired of his life; but
Minerva, who was propitious to the undertaking, appeared, it was said, to
Pericles, and prescribed a remedy; by which he was speedily and easily cured.
It was a plant, or herb, growing round about the Acropolis, and called
afterward Parthenium.

The right wing of the propylea was a temple of victory. On the left, and
fronting the temple of victory, was a building, decorated with paintings, by
Polygnotus; of which an account is given by Pausanias. This edifice, as well as
the temple, was of the Doric order; the columns fluted, and without bases. Both
contributed alike to the uniformity, and grandeur of the design; and the whole
fabric, when finished, was deemed equally magnificent and ornamental. The
interval, between Pericles and Pausanias, consists of several centuries. The
propylea remained entire, in the time of this topographer; and continued,
nearly so, to a much later period. It had then a roof of white marble, which
was un-surpassed, either in the size of the stones, or in the beauty of their
arrangement; and, before each wing, was an equestrian statue.

The propylea, or vestibules, have ceased to be the entrance of the Acropolis;
The passage, which was between the columns, is walled up almost to their
capital; and above is a battery of cannon.

The temple of victory, standing on an abrupt rock, has the back, and one side,
un-incumbered with the modern ramparts. The columns in the front being walled
up, you enter it by a breach in the side, within the propylea, or vestibules.
It was used by the Turks, as a magazine for powder, until about the year 1656;
when a sudden explosion, occasioned by lightning, carried away the roof, with a
house erected on it, belonging to the officer who commanded in the Acropolis;
whose whole family, except a girl, perished, and it is now abandoned to ruins.

The building opposite to the temple, has served as a foundation, for a square
and lofty tower of ordinary masonry. The columns of the front of this building
are likewise walled up, and the entrance is by a low iron gate in the side. It
is now used as a place of confinement for delinquents; but, in 1676, was a
powder magazine. In the wall of a rampart, near it, are some pieces of
exquisite sculpture; representing the Athenians fighting with the Amazons. In
the second century, when Pausanias lived, much of the painting was impaired by
age; but some remained, and the subjects were chiefly taken from the Trojan
story.

Pausanias mentions, with enthusiasm, the astonishing whiteness of the marble,
employed in building the propylea; and the immense size of the pieces, some of
which were two and twenty feet in length. The height of the five door-ways was
the double of their breadth. The central one was twelve feet seven inches wide;
the two next eight feet eight inches; and the two smallest, four feet four
inches. The portico, to which the five door-ways belonged, consisted of a large
square room, roofed with slabs of marble, which were laid on two great marble
beams, and sustained by four beautiful columns. The roof of the propylea, after
standing above two thousand years, was probably destroyed, with all the
pediments, by the Venetians, in 1687; when they battered the castle in front,
firing red-hot bullets, and took it; but were compelled to resign it to the
Turks, in the following year. The exterior walls, and in particular, a side of
the temple of victory, retain many marks of their violence.

The chief ornament of the Acropolis was the parthenon, or great temple of
Minerva, a most superb and magnificent fabric. The Persians had burned the
edifice, which before occupied the site, and was called hecatompedon, from its
being an hundred feet square. The zeal of Pericles, and of all the Athenians,
was exerted, in providing a far more ample, and glorious residence, for their
favorite goddess. The architects were Callicrates and Ictinus; and a treatise,
on the building, was written by the latter, and Carpion.

The statue of Minerva, made for this temple by Phidias, was of ivory,
thirty-nine feet high. It was decked with pure gold, to the amount of one
hundred and twenty thousand pounds; so disposed, by the advice of Pericles, as
to be taken off and weighed, if required. The goddess was represented standing,
with her vestment reaching to her feet. Her helmet had a sphinx for the crest,
and on the side were griffins. The head of Medusa was her breast plate. In one
hand she held her spear, and in the other supported an image of victory, about
four cubits high. The battle of the Centaurs and Lapithae were carved on her
sandals; and on her shield, which lay at her feet, the war of the gods and
giants, and the battle of the Athenians and Amazons. By her spear was a
serpent, in allusion to the story of Ericthonius; and, on the pedestal, the
birth of Pandora. The sphinx, the victory, and the serpent, were accounted
eminently wonderful. This image was placed in the temple, in the first year of
the eighty-seventh Olympiad, in which the Peloponnesian war began. The gold was
stripped off, by the tyrant Lacharez, when Demetrius Poliorcetes compelled him
to fly.

It was observed of Phidias, that, as a statuary, he excelled in forming gods
more than men; a short encomium containing the subject of a panegyric. The
Minerva of Athens, with a statue he made afterward of Jupiter, at Olympia,
raised him far above competition in ivory. Such an artist deserved to be
generously treated; but Phidias had enemies, as well as his patron. He had
inserted, in the shield of Minerva, a beautiful figure of Pericles, without his
knowledge, fighting with an amazon, the face partly concealed; a hand, with a
spear extended before it, seeming designed to prevent the likeness from being
perceived Much envy and obloquy followed, when that with our image was
detected. Phidias was represented as an old man, and bald, but with a ponderous
stone uplifted in his hands; and this figure cementing, as it were, the whole
work, could not be removed without its falling in pieces. He was accused of
having embezzled some ivory, by charging more for the scales of the serpent
than had been consumed. He fled to Elis, and was killed by the people, to
secure their Jupiter from a rival.

Minerva preserved her station in the Acropolis, during all the revolutions of
the Athenian government; till the extirpation of gentilism by Alaric. and his
Goths. The potent and revered idol of Minerva then; it is likely, submitted to
the common plunderer of the Grecian cities; who levelled all their images,
without distinction alike regardless whether they were heaven descended, or the
works of Phidias.

The Parthenon remained entire for many ages, after it was deprived of the
goddess. The Christians converted it into a church, and the Mahometans into a
mosque. It is mentioned in the letters of Crusius, and mis-called the Pantheon,
and the temple of the unknown god. The Venetians, under Koningsmark, when they
besieged the Acropolis, in 1687, threw a bomb, which demolished the roof; and,
setting fire to some powder, did much damage to the fabric. The floor, which is
indented, still witnesses the place of its fall. This was the sad forerunner
of farther destruction; the Turks breaking the stones, and applying them to the
building of a new mosque, which stands within the ruin; or to the repairing of
their houses, and the walls of the fortress. The vast pile of ponderous
materials, which lay ready, is greatly diminished; and the whole structure will
gradually be consumed, and dis-appear.

The temple of Minerva, in 1676, was, as Wheeler and Spon assert, the finest
mosque in the world, without comparison. The Greeks had adapted this fabric to
their ceremonial, by constructing, at one end, a semi-circular recess for the
holy tables, with a window; for, before, it was enlightened only by the door,
obscurity being preferred, under the heathen ritual, except on festivals, when
it yielded to splendid illuminations. In the wall, beneath the window, were
inserted two pieces of the stone called Phengites; a a species of marble,
discovered in Cappadocia, in the time of Nero; and so transparent, that he
erected with it a temple to Fortune; which was luminous within, when the door
was shut. These pieces were perforated, and the light which entered, was tinged
with a reddish, or yellowish hue. The picture of the Panagia, or Virgin Mary,
in Mosaic, on the ceiling of the recess, remained; with two jasper columns
belonging to the skreen; and within, a canopy supported by four pillars of
porphyry, under which the table had been placed; and behind it, beneath the
window, a marble chair for the archbishop, and also a pulpit, standing on four
small pillars, in the middle aisle. The Turks had white-washed the walls, to
obliterate the portraits of saints, and other paintings, with which the Greeks
decorate their places of worship; and had erected a pulpit on their right hand,
for their Iman, or reader.

The fabric, which is built of most beautiful white marble, is in the form of a
parallellogram, extending from East to West. Its length is two hundred and
twenty-one feet, and the breadth ninety-four. The colonades which surround the
building are forty-six in number. Their diameter is five feet eight inches, and
their height thirty-two. The distance between each column is seven feet four
inches. Eight columns are in front, as many behind, and fifteen on each side;
to which, if the four corner ones be added, there are seventeen on each side;
they are of the ARIADNE'S DANCE and the TEMPLE of MINERVA.
Doric order, fluted, and without bases, and adorned with admirable sculpture.

It is not easy to conceive a more striking object than the Parthenon; though
now a mere ruin. The columns within the naos have all been removed; but on the
floor may be seen the circles which directed the workmen in placing them. The
recess erected by the Christians is demolished, and from the rubbish of the
ceiling the Turkish boys collect bits of the Mosaic, of different colors,
which composed the picture. This substance has been found susceptible of a
polish, and is set in buckles. On the walls are some traces of the paintings.

The travelers to whom we are indebted for an account of the mosque, have
likewise given a description of the sculpture then remaining in the front. In
the middle of the pediment was seen a bearded Jupiter, with a majestic
countenance, standing, and naked; the right arm broken. The thunderbolt it has
been supposed was placed in that hand, and the eagle between his feet. On his
right was a figure, it was conjectured of victory, clothed to the mid-leg; the
head and arms gone. This was leaning on the horses of a car, in which Minerva
sat, young and unarmed; her head-dress, instead of a helmet, resembling that of
Venus. The generous ardour and lively spirit, visible in this pair of celestial
steeds, was such as bespoke the hand of a master bold and delicate, of a
Phidias, or Praxiteles. Behind Minerva was a female figure without a head,
sitting with an infant in her lap. On the left side of Jupiter were five or six
other trunks to complete the assembly of deities, into which he received her.
These figures were all wonderfully carved, and appeared as big as life. The
rest of the statues are defaced, removed, or fallen. In the other pediment is a
head or two of sea-horses, finely executed, with some mutilated figures.

It is to be regretted that so much admirable sculpture, as is still extant
about this fabric, should be all likely to perish, as it were immaturely, from
ignorant ^^^^empt and brutal violence. Numerous carved stones have disappeared;
and many lying in the ruinous heaps, moved our indignation at the barbarism
daily exercised in defacing them Besides, the two pediments, all the metopes
were decorated with large figures in alto relievo, several of which are almost
entire. These are exceedingly striking, especially when viewed with a due
proportion of light and shade. Their subject is the same as was chosen for the
sandals of Minerva, or the battle of the Centaurs and Lapithae. On the freeze
of the cell, was carved in basso relievo, the solemnity of a sacrifice to
Minerva, and of this one hundred and seventy feet are standing, the greater
part in good preservation; containing a procession on horseback. On two stones
which have fallen, are oxen led as victims. On another, fourteen feet long, are
the virgins, called Canephori, which assisted at the rites, bearing the sacred
canisters on their heads, and in their hands, each a taper; with other figures,
one a venerable person, with a beard, reading in a large volume, which is
partly supported by a boy. We purchased two fine fragments of the freeze, which
we found inserted over door-ways in the town; and were presented with a
beautiful trunk, which had fallen from the metopes, and lay neglected in the
garden of a Turk.

On the north side of the Parthenon, is a cluster of ruins, containing the
erectheum, and the temple of Pandrosos, daughter of Cecrops.

Neptune and Minerva, once rival deities, were joint and amicable tenants of
the erectheum. The building was double, a partition wall dividing it, which
fronted different ways. One was the temple of Neptunus Erectheus, the other of
Minerva Polias.

The ruin of the erectheum, is of white marble, the architectural ornaments of
very exquisite workmanship, and uncommonly curious. The columns of the front of
the temple of Neptune are standing with the architrave, and also the skreen and
portico of Minerva Polias, with a portion of the cell retaining traces of the
partition wall. The order is Ionic. An edifice revered by ancient Attica, as
holy in the highest degree, was in 1676 the dwelling of a Turkish family; and
is now deserted and neglected; but many ponderous stones and much rubbish must
be removed before the well and trident would appear. By the portico is a
battery, commanding the town, from which the Turks fire, to give notice of the
commencement of Ramazan, or of their Lent, and of Bairam, or the holy days, and
on other public occasions.

The Pandroseum is a small, but very particular building, of which no
satisfactory idea can be communicated by description. The entablature is
supported by women, called Caryatides. Their story is thus related. The Greeks,
victorious in the Persian war, jointly destroyed Carya, a city of Peloponnesus,
which had favored the common enemy. They cut off the males, and carried into
captivity the women, whom they compelled to retain their former dress and
ornaments, though in a state of servitude. The architects of those times, to
perpetuate the memory of their punishment, represented them, as in this
instance, each with a burden on her head, one hand uplifted to it, and the
other hanging down by the side. The images were in number six, all looking
toward the Parthenon. The four in front, with that next to the Propylea,
remain, but mutilated, and their faces besmeared with paint. The soil is risen
almost to the top of the basement, on which they are placed. This temple was
open, or latticed between the statues; and in it also was a stunted olive tree,
with an altar of Jupiter Herceus standing under it. The Propylea are nearly in
a line with the space, dividing it from the Parthenon; which disposition,
besides its other effects, occasioned the front, and flank of the latter
edifice, to be seen at once by them who approached it from the entrance of the
Acropolis.

Besides the statue of Minerva Polias, which was of olive, and that in the
Parthenon, the Acropolis possessed a third, which was of brass, and so tall
that the point of the spear, and the crest of the helmet, were visible from
Sunium. It was an offering made with a tenth of the spoils taken at Marathon,
and dedicated to the goddess. The artist was Phidias. It remained to the time
of Arcadius and Honorius; and Minerva, it was said, appeared to Alaric, as
represented in this image. There were likewise some images of her, which
escaped the flames when Xerxes set fire to the Acropolis. These in the second
century were entire, but unusually black, and mouldering with age.

The hill of the Acropolis, on the side toward mount Hymettus, is indented
near the end with the site of the theater of Bacchus. This was a very capacious
edifice, near the most ancient temple of Bacchus, and adorned with images of
the tragic and comic poets. Some stone-work remains at the two extremities, but
the area is ploughed, and produces grain. The Athenians invented both the drama
and the theater; the latter originally a temporary structure of wood; but while
a play of Aeschilus was acting, the scaffolds fell; and it was then resolved to
provide a solid and durable edifice. The slope of the hill, on which perhaps
the spectators had been accustomed to assemble, was chosen for the building;
and the seats were disposed in rows, rising one above another, each resting on
the rock as its foundation.

END OF VOL. XII.

