THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs by the Author, Sold at the Literary
Press. No. 62. Wardour Street, Soho.

1790.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including
all the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. XV.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, at the LITERARY-PRESS, No. 62, WARDOUR STREET,
SOHO; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC XCIV.

EGYPT.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Diseases.
AMONG other diseases incident to the human frame, those of the eyes are
peculiar to Egypt, where the blind are numerous. This affliction ought not,
however, to be attributed to the reflected beams of a burning sun; for the
Arabs, who live amidst sands, generally have good eyes, and a piercing sight:
nor must we think with Hassalquist, whose stay was short in the country, that
the disease was occasioned by the exhalations of the stagnant waters; for the
French merchants, whose houses are on the banks of the canal of Grand Cairo;
that, for six months in the year, contains water, the smell of which is
insupportable, would be all blind; and for these fifty years, not one has lost
his sight. The origin of this disease, no doubt, is the Egyptian custom of
sleeping in the open air, on the terraces of their houses, or near their huts,
during summer. From what Volney remarks on this subject, it appears, the
sea-air contributes very much to dim the organs of sight, in this misty
atmosphere.

Defluxions on the eyes, says he, are not peculiar to Egypt, they are also
frequent in Syria; with this difference, that they are less general; and that
the inhabitants of the seacoast, are alone subject to them.

In the city of Cairo, which is always full of filth, these disorders are more
prevalent, than in all the rest of Egypt. The common people are more liable to
them, than persons in easy circumstances, and the natives more than foreigners.
The prodigious number of persons in this city, whose sight is either gone, or
impaired, is scarce credible. Of a hundred persons, adds the above writer, I
have met while walking the streets of Cairo, twenty have been quite blind, ten
wanting an eye, and twenty others have had their eyes red, purulent, or
blemished. Almost every one wears a fillet, a token of an approaching or
convalescent opthalmy; but nothing is more astonishing, than the indifference
and apathy, with which they support so dreadful a misfortune. It was decreed,
says the Mussulman; praise be to God! God has willed it, says the Christian,
blessed be his name!

These defluxions happen at no certain season. They are an endemial disorder,
common to every month of the year, and to every age. The custom of sleeping in
the air, to which it is generally attributed, is not adequate to the effects
ascribed to it; for, in countries remote from the sea, the inhabitants also
sleep on their terraces, and yet their sight is not injured. If, therefore, at
Cairo, in the Delta, and on the coast of Syria, it is dangerous to sleep in the
open air, this air, must acquire some noxious quality from the vicinity of the
sea.

The usual diet of the Egyptians appears, likewise, to be a powerful cause. The
cheese, sour milk, honey, confection of grapes, green fruits, and raw
vegetables, the ordinary food of the people, produce in the stomach, a
disorder, which physicians have observed, to affect the sight. Bodies, thus
nourished, abound in corrupted humors, which are constantly endeavoring a
discharge. Diverted from the ordinary channels, by habitual perspiration, they
fly to the exterior parts, and naturally attack the head; because the
Egyptians, by shaving it once a week, and keeping it very warm, principally
attract the perspiration there; and, if the head receives ever so slight an
impression of cold, on being uncovered, this perspiration is suppressed, and
falls upon the teeth; or still more readily upon the eyes, as being the
tenderest part. On every fresh cold, this organ is weakened, and at length
finally destroyed.

Blindness is, in many instances, occasioned by the consequences of the
smallpox. This disorder, which is very fatal in that country, is not well
treated; during the three first days, confection of grapes, honey and sugar,
are administered to the sick; and, after the seventh, they are allowed milk,
meat, and salt-fish, as if they were in full health. Inoculation is not unknown
to them, but little practiced. They perform the operation, in a manner
different from us, by inserting a thread into the flesh, or by making the
patient inhale, or swallow the powder of dried pustules.

Another very general distemper at Cairo, is, that which the vulgar there call
the blessed evil; and which we also improperly term, the Neapolitan disorder:
one half of Cairo is infected with it. The greatest part of the inhabitants,
believe it proceeds from fright, from witchcraft, or from uncleanliness. Some
suspect the real cause; but as that is connected with a subject, on which they
are remarkably reserved, they choose not to mention it. This blessed evil is
very difficult to cure; mercury, under whatever form administered, generally
fails; sudorific vegetables succeed better, without being however infallible;
happily, the virus is not very active, from the great natural and artificial
perspiration. We see there, as in Spain, old men carrying this disorder about
them, to the age of eighty. But the danger is imminent, to such as carry it
into a cold country; for it there never fails to make a rapid progress, and
shows itself always more inveterate from this transplantation.

Several modern authors, with M. Paw at their head, have said, the pestilence
is native in Egypt. Foreign physicians, says Savary, who have resided there
twenty or thirty years, have assured me, this epidemic disease was brought
thither by the Turks. A proof that it is not native in Egypt is, that, except
in time of great famine, it never breaks out in Grand Cairo, nor the inland
towns, but always begins at sea ports, on the arrival of Turkish vessels, and
travels to the capital; whence it proceeds as far as Syene. Having come to a
period in Grand Cairo, and being again introduced, by the people of Upper
Egypt, it renews with greater fury, and sometimes sweeps off two or three
hundred thousand souls; but always stops in the month of June; or those who
catch it then are always cured.

We ought not to pass over another striking remark, which is, that the excess
of heat and cold, are equally destructive of this dreadful contagion; winter
kills it in Constantinople; and summer, in Egypt; it seldom reaches the polar
circle, and never passes the tropic. The caravavs of Grand Cairo, Damascus, and
Ispahan, which are sometimes infected, never propagate it at Mecca; and Yemen,
is safe from the plague.

The Europeans, stand aghast with fear, at the calamities it produces in Grand
Cairo. According to the commissioners of the customs, this city contains from
eight to nine hundred thousand inhabitants. They are so crowded, that two
hundred citizens here, occupy less space than thirty at Paris. The streets are
very narrow, and always full of people, who crowd and jostle each other; and
the passenger is sometimes obliged to wait several minutes, before he can make
his way. One person, with the plague, will communicate it to a hundred; its
progress is rapid, and spreads with the violence of a conflagration, the flames
of which are augmented by the wind.

When the disease breaks out, the French shut up their district, and intercept
all communication with the city. Arab servants, who live without, every day
bring them such provisions as they want; and, except bread, which does not
communicate the infection, they throw what they bring through an aperture, cut
in each door, into a tub of water, by which it is purified and used without
fear. These precautions give health and life to the French merchants, while
surrounded with all the horrors of death.

Burials, funeral processions, and tears, are in every street; for, like the
Turks and Greeks, when the Egyptians bury their relations and friends, there
are hired mourners, who make the air resound with their lamentations; and
desolate mothers, who, groaning, cover their faces with dust, rend their
clothes, attending to the grave the child they have nurtured, and whom they
soon follow; for the Eastern people, more pious than we are, never forsake
their infected relations, but assist them to the last moment, though almost
certain their affection will be fatal. These cries of despair, and funeral
pomp, spread a general consternation, and the French tremble in their asylums.
Who, indeed, without terror, could see humanity suffering under so fearful a
visitation?

All do not die who are attacked; but there are, sometimes, no less than three
hundred thousand people carried off by this pestilence, in Grand Cairo. Could
it be supposed, that the example of the French, who, when the contagion is
past, leave their houses safe, and in health, would not induce the Turks to use
like precautions? Could it be imagined, that throughout the whole Ottoman
empire, quarantine is not performed at one single port; or merits a nation like
this, to inhabit a country of the ancient Greeks and Egyptians?

CHAP. IX. Of their Commerce.
TWO powerful causes have contributed to render Cairo, the seat of an extensive
commerce; the first of which is, that all the commodities consumed in Egypt,
are collected within the walls of that city; and all the persons of property,
that is, the Mamlouks and lawyers, are assembled there, and draw thither their
whole revenue.

The second is the situation, which makes this city a center of circulation;
while, by the Red Sea, it corresponds with Arabia and India; by the Nile, with
Abyssinia, and the interior parts of Africa; and by the Mediterranean, with
Europe and the empire of Turkey. Every year, a caravan from Abyssinia arrives
at Cairo, and brings from a thousand to twelve hundred black slaves; as also
elephants' teeth, gold dust, ostrich feathers, gums, parrots, and monkeys;
while another destined for Mecca, leaves the extremities of Morocco, and
receiving pilgrims, even from the river of Senegal, coasts along the
Mediterranean, collecting those of Algiers, Tripoli, and Tunis, and arrives by
the desert at Alexandria; consisting of not less than three or four thousand
camels. From thence it proceeds to Cairo, where it joins the caravan of Egypt.
They then jointly set out for Mecca, where they arrive one hundred days after.
But the pilgrims of Morocco, who have six hundred leagues more to travel, do
not reach home, till after an absence of more than a year. The lading of these
caravans consists in India stuffs, shawls, gums, pearls, perfumes, and
especially the coffee of Yemen.

The same commodities arrive by another route at Suez. Cairo does not retain
the whole of this merchandise; but, besides what is there consumed,
considerable profits arise from the duties, and the sums expended by the
pilgrims. On the other hand, small caravans arrive, from time to time, from
Damascus, with silk, oils, and fruits. During the favorable season, there are
likewise vessels in the road of Damietta, unloading hogsheads of tobacco, from
Latahia; the consumption of which, in Egypt, is enormous. Others arrive
successively at Alexandria, bringing clothing, arms, fur, passengers, and
wrought silk, from Constantinople. Vessels come likewise from Marscilles,
Leghorn, and Venice, with cloths, cochineal, Lyons' stuffs and laces, grocery,
paper, iron, lead, Venetian sequins, and German dahlers. All these articles,
conveyed by sea to Rosetta, in barks, are first landed there, then reimbarked
on the Nile, and sent to Cairo.

From this account, it is not surprising, that commerce should continue so
flourishing in the capital of Egypt; and we need not hesitate to believe the
report of the commissioner-general of the customs, who asserted, in 1783, that
Cairo had traded to the amount of very near six millions and a half sterling.

But, if we examine the channels into which this wealth is poured; if we
consider, that great part of the merchandise and coffee of India, passes into
foreign countries, the value of which is paid in goods from Europe and Turkey;
that the consumption of the country, almost entirely consists of articles of
luxury, completely finished, and that the produce given in return, is chiefly
raw materials; we shall perceive, that all this commerce is carried on, without
contributing greatly to the real riches of Egypt, or the benefit of the people.

Under the Ptolemies, the haven of Alexandria received the merchandise of the
whole world; and the city became, as Strabo calls it, the greatest emporium on
earth. There was then a canal continued between the Nile, and the Red Sea. This
work, was completed under Ptolemy Philadelphus. It began at the Pelusiac
branch, and was carried to Arsinoe, now Aggeront, distant two leagues from the
port of Suez; for thus far, the sea has retired since that era. Locks,
constructed at its mouth, prevented a too hasty stream; and there were lakes
which supplied it where boats might stop.

The Ptolemies kept up a formidable marine in the Red Sea, and the
Mediterranean, to protect the Egyptian merchants. Theocritus affirms, they had
ninety-seven first-rate ships, several of which were two hundred feet long; and
four thousand barks, to bear orders throughout the empire. By such means,
Ptolemy Philadelphus extended his conquests far into Ethiopia, and Yemen, and
reigned over thirty-three thousand cities. These facts would appear incredible,
were they not attested by writers of good authority; and did we not know to
what degree of splendour, commerce might raise a state.

Following the example of his predecessors, Ptolemy Evergetes founded his power
on trade, to which he gave every encouragement, maintained the marine of the
Red Sea, subjugated several of the kings of Homeritae, who reigned in Arabia
Felix, commanded them to guard the high roads, and effectually protected
caravans from the Arabs. The wealth of Egypt was at its utmost under his reign;
and the abundance of gold and riches of all kinds, ever productive of excessive
luxury in Alexandria, corrupted the court of its kings. Most men are virtuous
in mediocrity; misfortune elevates the mind, and imparts energy, but excessive
prosperity enervates; and, by opening the floodgates of vice, shuts those of
happiness.

The Ptolemies enjoying supreme power, abandoned themselves to effeminacy,
irresolution, and disorders, which infected the morals of their subjects; for
the corruption of kingdoms always begins with that of the great. The fourth of
these princes, however, performed some good acts. He also kept up, and
maintained, the marine his ancestors had created. Under his reign, were vessels
of a size so enormous, that they have never since been equalled. Plutarch
describes one of his vessels, with forty benches of rowers, three hundred and
seventy-three feet long, and sixty-four high at the poop. This enormous ship,
beside which our three-deckers would seem small frigates, contained four
hundred sailors to work her, four thousand rowers, and about three thousand
fighting men. The arts of ship-building and navigation, must have been brought
to great perfection among the Egyptians, who could build and work such immense
vessels, that resembled floating towns.

During the Alexandrian war, which Ptolemy XII. sustained against Coesar, the
latter burnt a hundred and ten large ships; and the Egyptians still had
resources, enabling them to equip a fleet, capable of facing the enemy. But who
could withstand the genius of Coesar? To a woman, the glory of triumphing over
this great man, was reserved. Cleopatra, subjected the conqueror, by charms
irresistible. During the course of her life, this queen displayed magnificence
and prodigality, of which history contains not a second example. Cited by
Anthony, then at Tarsus in Cecilia, to render an account of her conduct, she
went to meet the Roman General. Passing the Mediterranean, she sailed up the
Cydnus in a vessel; the description of which resembles what the poets give us
of the shell of Venus. The sails were purple, the prow and sides of glittering
gold; and the oars, which kept time with the music, were plated with silver.
The queen, reclining under her canopy, says Plutarch, enriched with gold, and
inestimable gems, corresponded in dress to the splendour of her ship. The
richest robes, bedecked with pearls and diamonds, veiled, but did not conceal
her charms. Like the Cytherean goddess, round her were numerous children,
habited like cupids, agitating the air this new deity breathed; while clouding
perfumes, incessantly burnt, were waft^^ to the shore. Anthony, intending to
punish Cleopatra, soon felt the power of her beauty; and, forgetting the judge,
became the lover. Yet, not to beauty alone was the Egyptian queen indebted for
victory. She had wit, and a cultivated understanding; knew the Oriental
languages, spoke the Greek, Ethiopic, Hebrew, Parthian, Syriac, and Persian;
and conversed in their own idioms with the various foreigners, who incessantly
came to the port of Alexandria; that was then become the emporium of the world.

Cleopatra, had vanquished Coesar and Anthony, but in vain attempted Augustus,
a cold and artful man; and, fearing to be led in triumph by this powerful
conqueror, she killed herself. Egypt was then governed by the Romans; and was
to Rome, what Peru has been to Spain, and Bengal is to England: supplying Italy
with gold and silver in such abundance, that provisions, merchandise, and
lands, were doubled in value; thus hastening the ruin of the empire.

In proportion as the Romans narrowed its limits, they adopted the vices and
customs of the conquered people. Egypt, was the kingdom that influenced their
manners most, because it procured them most wealth. Fine linens, and cotton
cloths made at Alexandria superb carpets, and variegated crystals, were
transported to Rome; while the abundant productions of the Thebais, supplied
the proud city with provisions. After this, she had neither manufactures, nor
agriculture; and, in a few years was surrounded, like England, with immense
parks, and by gardens; on the spots, that dictators had ploughed and inhabited
their rustic mansions; delicious groves, cascades, parterres, and palaces were
beheld. Asiatic effeminacy enervated the proud republicans. In vain did the
wisest of their emperors endeavor to resist the torrent; nations paid them
tribute. Egypt gave them corn, and they imagined they had only to receive the
labors of the conquered, and the earth's homage. Its expiring ray freedom,
extinguished by Augustus, gave place to slavery, and all its consequent views.
The Romans became less desirous of commanding, than of enjoying, festivals and
shows. The thirst of gold completed corruption; all was venality at Rome;
soldiers and armies were bought, and the praetorian bands set the empire to
sale.

To Byzantium Constantine transported the seat of empire, which soon became
divided, and its destruction followed. Egypt long was the tottering throne of
Constantinople, and furnished its sovereign with resources against its numerous
enemies. The time, however, approached, when the glory of Egypt, together with
commerce, agriculture, and arts, was to decline.

Mahomet, possessed of a genius, equal to revolutions so vast, created a
religion for the nations of Arabia, scattered over the deserts, which was to
arm against the whole world. History affords not an instance of another mission
so audacious. Death cut short his exploits; but, his successors, animated by
his example, and healed by the enthusiasm he had communicated, overthrew
neighboring nations, conquered Egypt, and a part of the East.

Become a province under the califs, Egypt gradually lost her commerce and
arts. In her present state, groaning under the tyranny of the beys, she cannot
profit by her situation to rival the Europeans, who have discovered new
passages to that quarter of the globe, from whence she drew her richest
commodities. Her ignorant mariners, far from navigating the Indian, scarcely
dare venture over the Red Sea; their greatest effort, says Savary, is their
annual voyage to Moka, where there ill armed saicks, incapable of defense, are
laden with the coffee of Yemen; the muslins and cloths of Bengal, brought them
by the Banyans, the perfumes of Arabia, and the pearls of the isles of Beharim.
The coffee they buy for fourpence per pound, at Moka, they sell for fifteen
pence at Cairo; and this article alone amounts to half a million sterling.

Egypt, even in a decline, however, appears respectable, because she contains
within herself the true source of wealth. Her corn, with which she supplies
Arabia, Syria, and a part of the Archipelago; her rice sent over the
Mediterranean; her carthamus flowers, with which the people of Provence
annually load several ships; her sal ammoniac, transported through all Egypt;
her abundant souda; her excellent flax, esteemed by the Italians; her blue
cloths, that cloth in part the neighboring nations; all are objects that will
make the balance of trade in her favor. The Abyssinians, bring her gold dust,
elephant's teeth, and other precious commodities, which they exchange for her
productions. The cloths, lead, arms, and some gold lace from Lions, which
French ships bring, do not equal what they receive; they pay the balance in
Turkish piastres. The merchandise, imported by the Turks, is far below what
they take in return, and the difference is paid in ready money. Except Moka and
Mecca, where the Egyptians leave a great part of their sequins, all who trade
with them, bring silver and gold. So plentiful are these metals, that Ali bey
flying to Syria, carried with him three millions and a half sterling; and
Ismael bey, escaping some years after, loaded fifty camels with sequins,
patacas, (a coin worth about five shillings) pearls and jewelry.

If destitute of shipping and manufactures, Egypt is still so wealthy; what
might she not be, governed by an enlightened people? What an influx of
prosperity would there arise from opening her canals, repairing her mounds, and
restoring to agriculture a third of the grounds, buried under the fands; what
wealth, from opening her mines of emeralds, famous for almost equalling the
diamond in duration! With what utility might her indigo, carthamus, and other
substances, excellent for dying, scattered through her deserts, be employed!
These are not chimerical riches; Egypt has possessed them for ages: and a wise
administration, would restore all the prolific treasures of nature.

It may not be amiss here, to give a more particular description of the
caravans, extracted from Major Rooke's entertaining narrative, who crossed the
desert with one, from Suez to Grand Cairo. A caravan, says he, signifies an
assemblage of camels, horses, mules, men, and other animals, who are formed
into large bodies, for the sake of mutual protection; and, as they travel in
some parts for two or three months together, over waste and barren deserts,
yielding nothing for the support of either man or beast, are obliged to take
all necessaries with them, and particularly water: it is on these occasions,
that they find the superior excellence of the camel, to all other animals; not
only from its great strength and unwearied perseverance, but from that property
it has of sustaining thirst for several days. These annual caravans, which go
from Aleppo and Cairo to Mecca, are often composed of thirty or forty thousand
people, and are under military government. An officer being appointed by the
Grand Signior, called the Emir Hagj, as we have before remarked, who conducts
and commands them; the order of march, is regular and by ranks; the discipline
is very exact; and a guard of Janissaries, with fieldpieces, form the escort:
they have regular times of marching and halting, which is done by signal. When
they take up their ground for the night, tents are pitched; kitchens,
cookshops, and coffee-houses, are immediately erected, and a large camp is
formed; every thing is as quickly packed up, and the camels are loaded in the
morning, to be ready for gun-firing, which puts the whole body in motion. The
caravan from Cairo, performs its journey to Mecca, in forty days; where, having
staid about a month, to celebrate the Hadji, a festival, in which both the
interests of trade and religion are equally consulted, it returns in the same
order, stopping at Medina in the way back, to pay a visit to, and make
offerings at the shrine of Mahommed, that having been the place of his
interment, as Mecca was of his nativity.

The caravan from Suez to Cairo, being under no regulations, is an irregular
and straggling body, consisting of about one thousand camels, and half as many
men; we set out, says he about noon, traveling on till eight at night; we then
took up the ground; the camels eased of their burdens, placed themselves round
their food, couchant, with their legs under them; and the men in the same order
formed their messes: the caravan was in motion by three the next morning, and
traveled on without making one single halt, even to give the camels water or
food, till nine at night; some conjecture may from hence be formed, of the
power of that animal; the pace we went at, seemed to be nearly four miles an
hour, and this was continued for eighteen hours together. My traveling
carriage, was termed a Kushob. To compare small things with great, it resembled
the body of a coach, with an opening between the two seats for the back of the
camel, on which it was placed longitudinally, so that one seat hung on one
side, the other on the other, and on each sits a person. I had a canopy over
the top, in which I found singular use, as the heat of the sun was intolerable;
and, though I could not be conveyed in a manner more favorable to my feelings,
lying along on mattrasses, and pillows placed over the seat; yet the uneasy
motion of the camel, the heat of the weather, and the excessive drought I
experienced, rendered it the most unpleasant journey I ever made.

The distance from Suez to Cairo is eighty miles, and is always a three day's
journey for loaded camels; but our's not being loaded, they made the journey in
little more than half the time. Having explained the mode of traveling, it
will not require many words, to describe a country uniformly barren, and sandy;
some part of the way lay through a narrow valley, which appeared to be the bed
of the canal, that was made to join the Mediterranean with the Red Sea, and
come into the latter at Suez; a great number of petrified branches of trees,
and pieces of wood, are met with on the road, with here and there a carcass,
which is the vultures' prey; and, in some parts, a few stunted shrubs: every
one, in these journies, goes armed, as the caravans are frequently attacked and
plundered by the wild Arabs, who strip the people, and leave them to perish on
the desert; a circumstance that happened to several of our countrymen, a few
years ago, in the following melancholy manner.

A contraband trade had, for some years, been carried on by the English people,
from India to Cairo, much to their advantage, and as much to the prejudice of
our commerce from thence to Europe: several ships came annually to Suez, with
cargoes from India; and though there was a firman of the Grand Signior, to whom
the port belongs, strictly forbidding all foreign ships, or Christians, to
approach Suez; yet, as the pacha of Cairo, and the chief bey, found their
interest in this illicit trade, they suffered the firman to sleep, which it
did, till a new pacha was sent from Constantinople, with strict orders to
enforce it; whereon the following tragical event befell the Englishmen, when
they came next to Suez, with their accustomed merchandise; not aware of this
change of men and measures at Cairo, they landed the cargoes of their ships at
Suez, paid the duties, and set off. They traveled on the first day with
security, pleasing themselves, probably, with the visionary wealth which the
goods were to produce, and little thinking how sad a reverse the next morning's
light would occasion; scarce had they moved off the ground where they passed
the night, when they were surrounded by a large body of men, plundered,
wounded, stripped, and left naked in the desert; the camels, with all their
effects, water, PLUNDERING a CARAVAN.
and provisions, being taken off by the robbers: in this piteous plight, they
consulted what was best to be done, the only alternative being, whether they
should return to Suez, or proceed to Cairo: they imprudently resolved on the
latter, to which the distance was double that to Suez; to this place, two only
of the company, wiser than the rest, made good their retreat; the others went
toward Cairo, at the instance of a commander of one of the ships, who told
them, that he knew the way across the desert, and that by going straight to
Cairo, and laying their case before the government, they would stand a better
chance of recovering their goods; he gave the first proof how bad his counsel
was, for being soon spent with heat and fatigue, he dropped and died. Being
without their pilot, the rest had but little chance of finding their way across
the desert, where there is hardly a track; indeed, had they known it perfectly,
it would have availed them little; naked, and exposed to the scorching beams of
an African sun, in the month of August, without a drop of water to allay the
raging thirst they must have experienced; all perished except one, who arriving
spent and speechless, at some Arabs huts, about a league from Cairo, the people
there took a great deal of care of him, and partly recovered him; he could
scarcely articulate the name of the person to whose house he wished to go; and
when he arrived, he was scarcely known, so disguised was he with his
sufferings, which he did not get the better of in a twelvemonth.

The cruelty and weakness of a government, that inflicts punishment in the
miserable manner above related, is highly culpable; for such was the mode
adopted by the pacha and bey, to put in force the firman of the Grand Signior;
they themselves, in fact, plundered the caravan, by means of their soldiers,
whom they sent on this errand, and appropriated the spoil to their own use:
they contrived likewise, to get possession of the English ships, by an artifice
of the same dark nature, and imprisoned the crews. The government of Cairo,
which, by openly seizing the effects of the people, who came there contrary to
the orders of the Grand Signior, and contrary to the laws of their own country,
would have acted properly, may justly stand taxed with the greatest inhumanity
for the conduct they observed; and fearful that it might draw on them the
resentment of the English, who, with a single frigate, could destroy the whole
of their trade in the Red Sea: they obliged all the Englishmen, who were then
at Cairo, to bind themselves, under the penalty of a considerable sum, that no
step should be taken to revenge what had happened, making them find a merchant,
who resided at Cairo, to be surety for them.

No Christian ships have come to Suez since this affair; a frigate, with
dispatches from India, came to Cosire, about two years after; but the person
charged with them, being contraband, was imprisoned by the pacha at Cairo, and
sent to Constantinople; for the firman not only forbids foreign ships, and
particularly English, from approaching the port of Suez, but all Christians;
declaring, "That the sea of Suez, was designed for the noble pilgrimage of
Mecca; and, that the port thereof, is a port of two illustrious cities, which
are those that make the light of the truth to shine, and the law of the
prophet; and are established to promote religion and justice, Mecca the
enlightened, and Medina the honored; wherefore, it says, let such Christians
as come there, be imprisoned, and their effects confiscated; and let no one
endeavor to set them free."

I little imagined, says Rooke, when I made those observations respecting the
oppression and tyranny of the Egyptian government; that I should, in my own
person, so soon give proof of what I have advanced; but, thus it happened, and
the following adventure which I met with, may serve to give a tolerable idea of
its equity.

In one of my rides about the city, I was met by a party of Turkish soldiers,
who accosting me, and some European friends who were of my party, said, that by
order of their master, Mustapha Bey, they were come in search of us, and that
they must immediately conduct us to him. We did not at all relish this
salutation, and would gladly have been excused the honor of paying a visit to
the Bey, but having no alternative, we proceeded quietly under their escort. We
were not, it may be readily supposed, extremely comfortable in this situation;
and, in our way, endeavored to divine the cause of it, but in vain: we found
we had nothing else to do than to submit patiently, and wait the event. Being
arrived at the Bey's palace, my companions were set at liberty, and I only
detained; one of my friends, however, stayed with me to act as interpreter, and
plead my cause. We were now ushered into the presence chamber, and found this
potentate sitting cross-legged on a carpet, smoking a pipe seven or eight feet
long; he was a middle aged man, rather corpulent, had a black and bushy beard
that reached below his breast; and his countenance was handsome, although stern
and severe; his myrmidons, who were bearded like himself, stood in a circle
round him, into the midst of which we were introduced.

The Bey, being informed that I was the person he had summoned, surveyed me
attentively; and, with an imperious tone of voice, pronounced my crime, and my
sentence, in the same breath; telling me an Armenian merchant having
represented to him, that an Englishman, who had passed through Cairo two years
before, owed him a sum of money, his orders were, that I should immediately
discharge the debt incurred by my countryman. I heard, with astonishment, this
extraordinary charge, and verdict; and, in reply, endeavored to explain the
hardship, and injustice of such a proceeding; telling him, that in the first
place, I doubted much whether the debt claimed by the Armenian was just; and,
in the second, supposing it was, I did not consider myself, by any means, bound
to discharge it; but all endeavors to exculpate myself, on the principles of
reason or justice, were totally useless, since he soon removed all my arguments
by a short decision; which was, that without further ceremony, I must either
consent to pay the money, or remain prisoner in his castle. I began then to
enquire what the sum was, which the Armenian pretended to be due to him, and
found it to be near five hundred pounds; at which price, high as it was, I
believe I should have been induced to have purchased my liberty, had not my
friend advised me to the contrary, and given me hopes that it might be obtained
without it; recommending me rather to suffer a temporary confinement, than
submit to so flagrant an extortion. Accordingly I protested against paying the
money, and was conducted, under a guard, into a room where I remained in arrest.

It was about noon, the usual time of dining in this country, and a very good
pilau, with mutton, was served up to me; in short, I was very civily treated in
my confinement, but still it was a confinement; and, as such, could not fail of
being extremely unpleasant; my only hopes were founded in the good offices of
an Italian merchant, whose services to me, and many of my countrymen, who had
been embroiled in affairs of the like nature here, deserve our warmest
gratitude.

My apartment was pleasantly situated, with a fine view of the Nile, and a rich
country; but I should have enjoyed the prospect much more, upon another
occasion. On a kind of lawn, shaded with trees, in front of the castle, two or
three hundred horses stood at picquet, richly caparisoned, belonging to the Bey
and his guards. His principal officers and slaves came to visit me; and, in
talking over my case, they agreed it was very hard; but, to comfort me, said
that their master was a very good prince, and would not keep me long confined.
I found several of them pleasant, liberal minded men, and we conversed together
very sociably, through my Arabian servant, who remained with me.

The people in this country always sleep after dinner, till near four o'clock;
they then rise, wash and pray: that time of prayer is called by them Asser, and
is the common hour of visiting; the beys then give audience, and transact
business: Mustapha Bey now sent for me again; and, seeming to be in good
humor, endeavored to coax me into a payment of the demand he made; but I
continued firm in my refusal; on which he changed the subject, and, smiling,
asked me if I should not like to be a Mussulman; telling me it was much better
than being a Christian, and hinted that I should be very well off, if I would
become one of them, and stay at Cairo; using likewise other arguments to effect
my conversion, and all this in a jocular laughing manner. While he was
proceeding in his endeavors to bring me over to his faith, two officers came
from Ibrahim, the chief Bey, to procure my release. My worthy friend, the
Italian merchant, having very good interest with him, had made application in
my behalf, and, in consequence, these two ambassadors were sent to request that
Mustapha Bey would deliver me up to them; but he seemed by no means inclinable
so to do; and, resuming his former sternness of look, remained for some time
inexorable; till at length, wrought on by their entreaties, he consented to let
me go, observing, at the same time, whenever he had an opportunity of making a
little money, Ibrahim Bey always interfered, and prevented him: a pretty
observation! From which may be inferred, that they look upon us as fair
plunder; and do not give themselves much trouble to find out a pretense to
found their claims.

The English seem particularly to have been victims to this species of rapine,
owing to the facility with which they always submit to it; and many of our
wealthy countrymen, having returned by this road, laden with the spoils of
India, these beys have frequently fleeced them; allured by the temptations of
that wealth, which these Nabobs are so fond of displaying: various are the
instances of extortion practiced on them. Our readers may form an idea of all,
when we mention one of a gentleman, who passing by Suez, in his way to England,
that he might not be detained there, by the searching of his baggage, prevailed
on the custom-house officers to dispense with it, and only put their seals on
his trunks, to exempt them from being visited till his arrival at Cairo; where
being come, fatigued with his journey, and impatient to shift himself, he would
not wait for the inspection of the officers, but broke the seals to get his
clothes, and paid a thousand pounds for the luxury of a clean shirt, an hour
before he otherwise would have had it.

When I hear, says Rooke, of the heavy fines that have been levied on my
countrymen, in their passage through Egypt, I consider myself happy in being
quit for a confinement of only a few hours, and fifty pounds given in fees, to
different people employed in the task of procuring my release.

From Mustapha Bey's palace, I was conducted to that of the chief Bey, being
attended by an officer of the former, who was sent with me; Ibrahim was sitting
in a small apartment, richly furnished, smoking his pipe, and was accompanied
by two other Turks; he appeared to be between forty and fifty years of age,
middle sized and handsome; and is reckoned a man of ability. He addressed
himself to Mustapha Bey's officer, inveighing severely against the conduct of
his master; then, turning to me, said I might depend on his protection, during
the remainder of my stay in that country; and, finding my purpose was to go
down the Nile, and to Alexandria, he gave me a passport to exempt me from any
trouble, or molestation I might receive on my passage. Having made my proper
acknowledgments to this prince for his civilities, I retired, not a little
rejoiced, to have regained my liberty.

Owing to this kind of rapine and extortion, practiced by these potentates, and
likewise to the firman of the Grand Signior forbidding European ships to
approach the port of Suez; this channel of communication, betwixt Europe and
India, has been shut for some years past; a circumstance extremely detrimental
to us, since it is by far the most expeditious way of conveying intelligence;
and, by proper management, might still be made use of for that purpose; some
presents, annually sent by the India company, to the chief Bey, who is in fact
the king of the country, would ensure safety to their servants, who might pass
charged with dispatches; and when it is known that the passage to Madras has
been made, by way of Suez, in sixty-three days, it is surprising such an
advantage should be overlooked, if possible to be obtained; not that it would
be advisable to make it a common road for passengers, or permit any other
ships to go to Suez, but small packet boats, for the purpose of conveying
dispatches; for otherwise a door would be opened to a contraband trade, which
would prove extremely prejudicial to the commerce of the India company, and the
revenue of our government.

CHAP. X. History and Government.
THE Egyptians are certainly a very ancient nation, though far from being so
ancient as they pretend, when they give us a catalogue of princes, who,
according to their account, must have existed several thousand years before the
creation; but, as it has been suggested by some writers, if the Egyptians, by
years, intended only periodical revolutions of the moon, and not of the sun,
their difference of reckoning may be more easily reconciled. Besides, it has
been long observed, of the Chinese, and other kingdoms who remount their origin
so very high, that they give no authentic account of these pretended ancient
times, but refer the first rise, of all arts and sciences, to the same date
with ourselves.

It is, however, generally agreed, that the princes of the line of Pharaoh were
the first sovereigns of Egypt. They are supposed to be descended from Cham, the
son of Noah, who was the Jupiter Ammon of the Egyptians, and Misraim, his
grandson, their great deity Osiris. The line of Pharaoh reigned in Egypt till
it was conquered by Cambyses, two hundred and fifty years before Christ. In the
possession of the kings of Persia it continued till the time of Darius, when it
was taken from them by Alexander the Great. At his death the province of Egypt
fell to the share of Ptolemy, whose successor, ever after retained that name.
In this line it continued till the famous Cleopatra ascended the throne, the
wife and sister of Ptolemy Dionysius, the last king. After the death of
Cleopatra, who had been mistress, successively, to Julius Coesar and Mark
Anthony, Egypt became a Roman province for near seven hundred years, when the
Saracens took it in 640. The famous library of Alexandria, said to have
consisted of 700,000 volumes, was collected by Ptolemy Philadelphus, son of the
first Ptolemy, and the same prince caused the old testament to be translated
into Greek; this translation is known by the name of the Septuagint version.

During the Crusades, in the twelfth century, Egypt was governed by Noreddin,
whose son, the famous Saladin, was so dreadful to the christian adventurers,
and retook from them Jerusalem. This prince instituted the military corpse of
Mamluks, who soon after massacred the descendants of Saladin, and usurped the
government into their own hands. These Mamluks changed the form of government
into a republic. They elected, however, a chief, in whom they consided great
authority. Egypt continued in their possession till 1517, when Sultan Selim
made a conquest of the country, and it has ever since been tributary to the
Turks.

But before we speak of the present government in Egypt, it may be necessary to
give some clear and precise idea of the Mamluks. This appellation is bestowed
on children, who, carried off by merchants, or banditti from Georgia,
Circassia, Natolia, and the various provinces of the Ottoman empire, are
afterward sold in Constantinople and Grand Cairo. The grandees of Egypt, who
have a similar origin, bring them up in their houses, and destine them to
succeed to their dignities. These foreigners, at present, can alone enjoy the
title of Bey, and fill the offices of state. The law is so precise, that even
the son of a Bey cannot be raised to this eminent station; he, therefore,
usually embraces the profession of arms. The divan assigns him a proper
maintenance, and names him son of the country.

The Mamluks are, most of them, born of christian parents; but are forced to
embrace Mahometanism, and suffer circumcision. They have an excellent education
given them, so that they may be capable of exercising the offices they are to
fill. They rise usually by their merit, through the various trusts in the house
of the Beys, till they arrive at the post of Cachef, or Lieutenant of the Beys;
when they govern the towns dependent on their patrons; at which time they are
permitted to buy Mamluks, who follow their fortune, and become their companions
and instruments. Their next rise is to the dignity of Bey, which gives them a
seat among the four and twenty members of the Divan, or council of the republic.

On seeing them subsist in this country for several centuries, says Volney, we
should be led to imagine their race is preserved by the ordinary means; but, if
their first establishment was a singular event, their continuation is not less
extraordinary. During five hundred and fifty years that there have been
monarchs in Egypt, not one of them has left subsisting issue; there does not
exist one single family of them in the second generation; all their children
perish in the first, or second descent. Almost the same thing happens to the
Turks; and, it is observed, they can only secure the continuance of their
families by marrying women who are natives, which the Mamluks have always
disdained.

The wives of the Mamluks are like them, slaves brought from Georgia,
Mongrelia, etc. Their beauty is a constant topic among us, and we must believe
it on the credit of fame. But a European, says Volney, who has only been in
Turkey, has no right to give his testimony on the subject. These women are more
invisible here than the others; and to this circumstance their reputation for
beauty is greatly owing. A lady, wife of one of the French merchants at Cairo,
who, by dealing in laces and Lyons' stuffs, had access to all the harems,
assured me, says Volney, that among a thousand, or twelve hundred chosen women,
she had seen, she had not found ten real beauties. But the Turks are not
difficult; provided a woman be fair, she is handsome; and if she be fat, she is
enchanting; "her countenance is like the full moon, her haunches are like
cushions," say they, to express the superlative of beauty. They may be said to
measure them by the quintal. They have besides a proverb worthy the notice of
naturalists; "Take a fair female for thy eyes, but for pleasure an Egyptian."

Let the naturalist explain why men well formed, and married to healthy women,
are unable to naturalize on the banks of the Nile, a race born at the foot of
mount Caucasus; And let it be remembered, at the same time, that the plants of
Europe in that country are equally unable to continue their species! Some may
refuse to believe this extraordinary fact, but it is no less certain, nor does
it appear to be new. The ancients have made observations of the same nature;
thus when Hippocrates asserts that, among the Scythians and Egyptians, all the
individuals resemble each other, though they are like no other nations; when he
adds that in the countries, inhabited by these two races of men, the climate,
seasons, aliments and soil, possess a uniformity no where else to be found,
does he not recognize that kind of exclusion? When such countries impress so
peculiar a character on every thing native, is it not a reason why they should
reject whatever is foreign? It seems then, that the only means of naturalizing
animals and plants, would be to contract an affinity with the climate, by
alliance with the native species; and this the Mamluks have constantly refused.
The means, therefore, by which they are perpetuated and multiplied, are the
same by which they were first established; that is to say, when they die, they
are replaced by slaves brought from their original country.

Sultan Selim having conquered Egypt, and defeated the Mamluks, caused their
king to be hanged at the gates of Cairo. This barbarous action, disgusted them
so much, that they only waited his departure again to take up arms. Reflecting
afterward on his error, that he might gain their good will, he granted them
very peculiar privileges, specified in a treaty, and made very little change in
their form of government.

The four and twenty Beys were to govern as before; except, that a bashaw from
the Port was to reside at Grand Cairo, with whom it was required they should
deliberate, from time to time, on the state of public affairs; but if he
attempted to infringe their privileges, they might suspend him. They were
likewise to furnish a stipulated body of troops to the Ottoman court, if it
were attacked; and further, to pay a certain tribute; but, in other respects,
they were left entirely to their own government.

The Beys feel the power they possess, which they dreadfully abuse. The pacha
remains no longer than while he is subservient to their designs; should he dare
to speak in defense of his master's interests, or those of the Egyptians, he
becomes a state-criminal: the divan assembles, and he is expelled. The
following is the manner in which they receive and eject those representatives
of the Grand Signior.

When a new pacha lands at Alexandria, he gives notice of his arrival to the
council of the republic; some of the Beys, of most address, are then sent to
compliment him, bring him presents, and profess great submission. While they
attend on him, they artfully sound his inclinations, and endeavor to learn
from his own mouth, or that of his officers, what are the orders he brings.
Should they find them inimical to their own purposes, they expedite a courier
to the chief Bey, who assembles the divan, and the pacha is forbidden to
proceed further. They then write to the Grand Signior, that the new governor
comes with hostile intentions, and such as will excite rebellion among his
faithful subjects; and request his recall, which is sure to be complied with.
When the chiefs of the republic believe they have nothing to fear from the
pacha, they invite him to Grand Cairo; the deputies place him in a sumptuous
galley, and escort him all the way. The attendant boats are elegantly tilted,
and filled with musicians. He advances slowly at the head of the fleet; no
vessel being allowed to pass that of the pacha. Those, who are unfortunately
making a voyage up the Nile, are obliged to follow in his suite. He stops at
Helai, a small village below Boulac, where the Sheik El Balad, i. e. chief Bey,
comes himself to receive him, or deputes several fangiacs. The heads of the
republic again congratulate him on his landing; the Aga of the Janissaries
presents him the keys of the castle, prays him to make it his residence, and he
is conducted in pomp through the city. I have seen, says Savary, and therefore
can describe, the entrance of a pacha.

The various corpse of infantry, with their noisy music, march first in two
files, their colors waving; the cavalry follow. About five or six thousand
horsemen advance in good order, their clothing made of very bright stuffs,
while their floating robes, enormous mustachoes, and long lances of shining
steel, give them a majestic and warlike appearance. Then come the Beys,
magnificently clothed, and attended by their Mamluks, mounted on Arabian
horses, highly mettled, and adorned with housings, embroidered in gold and
silver; the bridles of those of the chiefs are bedecked with fine pearls and
precious stones, and their saddles with glittering gold. The various retinues
of each Bey were very elegant; the beauty of the youth, the richness of their
dress, and their excellent horsemanship, all together formed a very agreeable
sight. The pacha closed the march, advancing gravely, preceded by two hundred
horsemen, a band of music, and four led horses, slowly guided by slaves on
foot, covered with housings, most richly embroidered in gold and pearls, thrt
trailed on the ground. The pacha, mounted on a beauteous barb, wore a cluster
of large diamonds in his turban, which darted back the sun's rays. This
procession may convey some idea of the oriental pomp and magnificence of the
ancient monarchs of Asia, when they showed themselves in public. It began about
eight and lasted till noon.

On the morrow the pacha assembled the divan, and invited the beys to be
present: he sat on a raised seat with a barred window, like the Grand Signior.
His Kiaya, or lieutenant, read the orders of the Port, and the sangines,
profoundedly bowing, promised obedience in all things which should not infringe
their rights This ended, a collation was served; and, when the assembly rose,
the pacha presented the Sheik El Balad with a rich furred robe, and a horse
magnificently caparisoned; also caftans to the other Beys. Such is the ceremony
of installation for a pacha.

His office is a kind of banishment; he cannot leave his palace, without the
permission of the Sheik El Balad, but is a state-prisoner; who, in the midst of
splendour, cannot avoid feeling the weight of his chains. His revenue amounts to
near 125,000l. and is raised from the duties paid at Suez, on the merchandise
of the Red Sea.

The ambition of the Beys presents him with an abundant source of wealth; when,
possessing political cunning, and a knowledge of his own means, he has the art
to sow dissension among the chiefs, and form parties. Each will exert their
endeavors to obtain his interest, and wealth will pour in upon him. The
sangiacs, named by the divan also, purchase a confirmation of their dignity
from the pacha; and the inheritance of those who die without issue appertains
to him.

Thus may the Grand Signior's representative maintain himself in office, and
become immensely rich, provided he proceeds with circumspection; for the ground
on which he stands is so slippery, that the least wrong step occasions his
fall; and some unforeseen circumstances will often counteract his utmost
policy. Should some young, audacious sangiac vanquish the party, favored by
the pacha, and arrive at the dignity of Sheik El Balad, he assembles the
council, and the governor is ignominiously expelled. His order to depart is
entrusted to an officer clothed in black; who, carrying it in his bosom,
advances into the audience chamber; and, taking up a corner of the carpet which
covers the sofa, bows profoundedly, and says Insel Pacha, i. e. come down
Pacha; which, having said, he departs. The governor is immediately obliged to
pack up and retire, in the space of four-and-twenty hours, to Boulac, where he
waits for orders from Constantinople. His person is generally safe; but, should
the prevailing Beys have complaints against him, they make him render a severe
account of his administration, and the presents he has received; after which
they divide the spoil. The council of the republic elects a Caimakan, during
the interregnum, to supply his place, till the arrival of a new pacha.

An attempt was made, a few years since, to deprive the Ottoman Port of its
authority over Egypt, by Ali Bey, whose father was a Greek priest, of one of
the most distinguished families of the country. Having turned Mohammedan, and
being a man of abilities and address, he rendered himself extremely popular in
Egypt. A false accusation having been made against him, soon after he was
raised to the dignity of Bey, orders were sent from Constantinople to take off
his head. Being apprized of the design, he had the messenger put to death, who
brought the order, and soon found means to put himself at the head of an army;
and, being also assisted by the dangerous situation to which the Turkish empire
was reduced, in consequence of the war with Russia, he boldly mounted the
throne of the ancient sultans of Egypt. But not content with this, he also laid
claim to Syria, Palestine, and that part of Arabia which belonged to them.

The occasion of his assuming the sovereignty of Egypt is related by Savary as
follows. In 1768, the Russians declared war against the Turks, and sent their
fleets into the Mediterranean. Ali, who was Sheik El Balad, according to the
ancient stipulation, when the country was conquered from the Mamluks, raised
twelve thousand men to assist the Port, which circumstance his enemies
endeavored to turn to his destruction. They wrote to the divan, that the
troops he had assembled were to serve in the Russian armies, with whom he had
entered into an alliance, and the latter was signed by several of the Beys. The
calumny was credited, and a Capigi-bachi immediately sent, with four
attendants, for the head of Ali. Happily for him he had a faithful agent in the
council, who instantly sent off two couriers, the one by land, the other by
sea, to advertise him of the treachery. They outstripped the messengers of the
Grand Signior, and Ali sent for Tentaoui, one of his confidents, informed him
of the secret, ordered him to assume the disguise of an Arab, and, with twelve
Mamluks, wait the arrival of the messengers from Constantinople twenty miles
from Cairo, seize their dispatches, and put them to death. Tentaoui performed
his mission: having waited some time at the appointed place, he saw the
Capigi-bachi and his attendants approach, seized them, and their fatal order,
murdered them, and buried their bodies in the sand.

Having the firman in his possession, Ali assembled the Beys, and after reading
it to them, addressed them in the following animated speech: "How much longer,
says he, shall we be the victims of Ottoman despotism? What faith can we put in
the treaites of the Port? Not many years since, several of the Beys were
assassinated, contrary to all justice; some of you were present, and bear about
with you the marks of that massacre. The marble we tread is red with the blood
of four of your colleagues. To day I am to die, and tomorrow, the man who
shall supply my place. The hour is come for us to shake off this tyrant's yoke;
who, violating our privileges and laws, dispenses with our lives at his
pleasure. Let us unite ourselves with Russia, and free the republic from the
dominions of a barbarous master. Grant me your aid, and I will be responsible
for the liberty of Egypt."

This produced its wished for effect. Sixteen Beys, who were of Ali's party,
unanimously declared for (...) on the Grand Signior; and the rest, un^^^^ (...)
oppose, promised every assistance in their power The pacha was ordered to quit
Egypt in four and twenty hours, and the standard of independence was
immediately raised.

Whilst Ali was engaged in subduing the neighboring provinces of Arabia and
Syria, he was no less attentive to the establishment of a regular form of
government, and introducing order into a country that had long been the seat of
anarchy and confusion. His views were equally extended to commerce, for which
purpose he gave great encouragement to merchants, and abolished some scandalous
restraints and indignities to which they were before exposed. His great design,
it is supposed, was to make himself master of the Red Sea; to make Suez a free
port, particularly for the Europeans, and to make Egypt once more the great
center of commerce. The conduct and views of Ali showed an extent of thought
and ability; and bespoke a mind equal to the founding of an empire, but he was
not finally successful.

Though at the summit of grandeur, Ali forgot not his parents. Having made his
peace with the Port, he ordered one of his generals, who was going into
Natolia to bring back his father and family. Hearing of their arrival at
Boulac, he went to meet them with a numerous train; and, as soon as he
perceived the aged Daoud he descended from his horse, ran and fell on his
knees, and kissed his feet. The father wept with joy; it was the happiest day
of his life, and Ali embraced his sister and nephew. This tender scene over, he
conducted them to his palace, and the Mamluks contended who should wash the
feet of their master's father. When they had clothed him in magnificent robes,
he was led into the harem, and received the most affectionate caresses from the
wife of Ali. Daoud, mounted on a fine horse, was conducted to the hall of the
divan; the beys, and even the pacha, complimented and made him presents. After
remaining seven months in Egypt, he wished to return to his native country,
whither Ali sent him, on board a vessel loaded with riches. Incidents like
these, which have a great resemblance to the history of Joseph, when he went to
meet his father in Goshen, are often renewed in Egypt. Ali's wife was a female
slave from Red Russia, who was very beautiful; her flaxen hair reached to the
ground; her figure was tall and noble; her complexion of the purest white; her
eyes blue, and her eyebrows black; but these were the least of the treasures
which nature had bestowed on the youthful Maria; her mind was superior to her
form. Her unhappy fate never could make her condescend to gratify the desires
of her master; he spoke of his power; she showed she was free, though in
chains; he wished to dazzle by his splendour, but she was insensible to pomp and
grandeur. Charmed with a haughtiness so congenial to his nature, he became her
lover and offered her his hand, if she would renounce christianity; but, though
not without affection for a man who had treated her according to her deserts,
she still had the fortitude to refuse. At last he permitted her to retain her
religion, provided she would not profess it publicly, and obtained her
consent; and so great was his love for her, that he never had any other wife.
Ali was, for a long time, very fortunate in all his enterprises against the
neighboring Asiatic pachas, whom he repeatedly defeated; but was afterward
deprived of the kingdom of Egypt, by the base and ungrateful conduct of Abou
Dahab, who had long meditated his ruin. This was a slave for whom Ali had a
particular affection. He had raised him to the dignity of Bey; and to give him
a still further proof of his affection, gave him afterward his sister in
marriage. Aspiring, however, to the sovereign power, he thought no means unjust
by which he might rid himself of his patron. The Beys of his faction, knowing
his avarice, gave him considerable sums to rid them of Ali; but he, conscious
of his brother's vigilance, the love of his adherents, and the difficulties of
his enterprise, kept the gold, and waited a more favorable opportunity; but to
ingratiate himself, and blind his friend still farther, he discovered the
conspiracy. The consequences exceeded his expectations, and the affections of
Ali, for the man to whom he thought he owed his life, became excessive. Abou
Dahab, however, never lost sight of his detestable intents, but endeavored to
seduce Tentaoui, and offered him twelve thousand guineas, to assassinate his
patron, when they were playing at chess. Tentaoui immediately informed Ali of
the proposal, at which so much was he prejudiced in his favor, that he did but
laugh. Failing in this project, he tried another, and wished to force a wife to
poison a brother she loved, in a cup of coffee. She rejected the proposal with
horror, and sent his faithful slave to conjure Ali to keep on his guard against
Abou, as his most dangerous enemy. So many warnings ought to have rendered him
suspicious, but his affection was extreme; nor could he credit crimes his heart
disclaimed; besides, the benefits he had conferred, rendered him confident.

The treachery of this villain, and of another of his generals, Ismael, whom he
had entrusted with the command of his troops, and who went over to Abou, preyed
upon his mind; he shuddered at the very name of Abou Dahab, and his blood
boiled in his veins. Being obliged in consequence, to fly Egypt, he retreated
to the dominions of Sheik Daher, at Acre, where he collected an army to make
head against Abou. This agitation, and the fatigue of a painful march,
occasioned him to fall dangerously ill. When he came in sight of Abou Dahab's
army, he arranged his troops in order of battle, and ordered himself to be
carried into his tent, for he was too weak to sit on horseback. Victory had
declared for Ali, when the Mograbians, mercenary troops* who fight only for the
lust of gain, seduced by the magnificent promises of Abou, went over to his
side, and the face of fortune was changed. The flying rallied; and, having now
only a small army to encounter, surrounded them on all sides, and made great
slaughter. His friends then rode up to his tent, and conjured him to fly to
Acre. Ali answered, fly my friends, I command you; as for me, my hour is come.
Scarcely had they quitted him, before the lieutenant of Abou, entering, sabre
in hand, Ali firing his pistol, ended him. Bathed in his blood, for two
soldiers had before wounded him, he fought like a lion; when another from
behind bringing him down with his sabre, they fell upon him, and carried him to
the tent of the victor. The traitor, perfidious to the last, shed feigned
tears, at beholding him thus, and endeavored to console him. Ali turned away
his eyes and spoke not a word. He died a week after of his wounds; though some
said he was poisoned by his infamous brother-in-law; if so, this was the
completion of his atrocious acts; nor can we reflect, without shuddering on the
horrors which ambition impels men to commit.

Ali was above the middle size; his eyes were large and full of fire, his
manner was noble and winning, and his character frank and generous. Nature had
endowed him with unconquerable fortitude, and an elevated genius. He fell the
victim of friendship, and his misfortunes were the consequence of having
nurtured a traitor, who profited by his benefactions to embitter and rob him of
life. Had Russia accepted the offers he made her, and granted him engineers,
with three or four thousand men, he would have subdued Syria and Egypt, and
yielded the commerce of Arabia and India into the hands of his ally. He
perished at the age of forty-five. The Egyptians wept his death, and saw
themselves again the victims of miseries, from which he had delivered them.

Abou Dahab was, one morning soon after, found dead in his bed; whether by
poison or otherwise, is uncertain.

CHAP. XI. Of their Antiquities.
BEFORE we quit Egypt, it will be necessary to speak of the monuments that are
most worthy of the curiosity of those who travel into this country; we mean
those pyramids, that have been ranked formerly in the number of the seven
wonders of the world, that are admired still, and that extend from Cairo to
Meduun.

These superb monuments are found only in Egypt; for though there is one at
Rome, which serves for a tomb to C. Cestius, it can be considered only as a
mere imitation; and the least of those in Egypt surpasses it much in grandeur.
Thus it does not hinder us from being able to assert, that pyramids are found
only in Egypt.

Another general position is, that we see pyramids only between Cairo and
Meduun. Some, indeed, have advanced that there were pyramids in Upper Egypt;
but they have been deceived, says Norden, by false memoirs, or they were
willing out of vain glory, to have supposed to have penetrated places where no
one else has been, and to have seen what no one has since discovered.

The pyramids are not situated in plains, as is generally supposed; but, upon
the rock, that is at the foot of the high mountains, which accompany the Nile
in its course, and which make the separation between Egypt and Libya. They have
been all raised with with the same intention, that is, to serve for sepulchers;
but their architecture is extremely different, with regard to the distribution,
the materials, and the grandeur.

Some are open; others ruined; and the greatest part of them are closed; but
there is none of them which has not been damaged in some of its parts.

It is easily conceived that they could not have been all raised at the same
time. The prodigious quantity of materials, that it was necessary to collect,
renders the supposition extremely improbable. The perfection, with which the
last are built, shows it in like manner, as they surpass the first, very much,
in grandeur and magnificence. All that can be advanced for certain is, that
their fabric is of the most remote antiquity, and even more early than the
times of the most ancient historians, whose writings have been handed down to
us. That which these authors assert, of the time of the building of the
pyramids, is founded on traditions more fabulous than probable. It is a thing
as wonderful as it is certain, that they subsist to our time; though the epoch
of their foundation was lost, even at the time that the first Greek
philosophers traveled into Egypt.

If any one should think of maintaining, that the most ancient pyramids must
have been founded at the same time as the tower of Babel, the notion would be
thought a little extravagant. But the pyramids would, at least, have this
advantage, that they subsist at present; but there remain scarce any footsteps
of that ancient tower.

It appears probable, says Norden, that the origin of the pyramids even
preceded that of the hieroglyphics. And as they had no longer the knowledge of
those characters, at the time when the Persians made the conquest of Egypt, we
must throw back the first epoch of the pyramids, into times so remote in
antiquity, that vulgar chronology would find it difficult to fix the era of
their date.

If we conjecture that the pyramids, even the latest, have been raised before
they had the use of hieroglyphics, we do not make the assertion without some
grounds to go upon. Who can persuade himself that the Egyptians would have left
such superb monuments, without the least hieroglyphic inscription -- They who
were profuse of hieroglyphics, upon all edifices of any importance? Now there
are none to be perceived, either in the inside, or outside of the pyramids, nor
even on the ruins of the temple of the second and third pyramid. Is not this a
proof, that the origin of the pyramids is antecedent to that of the
hieroglyphics, which are, however, considered as the first characters used in
Egypt.

There runs among the people in Egypt, a tradition, that there were anciently
in this country giants; and that they raised without much difficulty, the
pyramids, temples, and vast palaces, whose remains occasion at present, our
admiration.

This fable scarces deserves to be confuted; its falsity appears at first
sight. But to obviate entirely what might be said in its favor, we shall only
observe, that if the country had been peopled by giants, the entrance of the
caves, from whence they have drawn stones for these edifices, must have been
greater than they are: that the gates of the ancient buildings, still
subsisting, would have had in like manner more height and breadth, for the more
easy going in, and coming out of the giants; and that the passages of the
pyramids, so narrow at present, that scarce a man of the present time can drag
himself along, when lying on his belly, would have been by no means proper for
men of such a stature.

Besides, nothing gives a more just idea of the stature of the men of that
era, than the urn, or the Sarcophagus, in the greatest and last pyramid,
nearest to Grand Cairo. This existing and irrefragable proof annihilates all
those extravagant ideas, that might be formed of the existence of giants. It
determines the size of the body of the prince, for whom the pyramid was built;
and the passages of that pyramid further show, that the workmen were not of
larger size than the prince; since the entrance, and the egress, scarce give
sufficient room for men of such a stature as they have at present.

The principal pyramids are at the South-east of Gaza; and, as several authors
have pretended that the city of Memphis was built on this spot, they are
universally denominated the pyramids of Memphis.

There are four which are more particularly the object of attention; for,
though there are seven or eight others, at no great distance, yet they are not
to be compared with these; especially since they have been opened, and almost
entirely ruined. The four principal ones are almost upon the same diagonal
line, and distant from each other about four hundred paces. The two most
northerly pyramids are the largest, and have five hundred feet perpendicular
height. The two others are much less; but have some peculiarities which
occasion their being examined and admired.

The four faces, of all the pyramids, correspond precisely with the four
cardinal points; the North, the South, the East, and the West. The situation of
these, with their adjacent parts, shows in what manner they have been raised,
upon the rock, at the foot of the mountains. The rock, not having been
thoroughly even, has been smoothed by a chissel; and this artificial plain has
a sloping on the North, and on the East sides, to give convenience for
transporting the materials, necessary for the pyramids. This plain may have
about eighty feet of elevation, above the horizon of the ground, which is
always overflowed by the Nile; and it has a Danish league in circumference.

The most Northern of these great pyramids is the only one that is open; and,
as it is the first met with, we shall begin with a description of it, and then
proceed to the others.

The figure of a pyramid is so well known, that it would be superfluous to
attempt describing it; we shall only observe that it is the most solid figure
that it is possible to give to the main body of a building. There is no
destroying it, but by beginning at the summit. It rests on a basis too firm to
be attacked in that part; and whoever should attempt it would find as much
difficulty, as there was in raising it.

The external part of the pyramid is chiefly built of great square stones, laid
upon each other, without cramps, cut out of the rock along the Nile; and where,
even at this day, we see the caves from whence they have taken them out.

These stones are nothing near so hard as might be imagined, on account of
their having subsisted so long a time. They owe their preservation, properly,
to the climate where they are, which is not subject to frequent rains.
Notwithstanding this advantage, it may be observed, on the North side, that
they are rotten.

In the center of the pyramid is a chamber, which contains a tomb, supposed to
be that of Cheops, king of Egypt, founder of the pyramid; being one entire
piece of marble, hollowed, and uncovered at the top, which sounds like a bell,
on being struck. There are no signs of any corpse having been laid in it. The
interior part of this sarcophagus is six feet in length, and two in depth and
breadth. It is not easy to conceive how this sarcophagus was brought into the
place where it now stands; it being impossible that it could have entered by
the narrow passages which lead to this chamber. It is therefore reasonable to
suppose there must have been some other entrance, so artfully stopped up, as
not to be discerned. The dimensions of this chamber are thirty-four feet in
length, seventeen in breadth, and nineteen and a half in height.

It is composed of more than two hundred layers of stone, that recede in
proportion to their height; which is from four feet to two. Of these stones
some are above thirty feet in length. These enormous steps must all be mounted
to arrive at the summit. This summit, which, to those who view it from below,
seems a point, is a fine platform, composed of ten or twelve massy stones; and
each side of that platform sixteen or eighteen feet in length. The area of this
edifice is computed to be about the dimensions of the largest square in London,
and the height one third above that of St. Paul's.

The large one, according to Greaves's measurement, is seven hundred feet
square, covering about eleven acres of ground; the inclined plane is equal to
the base, so that the angles and base make an equi-lateral triangle: the
perpendicular height, as we have before observed, is five hundred feet. The
apex is thirteen feet square.

With what majesty, says Savary, do these mountains of man rise to the regions
of air! Awful in their age, how often has the rising sun enlightened them;
scorched their burning sides at noon, and gilded them as he sat! During how
many ages have they, keeping pace with the inconceivably swift motion of the
earth, annually encircled this grand luminary! Man then has constructed durable
edifices, and these edifices are tombs! Thousands of ages hence, if undisturbed
by any grand revolution in the earth, travelers from enlightened nations, shall
go to admire these vast monuments, and say Europe scarce had a few savages
scattered over her forests, when a learned nation erected these superb
mausoleums, toward the four cardinal points of heaven, as monuments of its
piety and astronomical knowledge.

The other three pyramids, which are nearly of the same size, do not appear
ever to have been opened.

Though an entrance has been discovered only into the largest pyramid, yet,
most probably, there is a way into the others, and likewise apartments in them;
since Strabo tells us that in the middle of the pyramids there is a stone,
which may be taken out, to open a a passage to the tombs. Attempts have been
made, but without effect, to discover an entrance into the second, a great
breach appearing in one of the sides of it.

These four grand pyramids are surrounded by a number of other that are
smaller; and which appear to have been opened.

Tavernier tells us, that the curiosity of strangers has been so great as to be
desirous of visiting the interior parts of some of these pyramids; and that
once, the fellow that showed them took an opportunity to shut some Englishmen
in, and leave them there to die with want, purposely to plunder them of their
property. Their bodies were not removed, and soon after, another party, going
on the same errand, attended by a new exhibiter, were struck motionless at the
sight of the dead bodies of their countrymen. We trust this will be sufficient
to caution travelers not to let their curiosity get the better of their
prudence.

To the East of the second pyramid is the head of the great, and famous Sphinx,
the whole body of which is buried in the sand, the top of the back only to be
seen; which is above a hundred feet long, and is of a single stone, making part
of the rock on which the pyramid rests. Its head rises about seven and twenty
feet above the sands. Mahomet has taught the Arabs to hold all images of men,
or animals, in detestation; and they have disfigured the face with their arrows
and lances. The dimensions of this figure, according to Pliny, were as follow:
the circumference of the head, one hundred and two feet; the length of the
legs, one hundred and thirty-three feet; the height, from the bottom of the
belly to the summit of the head, sixty-three feet; and the head and neck,
twenty-seven feet. It is said to have been the tomb of Amasis; but is more
famous on account of the enigmatical oracles delivered from it, to all who came
thither to consult it; and from the ambiguous terms in which they were couched,
have given rise to the proverbial expression, Sphinx's riddles, applied to any
thing difficult to be solved. At the top of the head there was originally a
hole, as likewise on the (...)
back, from whence issued the answers dictated by their priests, who were
placed within.

What has been said, concerning the judgment we ought to form of the pyramids,
may be applied to the labyrinth, which Herodotus assures us was still more
surprising than the pyramids. It was not so much one single palace, as a
magnificent pile, composed of twelve palaces, regularly disposed, which had a
communication with each other. Fifteen hundred rooms, interspersed with
terraces, were ranged round twelve halls, and discovered no outlet to such as
went to see them. There were the like number of buildings under ground. In
order to visit the rooms, and halls of the labyrinth, it was necessary, as the
reader will naturally suppose, for people to take the same precaution, as
Ariadne made Theseus use, when he was obliged to go and fight the minotaur in
the labyrinth of Crete.

This monument, says Savary, regarded by Pliny as the most astonishing effort
of human genius, is no more to be found. Hereafter, when Europe shall have
restored to Egypt the sciences it thence received, perhaps, the sands and
rubbish, which hide the subterranean part of the labyrinth, will be removed,
and precious antiquities obtained. If the dust of Herculaneum, an
inconsiderable city, has preserved so many rarities, and instructive remains of
art and antiquity, what may not be expected from the fifteen hundred apartments
in which the archives of Egypt were deposited; since the government assembled
here to treat of the most important affairs of religion and of state?

But the noblest and most wonderful of all the structures, or works of the
kings of Egypt, was the lake of Moeris. Accordingly Herodotus considers it as
vastly superior to the pyramids and labyrinth. This lake, according to the
above writer, was six hundred and thirty stadia, or seventy-five leagues, in
circumference, and three hundred feet deep. This work, the most useful and vast
the earth ever contained, united every advantage, and supplied the deficiences
of a low inundation, by detaining waters which would have been uselessly
expended in the sea. History knows not a work so glorious; nor is it wonderful
antiquity esteemed it above the pyramids and labyrinth; for, with the grandeur
of the enterprise, it included the happiness of the people. Thus the Egyptians,
who detested the kings by whom they were forced to remove mountains, that
pyramids might be raised, blessed the memory of Moeris, and his name is
everlasting; while the names of the founders of the pyramids are forgotten.

In sailing up the Nile, from Girge to Essuan, opposite the Carnac, and about a
league from the Nile, are to be seen two colossal statues. The first seems to
represent a man, and the second a woman. In other respects they are both of the
same size, and that size is prodigious. They are about fifty feet high, from
the bases of the pedestal to the summit of the head. They are fitting on
stones, almost cubical, fifteen feet high, and as many in breadth, including in
them the Isiac figures; which seem for ornament to the two corners of each
stone. The back part of each stone is higher than the fore part, by a foot and
a half.

The pedestals are each five feet high, thirty-six and a half long, and
nineteen and a half broad. The distance between the two statues is twenty-one
paces.

The breasts and legs of these statues are covered with abundance of Greek and
Latin inscriptions, which have been engraven on them since they were made, and
in the time of the Romans. The purport of these inscriptions is, to signify
that the voice of Memnon has been heard by those persons, whose names were
affixed to them.

On the North side of these colossuses are some ruins, which no doubt are the
remains of the palace of Memnon. Among these ruins is the fragment of a
colossus, thrown down and half buried. The upper part is wanting, and it
appears that violence has been employed to separate it. All the body of this
colossus was of a single piece of black granite marble. Its pedestal is, in
some measure, entire, and we saw on it some hieroglyphics; such as knives,
semi-circles, and other figures. The rest of this colossus, says Norden, is so
disfigured and dismembered, that it was not possibel for me to take an exact
measure of it. I imagine, however, that its height is about twenty feet. All
these marks, he adds, seem to indicate, that it is here we must seek for the
vocal statue of Memnon, which Strabo, Pausanias, Philostratus, Lucian, Juvenal,
Tacitus, and diverse other ancient authors. Greek and Latin, have mentioned. As
most of these authors relate that the statue of Memnon gave a certain sound, at
the rising of the sun, I was curious to strike with a key, upon what remains of
this colossal figure; but as the whole is solid, it does not give any more
sound than another block of granite which is sunk in the ground.

The statue of Memnon had a lyre in his hands, which was said to sound at
sunrising; and some philosophers have supposed that the sun's light possesses
a mechanical impulse, so as to produce such sounds. The statue was thrown down,
and cut in two, by Cambyses, to discover its internal structure. -- It stood in
the temple of Memnon, at Thebes.

Strabo's account of this statue is as follows. Of two colossuses consisting of
an entire stone, and near to each other, the one is still preserved; but of the
other, the upper parts, from the seat, are fallen down; occasioned, as they
say, by an earthquake. It is believed, that once every day, a noise, as of a
stroke, but not a great one, is made from the remaining part, in the seat and
base; and I being on the spot, with OELIUS GALLEY, and a multitude of his
friends and soldiers attending him, about the first hour of the day heard a
noise: but whether from the base, or the colossus, or whether it was made
purposely, by some one of those that stood round the base, I cannot affirm. On
account of the uncertainty of the cause, I am inclined to believe any thing,
rather than this, that a sound is emitted from stones so disposed. Pape 816,
Edit. Paris.

Between Cous and Essouan, in Upper Egypt, may be discovered the ruins of
Thebes; the magnificence of which poets and historians have alike been eager to
describe. The great Diospolis, says Diodorus Siculus, which the Greeks have
named Thebes, was six leagues in circumference. The fame of its power and
wealth, celebrated by Homer, has filled the world. Its gates, and the numerous
vestibules of its temples, occasioned this poet to give it the name of
Hecatompolis. Four principal temples are especially admired there; the most
ancient of which was surprizingly grand and sumptuous. Of these, says Savary,
the remains of one only are still extant It has eight entrances, three of which
have each a sphinx, of enormous size, standing in front; with two colossal
statues, on each side of the sphinx, which are cut from a single block of
marble in the antique taste. Crossing these majestic avenues, we come to four
porticos; each thirty feet wide, fifty-two in height, and a hundred and fifty
in length. Beyond these porticos, the high walls, which form the first court of
the temple, begin. The people entered at twelve gates. We then come to the
second court, which leads to the temple; and, by its extent, equals the majesty
of the building. Standing at this place, the astonished eye surveys the temple;
the height of which is most surprising, in all its immensity. Its walls of
marble appear everlasting. Its roof, which rises in the center, is sustained by
eighteen rows of columns. Those standing under the most lofty part are thirty
feet in circumference, and eighty in height; the others one third less.

The world does not contain a building, the character and grandeur of which
more forcibly impress awe and majesty; it seems adequate to the high idea the
Egyptians had formed of the supreme Being; nor can it be entered, or beheld,
but with reverence. Its sides, both within and without, are loaded with
hierglyphics and extraordinary figures. On the northern wall are
representations of battles, with horses and chariots; one of which is drawn by
stags. On the southern are two barks, with canopies, at the end of which the
sun appears; the mariners guide them with poles; two men, seated at the stern,
seem to direct their proceedings, and receive their homage.

The entrance, which fronts the temple, is greatly decayed; but, if we may
judge from the obelisks which remain, it must have been most sumptuous. There
are two of sixty feet in height, and twenty-one in circumference, at the base;
and, a little farther, two others, of seventy-two feet in height, and thirty in
circumference. Were the ground occupied by the various entrances, porticos and
courts appertaining to the temple, measured, we shall find the whole was, at
least, half a league in circumference; and that Diodorus Siculus was not
deceived, when he allowed it that extent.

At the farther end of the plain, on which the ruins stand, is the village of
Luxor; near which are the avenues and remains of another temple, still more
ruinous than the first. Its extent is spacious, and so are its courts; which
are entered under porticos, supported by columns forty feet high, without
estimating the base buried under the sand. Pyramidical majestic gates,
abounding in hieroglyphics, and rows of colossal marble figures, forty feet
high, one third buried in the ground, all declare what the magnificence of the
principal edifice, the site of which is known by a hill of ruins, must have
been. But nothing can give a more sublime idea of the grandeur, than the two
obelisks which seem to have been placed there by giants, or the genii of fable.
They are each a solid block of granite, seventy-two feet high, above the
surface, and thirty-two in circumference; but, being sunk deep in the sand and
mud, they may well be supposed ninety feet, from the base to the summit. The
hieroglyphics they contain do honor to the sculptor; the hardness of the stone
has preserved them from being injured by the air. Nothing can be more majestic
than these obelisks. Egypt is the sole country in the world, where men have
performed works like these; yet there is not a city on the face of the globe,
where they would not become its greatest ornament.

Such are the most remarkable ornaments, found at present, on the eastern side
of Thebes. Their very aspect would awaken the genius of a polished nation; but
the Turks and Copts, crushed to death beneath an iron scepter, behold them,
without astonishment; and build huts, which can scarce screen them from the sun
in their neighborhood. These barbarians, if they want a millstone, do not
blush to overturn a column, which supports a temple or portico, and saw it in
pieces.

On the western side, of this once magnificent city, are the grottos, or tombs,
of the ancient monarchs of the Thebais. Diodorus reckons forty-seven of them;
but only nine are at present open, the rest having been closed up. The
subterranean galleries, leading to them, are, in general, ten feet high, and as
many in breadth. The walls and roof, cut in a white rock, preserve the
brilliant polish of stucco. The second grotto is spacious, and much
embellished, containing, on the ceiling, numerous golden stars; birds, painted
in colors, which seem to have lost nothing of their freshness and brilliancy;
and hieroglyphics, divided in columns, and engraved in the walls. Two men are
seated beside the gate, the passage to which is a long gentle declivity. A
block of red granite, sixteen feet high, ten long, and six wide, forms the
sarcophagus of the king, who is sculptured in bas relief, on the top of the
tomb, with an hieroglyphic inscription. There is one exceedingly fine grotto,
which contains only a marble lid, ten feet long, and six wide; and in the
further part of the most distant cavern is a human figure, with the arms
crossing the breast; and two others, kneeling, one on each side.

These galleries and subterranean apartments, which go very far under the
mountains, and a very small part of which are here described, are embellished
by marble figures of men, birds, and various animals; some sculptured in bas
relief, others cut hollow, and some painted in colors which are not to be
effaced. These unintelligible characters, which contain the history of the
times, conceal beneath their impenetrable veil, most interesting discoveries,
and the most remarkable facts, relative to the monarchs of the Thebais, whose
power extended as far as India. Torches are necessary in examining these
labyrinths, into which the light of day cannot penetrate.

Such are the caverns where the bodies of kings repose, surrounded by silence
and shades. A kind of religious terror is felt, while wandering through them;
as if the presence of the living disturbed the dead in their asylums, where
they have retired to rest in peaceful sleep.

Returning from these dark abodes, and proceeding South-east, the traveller
soon meets with the remains of a temple; on the square pillows of which are
statues, that have all had their heads broken off; each holding a scepter in
one hand, and a whip in the other. The remains of the buildings, belonging to
this temple, cover a mile of ground. In one of (...)
the courts are parts of two statues of black marble, which were thirty feet
high; in the other, the traveller stands in stupid amazement, at beholding a
colossal figure extended on the ground, and broken near the middle. The space
between the shoulders is one and twenty feet; the head eleven feet in length,
and eighteen in circumference. This gigantic statue is only inferior in size to
that of Memnon.

About half a league further are the ruins of Memnonium; where is the largest
colossus of Egypt. The circumference of these ruins is about half a league. On
entering them the traveller is struck with astonishment, at the sight of two
gigantic figures, which seem like rocks; and are seated beside each other.
Their pedestals are nearly equal; and formed from blocks of granite, thirty
feet long, and eighteen wide. The smallest of these statues is also one single
stone; the other, the largest in Egypt, is formed of five different pieces of
granite, and broken in the middle. Some idea may be formed of the gigantic size
of the grand colossus, when we are told that its feet alone are seven feet
long. This statue, the half of which remains on its base, and which Strabo
calls the statue of Memnon, uttered a sound at sunrising, as has before been
observed. Several writers have spoken of it with enthusiasm, regarding it as
one of the seven wonders of the world. A crowd of Greek and Latin inscriptions,
which are still legible, on the base and legs of the colossus, attest that
princes, generals, governors, and men of all conditions have heard this
miraculous sound.

Such are the remains of Thebes, and her hundred gates, the antiquity of which
is lost in the obscurity of ages; and which still contain proofs of the
profusion of arts in those most distant times. All here is sublime and
majestic. Its kings seem to have acquired the glory of never dying, while their
obelisks and colossal statues exist; and to have labored only for immortality.
They could preserve their memory against the efforts of time, but not against
the barbarism of conquerors; those dreadful scourges of science and nations,
which they have but too often erased from the face of the earth.

A DESCRIPTION OF ARABIA, FROM THE LATEST AUTHORS.
CHAP. I. Country, Climate, and Productions.
THIS is one of the most celebrated countries in the world, one of the largest
provinces in Asia, and lies near the borders of Africa. Its boundaries,
according to Cluverius, and other esteemed geographers, are, Babylon and the
gulf of Persia, on the East; the Indian ocean, on the South; the Red Sea, with
part of Egypt, on the West; and Palestine, Syria, and the river Euphrates, to
the North. Its extreme length is about four hundred and thirty German leagues;
but its greatest breadth is not more than three hundred and forty; and, in some
parts, not above one hundred and eighty. It is situated between thirty-five and
sixty degrees of Eastern longitude, and between twelve and thirteen degrees of
North latitude.

Arabia is the ancient, as well as the modern name; though the people have been
long called Saracens, or inhabitants of the deserts; Sarra, in their language,
signifying a desert. Some derive the name of Arabia from Harrabi, a thief or
robber, as they have been generally esteemed, ever since they were a nation, to
the present time.

The modern division of this country is into six large provinces; the HEDSJAS,
situated along the Arabian gulf, from Sinai to Yemen, and extending to the
province of Nedsjed; the second is the YEMEN in general, which may be
subdivided into the territories of the Iman of Sarra: a province which extends
from the borders of Hedsjas, along the Arabian gulf; and from the Indian Sea,
to Hadramaut. The other provinces are, HADRAMAUT, OMAN, LACHSA, and NEDSJED.

It was formerly divided into three parts, according to the nature of their
respective soils, viz. Arabia Felix, Arabia Deserta, and Arabia Petraea. Arabia
Felix, which is the South-east part, according to the present division, and now
called Yemen, contained at least four parts, in five, of the whole. Arabia
Deserta, which lies to the northward, is next in size; and Arabia Petraea,
situated on the Isthmus of Suez, is the least. But the exact boundaries of this
country, either ancient or modern, are very uncertain; or rather there are no
precise boundaries; for the inland country, being under the government of a
great number of Sheiks, or Arabian Princes, who march from place to place, and
encamp where they can find water and pasture for their cattle, their respective
dominions have scarce any fixed boundary; nor is it easy to say which part of
the country belongs to one of these divisions, and which to another.

The seas, and promontories of Arabia, are, the Indian ocean, the gulf of
Bassora and Ormus, the Red Sea, and the straits of Babelmandel.

The Red Sea, sometimes called the Arabian gulf, divides Arabia from Egypt and
Ethiopia; but if taken in its largest extent, the name of the Red Sea was
anciently given to all those seas, which border upon Arabia and Persia, from
Africa to the East Indies. The reason of its being called the Red Sea, some
attribute to the red mountains near it; others that the red sand of the coast
gave it that name. It is called in scripture the sea of weeds, or rushes, the
banks being overflowed with them in some places; but from whatever cause the
name is derived, no sea has been more celebrated than this; first, from its
having been the passage of the Iraelites through it; and secondly, from its
having been the usual conveyance for the fine spices, and all the rich
merchandise of the East, to Africa and Europe, for three thousand years, and
upwards.

No country is more destitute of rivers: Chat, Pran, and Nagiran are the
principal ones, neither of which are navigable; and some add the western branch
of the Euphrates, which runs near the boundaries of this country. The mountains
are those of Gebel, Ared, or the great mountains in the middle of the country;
and those of Mount Sinai and Horeb, in Arabia Petraea.

A country which, like Arabia, extends from the twelfth, to the fifteenth
degree of North latitude, and consequently situated, in part, between the
tropics, presents the idea of a climate where the heat must be intense. In some
of the provinces, says Nieuburk, the heat is intolerable. But it is in this
country, as in many others, where the elevation of the ground, the situation of
place, and the nature of the soil, occasion a great difference in the climate.

To comprehend this, we must form a just idea of the local situation of the
country. Arabia may be considered as a country full of mountains, and
surrounded, on all sides, by a vast extent of barren and sandy plains.

In these deserts, scattered with naked rocks, there is nothing to prevent the
action of the sun, which burns all kinds of vegetables, and reduces the lands
to parched sands. The drought is so great, that it often does not rain for
three years together; and the rivers, which descend from the mountains, lose
themselves in the sands, without being able to get to the sea. Were it not for
these rivers, which overflow in the rainy season, and from which canals are dug
to water the grounds, the farmers would not be able to obtain the smallest crop
of corn. From observations made with good thermometers, says Nieuburk, we found
that in these plains, as for example, at Loheya, Mocha, and Muscat, the heats
were as violent as in the hotter countries.

The interior of this country presents a very different temperature. Long
chains of mountains, very lofty, attract vapors; which, dissolving in copious
rains, refresh the air, and animate vegetation. The cold, produced by the
elevation of this mountainous part of the country, occasions snow there; which,
however, does not last long. And while the inhabitants of the plains are
overcome with the heat, those of the mountains are obliged to envelop
themselves with their pelises.

The position of these mountains, in the midst of a country so much surrounded
by sea, is also the cause of a phenomenon which is observed in the peninsula of
the Ganges, intersected by mountains. This is the difference in the rainy
seasons, which are regular in the countries situated between the tropics. In
the western part of Arabia, in the Yemen, the rainy season is the more
serviceable, as it begins in tbe middle of the month of June, and lasts till
the middle of September, which are months when the heats are greatest; and
where the earth, and its inhabitants, have most need of refreshment. In the
eastern part of these mountains, near Maskat, these rains fall, from the middle
of November, till the middle of February; and on the southern side of Arabia,
the rainy season lasts from the middle of February, till the middle of April.
Thus the rains appear to make the circuit of the peninsula, according to the
impulse of the predominant winds, during each season.

This regularity in the rains makes the valleys very fertile and pleasant,
which separate the chains of mountains. The people likewise, who inhabit these
mountains, by breathing a fresh and pure air, are well-made, healthy and
robust. Another advantage, which the Arabians derive, from the situation of
their country, is, that they have the productions of different climates at the
same time. In the plains are to be seen many vegetables, transplanted from
India; and also a great number of the animals of hot countries. The mountains
produce the plants of temperate climates, and the animals of those climates
also thrive there. In short, Arabia may be considered as an assemblage of
different climates, the real advantages of which are united in the space,
contained between the Red Sea, and the Persian gulf.

The nature of the winds is very different in Arabia, according to the point
from whence they come, and the space they blow over; so that the wind from the
same point is moist or dry, in different places, when it traverses the ocean or
the deserts. Upon the borders of the Persian gulf, the South-east wind brings
with it a humid atmosphere; which causes a very violent and oppressive
perspiration: the North-west wind, passing over the great desert, is much
hotter, but not so relaxing. This latter wind, however, heats the metals in the
shade, as if they were exposed to the sun; and its heat, when joined suddenly
to that of the atmosphere, often suffocates both man and beast. The Arabians
carry with them, when they travel, garlic and dried raisins, as remedies, with
which they generally restore to life those persons, whom these hot gusts of
wind have suffocated.

Notwithstanding its burning quality, this North-west wind serves to cool the
drink of the Arabs, in the middle of summer. For this purpose they put the
water in un-glazed pots, made of porous earth, which they hang up in some
place, exposed to the current of this hot wind. The water, by this means,
becomes very cool; a phenomenon known in almost all hot countries, and which
philosophers of the present age very well account for, as proceeding from a
sudden evaporation.

Another wind, of a still more dangerous kind, is the Samiel; rarely to be met
with in Arabia, but very common on the frontiers. This wind is predominant only
on the borders of the great desert, where the agitation carries with it
inflamed vapors; which the action of the sun kindles in this burning sand. The
places, most exposed to this dreadful wind, are, the borders of the Euphrates;
and, sometimes, the environs of Mecca, when the North wind blows on the side of
the desert. The effect of the Samiel is to suffocate, in an instant, like a
flash of lightning, every living creature, within the space of its activity;
and to occasion the bodies to become, in a short time, putrid. As it has been
remarked that an almost immemediate putrefaction has taken place, in the bodies
of animals, which have been killed by lightning, or by an electrical shock, it
has been suggested that this wind might be occasioned, by some electrical
fluid, which is so universally diffused; the Arabs can tell when this wind is
coming, from an extraordinary redness in the air; and they pretend to remark,
as it passes along, a smell of sulphur. Whether this be the case, or not, the
only means for a person to preserve himself from the fatal effects of this
singular wind, is, to throw himself on the ground, with his face downward, till
the storm has blown over; the vapors of which always keep at some little
distance from the ground.

The other meteors, in Arabia, are the same with those in all hot countries. A
serene sky, seldom obscured by clouds, is the reason that there are few storms
in the deserts. The air discharges itself of the electrical matter by balls of
fire, and by the phenomenon of falling stars; which are frequently seen, and of
a very considerable size. In the more desert parts, near the sea, the dews are
very copious. Notwithstanding this humidity, the air is so pure, that it is
usual for the inhabitants to sleep on the tops of their houses. There are,
however, some parts, where a person, indulging himself in this custom, is
liable to be seized with a fit of the palsy. But the inhabitants, from long
experience, know what precautions they ought, in such cases, to take.

Arabia has the advantage of, nearly, one continued verdure. The trees, indeed,
lose their leaves every year, and the annual plants wither, before they shoot
out a-fresh; but the interval, between the fall of the leaves, and the trees
budding again, is so small, that the change is scarce perceived. To have the
face of a country clothed with continual verdure, is an advantage peculiar to
those latitudes, where there is no frost, and where the rainy season occupies
the winter quarter.

From the singular position of Arabia, it will be easy to conceive that the
nature of the soil must vary very much. In fact nothing can be more opposite.
On one side there is nothing to be seen but deserts of sand; and, on the other,
beautiful and fertile valleys. The sandy plain, which surrounds this peninsula,
is almost entirely barren; and presents to view nothing but the image of
desolation.

This plain of sand, called Tehama, begins at Suez, and extends all round the
peninsula, to the mouth of the river Euphrates. Its breadth is unequal; in
general it takes two days to cross the Red Sea, to the foot of the mountains.
This part of the desert appears to have been covered with the sea: the bottom
is a gray clay, mixed with a great deal of sand, and containing a great number
of bones, and shells of seafish, at a considerable distance from the shore.
There are also great heaps of salt, in sufficient quantity to form even little
mountains. Its regular descent to the shore plainly indicates that it became
dry by degrees. There is no doubt but the sea is continually retreating from
this coast, and the Tehama gradually gaining fresh ground. The sand-banks are
continually increasing, and, as they approach the shore, render the navigation
of the gulf still more dangerous. History also proves this increase of land;
it mentions many places as seaports, which are now at some distance from the
coast; and passes over in silence, those which are now maritime towns; the
existence of which must consequently be dated since the formation of the lands,
where they are situated.

This acquisition of territory is of little advantage to the inhabitants; it
being entirely barren, and producing nothing. Nor is there any hope of its
being ever made better; as the soil of this province has remained the same for
many ages.

In the mountainous part of Arabia, the soil varies very much; and is, in
general, a clay mixed with sand. Their form prevents their being very fertile;
they are commonly very steep and pointed, so that they neihter afford
sufficient space to spontaneous vegetable productions, nor sufficient
nourishment; because the torrents are continually carrying away the good land.
The cultivation of them is likewise, owing to this circumstance, very laborious
and expensive.

This country may be considered as interesting, in many particulars; but, in
general, it is neither rich, nor fertile. Of this, the laborious life the
peasants lead, and their indifferent food, are evident proofs. If it was called
Arabia Felix by the ancients, it must have merited this name, rather by the
value and rarity of its productions, than from their abundance.

Their mountains they never endeavor to cultivate; they being, for the most
part, schistuous, and scarce capable of any improvement. Their valleys seem
equally barren, where water is wanting, and produce scarce any herbage; but in
those, where it can be introduced, they produce corn, vegetables, and and
flowers; and no country in the world affords a more picturesque view. The Arabs
draw the water in large skins, from the wells, with oxen, both morning and
evening; conveying it along little canals, by the sides of which their trees
and plants are set. They also cut little channels through their cornfieldsd, by
which they let the water into them, as often as they have a mind.

There is also, in this part of Arabia, a great variety of fine fruits; such as
oranges, lemons, grapes, peaches, and apricots; but what this country is most
famous for, is, their dates and their coffee: with which a great number of
ships are laden, every year, for Europe and India; besides large quantities
sent to Turkey.

The coffee shrub grows eight or ten feet high, with a gray smooth bark; the
wood is white, and without much pith. The twigs rise by pairs, opposite to each
other, and the leaves on the twigs in the same manner; the fruit hangs to the
twig by a foot-stalk, sometimes one, two, or more in the same place. These
shrubs are planted in a rich soil, and watered by artificial canals; after
three or four years bearing, the natives plant new shrubs, as the old ones then
begin to decline. The berries are dried in the sun, and the outward husk
afterward taken off with hand-mills; and these husks the Arabians infuse in
boiling water, when the heat is intense, instead of berries; esteeming the
liquor more cooling.

Arabia also abounds in myrrh, manna, cassia, incense, aloes, balm and
frankincense; besides some other valuable drugs. Among their trees nothing is
more wanted than timber; and indeed there is scarce any wood in the country.

All uncivilized nations have remedies, derived from vegetables, with whose
virtues they are acquainted by tradition. The Arabs are not without such kind
of medicines; of which they have made use, from time immemorial, with such
success as a stranger can hardly credit. Aloes and euphorbia are too
sufficiently known to dwell upon them; in Arabia the different species of this
latter plant are so numerous, that it may be looked upon as an indigenous
plant. In hot countries counter-poisons are set great store by, on account of
the venomous beasts with which they are infested. By long experience, the
inhabitants of these countries are acquainted with those plants, which are
salutary to men, and the contrary to these dangerous animals. The Arabs appear,
however, to be ignorant of the virtues of Ophiorrizo, so common in their
mountains. On the contrary, they set great value by the Aristolochia semper
virens; which they look upon, not only as a remedy, but as a preservative,
against the bite of serpents. According to their opinion, a person who has
drank a decoction of these herbs, for forty days, cannot be bit by these
venomous animals. Though this is not sufficiently ascertained; yet it seems
probable, that those persons who travel about with serpents, exposing
themselves to their bites, possess some secret to secure themselves from their
malignant effect.

Of their animals, those most useful and excellent in their kind, are, camels
and horses. The camels are well adapted to this desert country; the largest of
them will carry immense burdens; some writer; say near a thousand pounds weight
each. It is well known the Arabs set great value on their horses. They divide
them, says Nieuburk, into two kinds; the Kadischi, or those horses whose breed
is not known; and the Kochlani, or horses whose pedigree is traced back for
above these two hundred years. The Kadischi are held in no great esteem, and
are employed in husbandry, or in carrying burdens.

The Kochlani, on the contrary, are kept entirely for the saddle. They are very
much prized, and consequently very dear. The Arabs pretend they derive their
origin from the harems of Solomon. Be this as it will, they are capable of
enduring very great fatigue, and going for days together without food. They are
supposed to possess astonishing ardour; it is even said, that a horse of this
breed, when he finds himself wounded, and no longer able to carry his rider,
will quit the field of battle, in order to carry him to a place of safety. If
the rider is thrown to the ground, these horses will remain near him, and not
give over neighing, till some one comes to his assistance. These horses are
neither large nor handsome, but very swist; and the Arabs value them only on
accout of their pedigree, and their good qualities; but by no means for their
figure.

These Arabs, it is true, have no genealogical tables to prove the pedigree of
their Kochlani; but they are nevertheless certain of the regularity of the
descent, because a mare of this breed is never covered but in the presence of
witnesses. Though this people are not always very scrupulous about perjuring
themselves, they are more conscientious in an affair of this kind; nor is there
any instance of an Arab perjuring himself, respecting the breed of a horse;
because he is persuaded, that he himself, and his whole family would be ruined,
if, in an affair of such importance, be deposed what was not true.

The common food, both of camels and horses, is barley, or barley-meal, made
into dough. But Thevenot says, that in some parts of Arabia the horses are fed
with camel's milk; or with butter and wheat, and sometimes with the flesh of
camels dried in the sun. A more modern writer says, the cattle at Muscat are
fed with fish, not with such as are fresh taken; but they dig a small pit, and
having thrown a large quantity of fish in it, they are suffered to remain there
till they are rotten, and turned to a kind of earth, which is then taken up,
boiled in water, and, when it has stood till it is cold, is given to the
cattle. This makes them very fat, nor does their flesh taste amiss, from the
cattle being fed with this kind of diet. They have oxen, buffaloes, goats and
venison; but their beef, and the flesh of their buffaloes, is coarse. As to
hogs, they never breed any, being all Mahometans, who abhor the sight of this
animal. Fish and fowl are in great plenty on the seacoasts; but the inland
parts are very indifferently stocked; there being neither wood nor water to
supply them with wood and shelter. Lions, bears, tigers, wolves, jackalls, and
other wild beasts are also found in some parts of Arabia; but not in great
numbers, there being but little cover for them.

Among other carniverous animals, the most frightful and dangerous is the
hyaena; which attacks both men and beasts. This ferocious and solitary animal
inhabits the caverns of the barren mountains of Arabia Petraea; he is also to
be met with in the environs of the Persian gulf. The hyaena prowls about only
in the night. In the season, when the inhabitants sleep in the open air, he
frequently carries off the children, who are lying near their parents. As the
domestic animals of the southern part of Persia are fed chiefly on fish, he is
obliged to eat the same kind of food.

Arabia appears to be the native country of the ass; they are to be seen here
of such a beautiful, vigorous, and animated species, that their asses may be
compared to horses. The inhabitants also mention a wild animal, which they have
called Djaear, of the size and figure of an ass, the flesh of which is good to
eat. This animal is, perhaps, a wild ass; who, by living in woods, acquires
some peculiarities in its shape, which make the Arabians, who know little of
natural history, mistake it for some other animal.

The forests, in the southern part of Arabia, swarm with monkies who have no
tails; and whose buttocks are bare of hair, and red. I have seen troops, of
several hundreds, says Nieuburk; other travelers have met them, by thousands,
in the mountains of Aden. These animals are very docile, and learn all sorts of
tricks with great facility. This occasions a great quantity of them to be
exported into Egpyt, where the mountebanks exhibit them to the people.

In the cultivated parts of Arabia, poultry, of all kinds, is very common. Of
game, or wild fowl, very little is to be met with by travelers. The Arabians,
in general, do not think it worth their notice; and neither ca^e for the
pleasure, nor the labor, of hunting. Two reasons may be assigned for their
aversion to a pastime, which constitutes the supreme felicity of the
descendants from the savages of the North. A people, naturally sober and
frugal, living under a climate, where animal food is rather prejudicial, than
otherwise, to health, cannot be very fond of game. The punctilious precepts of
the Mohammedan religion must, besides, disgust an Arab from the pursuit of wild
animals; and, especially, birds. For, if he omits to say a short prayer, whilst
he is killing the animal; or if the animal does not lose the quantity of blood,
prescribed by law; or if he was not killed instantly; or if he fell upon a spot
that was inhabited, or contaminited: in all these instances, the sportsman
loses his labor, or his prey is deemed impure.

A dry country, like Arabia, cannot breed any great quantities of aquatic
birds. The birds which frequent the seacoasts, and seed on fishes, are very
common on the borders of the Red Sea; that sea being very shallow, and full of
fish. Ostriches are also to be met with, in the deserts, which the Arabs call
the desart-bird. Eagles, falcons, hawks and vultures are the birds of prey
which are seen in Arabia. The last of these birds renders signal services; he
purges the earth from all carcases, whose corruption is so sudden, and
dangerous, in hot countries; and he destroys the field-mice, which would
otherwise render useless the labors of the husbandmen. These essential
services have made this bird to be considered as sacred, by the ancient
Egyptians; and there are still many countries where they are not permitted to
be killed.

In many countries of the East, as in Arabia, is another bird no less useful to
the inhabitants. It is supposed to come from Korasan, and arrives in Arabia
about July, or August; following the swarms of locusts, of which it destroys an
incredible quantity. It is called Samarmar. The services which this bird
renders to the countries, exposed to the ravages of these insects, occasions,
in Syria, many ridiculous and superstitious customs. This bird is thought to be
enticed by the Korasan water, which is brought, with great ceremony, from a
considerable distance, and kep in a reservoir, made of stone, on the top of the
tower of the mosques. If this water sails, the inhabitants are in despair.

There are many kinds of serpents, in Arabia, whose bite is often mortal; there
are, however, as many more that are harmless. The bite of some only occasions a
disagreeable itching, which the inhabitants easily cure. In general, the bite
of those serpents only is mortal, who have a separate row of teeth longer than
others. The Arabs, in Egypt, are acquainted with the formation of the teeth of
these reptiles; and handle freely those serpents, from which they have taken
out, with pincers, the long teeth, which serve as a channel to the poison. In
Arabia, the only serpent truly dreadful is, that called Batan; very small, and
delicately made, with black and white spots. Its bite is instant death; and
swells the corpse of the person bit, in an extraordinary manner.

In our passage up the Red Sea, we saw great quantities of flying fish; which
rose, from time to time, above the surface of the water. But we discovered no
flying serpent; though the Arabs give this name to a serpent, which should
rather be called a springing one. This serpent fastens himself by his tail, to
the low branch of a tree; then giving a sudden jerk, by means of the elasticity
of his tail, he springs up, from one branch to another, till he reaches the top.

The Arabians distinguish several kinds of locusts, to which they give
particular names; but their names do not regard the nature of the animal, but
the pretended delicacy of its flesh. They give the name of Muken to that sort
which is looked upon the fattest, and most succulent; they eat also another,
which is thin and meagre; but they refrain entirely from that called Dubba,
because it brings on a diarrhaea.

All the Arabs, not only those that live on the borders of Persia, but those in
Syria and Africa, are accustomed to eat locusts; the Turks, on the contrary,
have an aversion to this kind of food, If Europeans express the same dislike,
the Arabs reproach them for eating oysters, crabs and lobsters.

Swarms of this insect darken the air, and appear a-far like a thick smoke. The
noise they make, as they fly, is dreadful; it stuns the ears like the fall of a
great river. When such a swarm alights on a country, it is laid waste, and
stripped of its verdure. The vegetables, and date-trees, suffer very much from
the locusts; but the corn that is ripe, or nearly so, is left un-touched, from
its being too hard for them to eat.

A little insect, about the size of a barley-corn, is another scourge to
Arabia, as well as to most hot countries. Many writers have, from its
resemblance, taken this creature for an ant. Its instinct leads it to walk out
only in the night, under some kind of galleries, which it builds up with earth
as it advances; when got to the end of its march, it destroys and devours every
thing; victuals, clothes and furniture. We found, says Nicuburk, an army of
these insects in our chambers, at Beit el Fakih, when they had built up their
galleries, which we immediately destroyed; but without being discouraged, or
even frightened, at the sight of us, they patched up their work, during the
night, with singular perseverance; so that we had an infinite deal of trouble
to get rid of this little animal, which lives and works in society, like the
ants.

The Arda is another insect very dangerous to trees whose leaves, or fruit,
their sweetness makes them fond of. These insects fasten their galleries, on
such kinds of trees, from the bottom to the top. The inhabitants have no other
means of securing their gardens, from a total devastation, than by surrounding
the trees with sheep's dung; the smell of which is insupportable to this insect.

There are a great number of ants in Arabia, most of which are as harmless as
our own. We must, however, except two kinds; one of which is troublesome, from
the voracity with which it attacks the provisions of the Arabs, if not driven
away by the smell of camphire; the bite of the other is almost as painful, as
that of the scorpion.

A kind of Scolopendre is also very tormenting to the inhabitants, by causing
burning pains to those it attacks. This insect fastens itself into the flesh,
with all its feet, in such a manner, that it is impossible to be freed from it,
but by successively burning, with hot iron, all the parts of the animal.

CHAP. II. Cities.
THE principal cities in Arabia, of which we propose to treat, are, Suez,
situated in the Northern part of Arabia; Jeddah, Mecca and Medina, in the
province of Hedsjas; and Loheia, Sana and Mocha, situated in the Yemen, or
southern part of Arabia.

Suez, which was the Arsinoc of the ancients, is situated at the top of the Red
Sea; it stands surrounded by the desert, and is a shabby ill-built place: the
ships anchor a league from the town, to which, the channel that leads is very
narrow, and has only nine or ten feet depth of water; for which reason the
large ships, that are built here, must be towed down to the roads, without
masts, guns, or any thing in them; some of these vessels are, at least, twelve
hundred tons burden, being as lofty as an hundred gun ship, though not longer
than a frigate. Eight of these ships sail every year to Jeddah, before the
Hadji, stay there two or three months, and return loaded with coffee: this is
so material an article, in the diet of a Mussulman, that the prayers and wishes
of them all are offered up for its safety; and, next to the loss of their
country, the loss of their coffee would be most severely felt by them; the
greatest part of it is sent to Constantinople, and other parts of Turkey.

The town, says Nieuburk, is situated on the western side of the Arabian gulf,
or Red Sea; but not quite at its extremity. It is not surrounded with walls;
the houses, however, are so well joined together, that there is no entering the
city, but by two streets; one of which, that toward the sea, is open; and the
other shut in by an old ruinous gate. The houses are very indifferent, and the
Khans are the only substantial buildings, There are scarce any remains of the
castle built by the Turks, on the ruins of the ancient Kolgum.

It is badly peopled. Among the inhabitants are some Greeks, and a small number
of Copts; but, at the season of the departure of the ships for Jeddah, the
concourse of strangers, collected there, is very great.

The country round about is nothing but rocks, slightly covered with sand,
which renders it so very barren, that scarce any vegetation is to be seen;
trees, gardens, fields and meadows are entirely unknown. The only article; of
food, which is in any plenty, is fish. All other subsistence, for men or
cattle, is brought from a great distance, from Cairo three days, or from Jassa,
six days journey.

There is not a single spring of fresh water in Suez. The only water, that is
drinkable, is brought from a place about two leagues from the town, on the
other side of the gulf. It is the Arabs who bring this water, which they sell
very dear. The principal occupation of the inhabitants is the building of
ships. This business is in a very flourishing state, in spite of the dearness
of wood, iron, and other materials, which are all brought from Cairo on camels.
The government of this town is under the influence of the Turks.

Between this town and Tor is a place called Burkit Pharoon, signifying
Pharach's whirlpool. This has been determined to be that part of the Red Sea
which Moses, and the children of Israel crossed, as related in the bible, when
pursued by Pharaoh; who, they say, was drowned, in that very spot, where this
eddy is. The Arabs have still a custom, when they pass this place, to kill a
sheep, which they smoke with incense, after cutting off its head, and then
throw it into the sea, praying at the same time.

The government of Suez is under the influence of the Turks. The governor is
appointed by the pacha of Grand Cairo. The Arabs, who live near Tor, on the
other side of the gulf, pay little regard to the Turkish governor of Suez. When
they are dissatisfied with him, or the inhabitants, they threaten to bring no
more water, and forbid any one to go near the well. The putting this threat
into execution would reduce the town to the greatest extremity; they therefore
do every thing to pacify them. They might easily ruin the town, if they did not
prefer the advantage they derive from the transport of merchandise, on their
camels, between Suez and Grand Cairo.

We ourselves, says Nieuburk, experienced the effects of the insolent threats
of these Arabs. The Scheiks who had conducted us to Mount Sinai, not having
fulfilled their engagements, we refused to pay them all the money we agreed to
give them. They threatened to kill us; we told them we would defend ourselves.
They then said they would cut off the supply of water; we replied that was
indifferent to us, who drank only wine; an answer which made the Turks laugh,
at the Arabs' expense. But, after having interested the tribe to take part in
their quarrel, the execution of this threat was so much dreaded, that the
governor entreated us to settle the the difference by paying the Scheik.

Every person, whether Christian or Mohammedan, who travels along the coast of
Arabia Petraea, either by sea or land, should take with him a Ghasir, or guide,
to whom he must make some little present, from time to time; as also at the end
of his journey. By these means he will travel through the country, without
danger of being molested. If the vessel, on which he embarks, should be
shipwrecked, it will be plundered by the Arabs; but his goods, or merchandise,
will be restored to him immediately, if his Ghasir is present. If the traveller
names one who is absent, a circle will be drawn round them, and they will be
kept till he comes; and, then, instantly transmitted to him. But if the
traveller has no Ghasir, or if he gives in a fictitious name, his effects will
be seized upon, without hearing any thing he has to say. The Turks, through
avarice, in order to save some little present, and out of pride not to be
thought to familiarize with the Arabs, very seldom take any Ghasirs; but they
suffer by this neglect. For the rights of this kind of hospitable friendship
are sacred among these robbers.

When I say of Jeddah, says Rooke, that it is terra senza frutti and populo
senza feed, I believe I give a pretty just description of it; but to enter into
a more minute one, it is an old and ill built town, surrounded by a broken and
ruinous wall, having no sort, nor any guns mounted; it is situated nearly
midway, between Mocha and Suez, on the eastern coast of the Red Sea, and is a
place of the greatest trade on it; the commerce, between Arabia and Europe,
here meets, and is interchanged; the former sending her gums, drugs, coffee,
etc. which are brought in small vessels, from the whole extent of the coast, as
far as Bassora, in the Persian gulf; and from Europe come cloths, iron, furs,
and other articles, by way of Cairo: the revenue, arising from the duties on
these, is shared between the Grand Signior, and the Scheriff of Mecca; to whom
this place justly belongs. It was formerly tributary to the Grand Signior only;
but the latter, whose dominions surround it, seized on it; the affair, however,
being compromised between them, they now share the profits of the port; the
former sends annually a Pacha, to support his pretensions, and collect the
revenue; the latter deputes a governor, who is termed the Vizir-Scheriff, and
has chief power and authority here.

This town, like Suez, is entirely without fresh water. The inhabitants have
none to drink, but what the Arabs collect in their reservoirs in the mountains;
which they bring, by little and little. on their camels, into the city. The
environs are a deep sand, and very barren. According to tradition, these parts
have experienced no change since the creation of the world; for, in a place a
little distant from the sea, they still show the tomb of Eve. In walking about
the harbor, says Nieubuhr, I was witness to the very singular manner in which
the Arabs take their wild fowl. The fowler undresses himself, puts some
sea-weed on his head, and walks toward the bird, who is not frightened at the
approach of the sea-weed, which he is accustomed to see floating on the waves.
The Arab then seizes the duck by the feet. When Pocock, and other travelers,
mentioned this method being practiced in China, their relation was not
credited. Nothing is, however, more certain.

The people here are not quite so black as they are farther South, having a
yellowish tinge in their complexions; their way of living, however, is much the
same: they sit cross-legged on the ground at their meals; watch, pray, drink
coffee, and smoke hookah five times in the day. There are several coffee-houses
which are always full; the common people there drink their dish of coffee
together, as ours would a pot of beer, at an alehouse. The women seem to have
rather more liberty than at Mocha, many of them may be seen walking about the
streets; but the appearance they make is very extraordinary: those of middling
rank wear loose cloth trowsers, and yellow huzzar-boots, have veils of white
linen over their faces, reaching almost to the ground, with only two slits for
the eyes, and wrap themselves in a large loose played of coarse cloth; they have
a variety of gold and silver trinkets round their arms and legs, and wear
necklaces of small pieces of money strung; all these make a jingle, like bells,
as they walk: through one of their nostrils they wear a ring, with a slat plate
on it, like a coat button, and dye their hands red, with a herb that grows in
the country; they are as fond of smoking hookah as the men; and, when they
visit, always take it along with them.

The dress of persons of distinction, among the men, is not unlike that of the
Turks. They wear their shirt over loose trowsers, made of linen. The jambea, a
kind of concave hanger, is fastened to a large girdle; a waistcoat, the sleeves
of which fit close, is covered with a very large mantle. The twist, which hangs
to the handle of the dagger, has a kind of coral suspended to it, with which
the Arabs amuse themselves, says Nieubuhr, to keep their fingers employed. They
are unacquainted with the use of stockings; and wear nothing about their feet,
but half-boots, or slippers.

The women of fashion are dressed nearly as the Turks are at Cairo; but the
common people wear only a shirt, without breeches. The Bedouins have nothing
but a long piece of linen, which they wrap round their waist. The women, among
the lower class, wear nothing but a long shift, hanging loose; and veil. In
these three articles consists the whole of their dress. We have given a plate
of one of these women selling bread. Her fan is made of a kind of mat, composed
of leaves of the palm tree interwove, and a parasol of the same.

Being near the fountainhead of their faith, the people here are great bigots
to their religion, and, of course, inveterate enemies to the Christians; any
stranger, of that class, is sure of being insulted in the streets, unless he
has a guard with him; they are not allowed to go out of the gate leading to
Mecca.

Eve's sepulcher is a white building, which stands about a quarter of a mile
North of the town; the Arabs say she was certainly buried there, and that her
grave is twenty feet in length, which they determine to have been the standard
height of mankind, at that early period of the world; the two Arabic words
signifying Eve, the mother of all, are inscribed on the building; they go every
sabbath to pray there, but will not suffer a Christian to visit it. The two
most valuable productions of this country are, balm of Gilead, and senna, says
Rooke; the former is extracted from a tree which grows amongst the mountains,
the latter is a shrub found near Mecca.

ARABS of DISTINCTION


Our merchants used to send annually ships from Bengal, and other parts, to
Jeddah; but the arbitrary impositions, laid on the goods, and the frauds they
experienced from the people, have made them entirely discontinue this commerce:
a most glaring instance of villainy, in the prince of the country, and the Lord
Lieutenant of Jeddah, stands foremost on the latter list; they jointly bought
the cargo of an English ship, worth near L. 50,000, took the goods, and engaged
to pay the money in a few days; but the supercargo, after repeated
applications, was obliged to return to India, having only the Scheriff's bill,
payable the following summer; accordingly he returned, was very pressing for
the money, but met with no better success than before, and only received a
fresh bill, with positive assurances he should be paid the following year; it
happened before his return, that both the Scheriff and his Vizir were dead; and
when he applied for payment of the bill to the reigning Scheriff, who was son
to the former, he flatly refused to pay a farthing, saying, that as the debt
was incurred by his father, his father only was answerable for it; that it was
true he was dead, but the body was at his service, and if it would be any
satisfaction to the creditors, he was very welcome to carry it with him to
Bengal.

This city, distant a day's journey from Jeddah, is situated in a dry and
barren soil. A few leagues farther up the country, however, toward the
mountains, very fine fruits are to be seen in great abundance. During the
summer months, the heats are intolerable at Mecca; the inhabitants, to shade
themselves, shut the blinds of their windows very carefully, and water the
streets, in order to cool the air. There have been instances of persons being
suffocated, while they were walking in the streets, by the burning wind called
Samoum.

As a great part of the nobility, of the province of Hedsjas, lives here, it is
better built than any other city of Arabia. Among the fine edifices it
contains, the most remarkable is the famous Kaba, or house of God, which was
held in veneration, even before the time of Mahomet.

I should have been curious enough to have seen this extraordinary building,
says Nieubuhr, but no Christian is permitted to go to Mecca, not that there is
any express law to the contrary, or that the more enlightened Mahometans have
any thing to object against a curiosity of this sort; but, on account of the
prejudices of the people, who, looking upon this as holy ground, think the
Christians unworthy to set their foot there: it would be profaned, in the
opinion of the superstitious, if it was trodden upon by infidels. The people
even imagine, that Christians are prevented from approaching it by a
supernatural power. They relate, that an infidel, on his arrival at the hills
which surround Mecca, was attacked by all the dogs of the city, who came out on
purpose; and that, struck with this miracle, and the august aspect of the Kaba,
he turned Mohammedan.

We must presume then, that all the Europeans who have described Mecca, from
ocular testimony, have been renegado's who escaped from Turkey. A recent
instance supports this opinion. On the promise of being able to preserve his
religion, a French surgeon was persuaded to accompany the Emir Hadji, as his
physician. But, at the first station, they obliged him to be circumcised, and
then permitted him to continue his journey.

Although the Mahometans do not permit the Europeans to go to Mecca, they do
not object giving them descriptions of the Kaba. There are painters who get
their livelihood, by making small paintings of the Kaba, and selling them to
the pilgrims.

To judge from these drawings, the kaba is a very insignificant building; a
kind of square tower, whose top has a covering of black silk thrown over it,
embroidered with gold. This covering is made at Kahira; and a new one, as we
have already observed in our account of Turkey, is sent every year by the Grand
Signior. The gutters of this building, are of pure gold. What seems most
magnificent in this holy building, are the arcades which surround the place
where the kaba is situated. The Mahometans speak with admiration of the great
quantity of gold and silver lamps, and chandeliers, contained in these arcades.
Yet, according to these accounts, which are probably exaggerated, the riches to
be found in the kaba, are much inferior to those displayed in many of the
Catholic churches.

The kaba contains a most venerable and extraordinary relic; this is the famous
black stone, brought by the angel Gabriel, for the construction of the holy
house. According to the mufti's, when this stone arrived, it was entirely
white, and so brilliant, that it dazzled the eyes at the distance of four days
journey; but it wept so much, and so long for the sins of men, that it became
opaque, and at last quite black. Every mussulman, when he walks round the kaba,
must kiss, or at least touch, this compassionate stone. The same honors are
not paid to Abraham's stone, nor to that of Ishmael. Pilgrims are dispensed
with from visiting and kissing them.

The Arabs venerate the kaba, because it was built by Abraham, and served as a
house of prayer for him. In the same precincts, is the well of Zemzem, esteemed
for the excellence of its water, and honored on account of its miraculous
origin. Hagar, turned out of doors by her master, set down the little Ishmael
on this spot, while she went to a fountain, to get some water for her son, who
was dying with thirst. Not being able to meet with any water, she was surprised
at her return, she was astonished to see a spring issuing out between the legs
of the child; and this spring is the well of Zemzem still existing.

A range of brass columns, which go round the kaba, serve farther as an
ornament to it. Chains run between the pillars, which support a multitude of
silver lamps. The portico's, or arcades, above mentioned, are intended to serve
as a shade to the pilgrims during the violent heats in the daytime. A farther
use is made of them; the merchants, who follow the caravans in great numbers,
display their merchandise under these arcades.

The Mahometans have so great an opinion of the sanctity of Mecca, that they
extend it to the environs. The territory of this town is reputed sacred, to
certain distances, which are pointed out by particular marks. Each caravan
finds, on its route, one of these marks, which is an indication to the pilgrims
to put on the humble garb, in which they must appear on this holy ground.

At one day's journey, distant from the harbor of Jambo, is Medina, a city of
a middling size, surrounded with bad walls, and situated in a sandy plain. It
belongs to the Scheriff. Before the time of Mahomet, this city was called
Jathreb; but it had the name of Medinet en Nebbi, or city of the prophet, given
to it, after Mahomet, on being driven from Mecca, took refuge there; and, in
this city, he passed the remainder of his days.

The tomb of Mahomet, at Medina, is respected by the mussulmen; but they are
not obliged to visit it, in order to pay their devotions to the tomb. The
caravans of Syria and Egypt, which, on their return from Mecca, pass near
Medina to see it.

I had, says Nieubuhr, a drawing of the great mosque, in which the tomb is seen
in one corner. As it was feared the people might render a superstitious homage
to the spoils of the prophet, iron nails are placed round the tomb, through
which it may be seen. It consists of simple masonry, in the form of a chest,
without other monument. I could not, says the above writer, learn what gave
rise to the ridiculous story, well known in Europe, of the large pieces of
adamant which supported Mahomet's tomb in the air. This tomb is placed between
two others, in which repose the ashes of the two first califs. Although it is
not more magnificent than most of the founders of mosques, the building which
covers it, is enveloped on the outside with a covering of green silk,
embroidered with gold, which the pacha of Damascus exchanges for a new one,
every seven years.

The building is guarded by forty eunuchs, in order to prevent the treasure
being taken away, which is said to be contained there. This treasure, made up
chiefly of presents from the Turkish nobles, is looked upon as very
considerable; but so many absurd stories are blended with this account, that it
is impossible to know what to think. Many very respectable Mahohometans have
assured me, as a fact, that among other valuable treasures belonging to this
tomb, one is the philosopher's stone, or a large quantity of powder which
converts all metals into fine gold.

The mountainous part of the province of Hedsjas, between Mecca, is divided
among a number of independent Scheicks. During the months proper for pasturage,
the persons of the highest rank in these tribes, live under tents in summer,
and remain the rest of the year in towns and villages. But the people commonly
live in little huts covered with rushes.

The most remarkable state, and the least known, is that which the Jews have
formed to the North-east of Medina. They have their own Scheiks, and are
divided into three tribes. They are so odious to the Mahometans, who accuse
them of plundering the caravans, that in Syria, the greatest affront that can
be put upon a man, is to call him Beni Kheibar, the name given to these Jews.

This establishment has, perhaps, given rise to the fable of the Sabbatic
river. These Jews, not traveling on the sabbath, cannot follow the caravans.
The country they inhabit is, however, surrounded with such extensive deserts,
and so very unsafe, that, without joining some caravan, it is impossible for
them to go out of a country so isole, or to get into it.

MOCHA.
This city, situated on the Red Sea, in the kingdom of Sana, which lies in the
Southern and most fertile province of Arabia, called by the natives Yemen, by
the ancients, Arabia Felix, appears extremely beautiful in approaching it,
being well built, and standing close to the water's edge; the houses are very
lofty, and are, as well as the walls, forts, etc. covered with a chinam, or
stucco, that gives them a dazzling whiteness: the harbor is semicircular, and
formed by two arms which run out into the sea, to equal lengths, having a fort
at each extremity. The circuit of the wall is two miles. There are several
handsome mosques in the city; but that with the tower, built in honor of
Shadeli, who founded the town, and brought the coffee-plant into the
neighborhood, is the principal one. The English, French, and Dutch, have
factories here; the house of the former, is a very large and handsome building.
There are no springs of fresh water in the town, but some of a very good
quality, within a quarter of a mile, among the groves of date-trees.
Provisions, fruits, and vegetables, are in great abundance.

Trade has much declined here of late years, since Europe has been supplied
with coffee from the West Indies, which article is the staple commodity of this
country; it grows at a place called Betelfaqui, about sixty miles from hence,
and is brought to Mocha on camels; that patient and docile animal, in these
Eastern countries, shares with man in his toil, and transports his merchandise
from place to place; he kneels down at the command of his master, to receive
his load, and carries it with a slow and steady pace across the dry and barren
deserts, supporting thirst for several days together; nor is this animal useful
only for the purposes of carrying a rider, or his burden, but it likewise
supplies man both with food and raiment.

The finest breed of Arabian horses is near this city, and has furnished us
with those we make use of for the turf; they are here chiefly articles of
luxury, used only in war, and for parade; the governor has a large stud; they
are small, but finely shaped, and extremely active; of this, says Rooke, I had
an opportunity of judging, when the cavalry had a field-day in the great
square; which, from the mode of exercise, called to mind the idea of our
ancient tilts and tournaments; the lists were surrounded with a great number of
spectators, and within were drawn up fifty horsemen; they first moved in a
body, and performed several charges with great rapidity, then dispersed; some
took antagonists, and practiced with them a mock fight with lances, of ten or
twelve yards in length, which they all carried; others went singly through
their exercise with that weapon, and the motions of attack and defense; their
horses were sumptuously caparisoned, being adorned with gold and silver
trappings, bells hung round their necks, and rich housings; the riders were in
handsome Turkish dresses, with white turbans, and the whole formed a most
pleasing spectacle.

There are many rich merchants here; but as their wealth increases, the
sovereign makes a demand of his share; which is as much as he chooses to ask
for; when his wants are pressing, he sends orders to the governor nor to demand
a free gift of so many dollars from the merchants, which they freely give,
because they dare not refuse; the governor assesses them according to his own
pleasure, dividing the sum to be raised between Banians and Mussulmen.

The English agent, who is a Gentoo, has a large conversazioni every afternoon,
composed of his brother banians, the denomination given to such as are of the
mercantile cast, who sit round the room on cushions, and take coffee with him;
they are of a lighter color than any other people here, and some of them
might, in looks, pass for sallow Europeans; they dress in a long, close-bodied,
muslin gown, and a red turban, made up into a form, something like a woman's
bonnet; they cherish one single lock on the crown of the head, shaving all the
rest, and generally have a red wafer stuck in the middle of their forehead,
which is a religious badge, placed there by the priests.

The Gentoos are very numerous in this city; these are a particular sect of
men, scattered through the East, no less singular in their life and manners,
than in their doctrine; the founder of them was Brama, who gave them their
creed; they are distributed into what we term castes, or communities of men,
who practice the same occupation, and keep themselves distinct from each other;
they hold it the greatest of crimes to drink out of the same vessel, with one
of another cast, or religion; they never eat of any animal, nor kill even a
fly. This lenity is founded on their belief, in the metempsychosis, which also
induces them to feed all kinds of animals, not knowing but that the souls of
some of their friends may have taken up their abode in the bodies of them; so
that the dogs, cats, cows, pigeons, fowls, etc. subsist mostly by the charity
of the Gentoos; the owners of them thinking it unnecessary to be at the expense
of feeding them, when these good gentlemen are taught, by their religion, to
take so much care of them.

In traveling through different countries, the first idea that suggests itself
is, whether the laws and customs which prevail, are such as tend to make the
people happy; and, in forming this estimation, we are but too apt to measure
their feelings by our own; which is, in fact, to consider whether we ourselves
should be happy in them. Arguing on this principle, we must, of course, draw
one comparison, much to the disadvantage of that country, where the violation
of property is so customary as it is here; and the intercourse with the
beau-sexe, is founded on tyranny and compulsion, instead of that delicacy and
sympathy of sentiment, which forms these attachments with us. But, to weigh the
matter fairly, we should pronounce that if an Englishman would be miserable in
Arabia Felix, an Arabian would be no less so in England; the force of custom,
climate, and complexion, which makes men equally happy in different quarters of
the globe, will not allow them to be transplanted more than the fruits of the
country, which can only flourish in their proper soil.

Sana, the capital of the kingdom, where the Imam, or king, resides, is about
ten days journey from Mocha: a day's journey is five and twenty miles. This
city stands among mountains, and always enjoys a temperate climate. It is
situated at the foot of a mountain, on which are seen the ruins of a castle,
built by Sem, according to the opinions of the Arabs. The town is of no great
circumference, and may be walked round in an hour; though it is the capital of
a kingdom, the circuit of which is six hundred miles. It has seven gates and a
number of mosques, some of which have been built by Turkish pachas. It appears
more populous than it is in reality, as the gardens occupy a considerable part
of the space within the town. There are only twelve public baths at Sana, but
there are a great number of magnificent palaces; the three finest of which were
built by the present Imam.

The architecture of the Arabic palaces, bears no resemblance to ours. They
are, however, built with bricks or stone, cut or shaped in the same manner.
They have scarce any window-frames. Instead of windows, they, in general, have
shutters, which they open in fine weather, and shut, when it rains. In this
latter case, there is a small hole at the upper part of the shutter, silled up
with Muscovy glass, through which the light enters. Some of the Arabs have
small painted windows which they get from Venice.

There is at Sana, as in all the towns of the East, large khans for travelers.
Every kind of merchandise has its particular market. None but women are to be
seen in the bread-market, who have portable shops, or stands. It is the same
with all other trades, where the business is carried on in similar buildings in
the open street. The writers have portable shops, where they transcribe their
papers, copy books, and give lessons in writing to their pupils. There are also
markets, where old clothes may be exchanged for new.

Timber, is in general, very dear in the Yemen; wood for burning, is no less so
at Sana. As all the mountains are barren, the wood comes at the distance of two
or three days journey, so that a camel's load commonly costs about two crowns.
This scarcity is supplied by charcoal; they have also turf, but it is so had
that it must be mixed with straw, in order to make it burn.

Fruits, on the contrary, are in great profusion at Sana. There are more than
twenty different kinds of grapes, which ripening one after another, furnish a
delicious refreshment for many months. The Arabs hang them up in their cellars,
and make them last almost the whole year. The Jews make a small quantity of
wine, and might make still more for commerce, if the Arabs were not such
enemies to strong liquors. A Jew, convicted of having carried wine to an Arab,
is severely punished. He must even be cautious in sending it to one of his own
persuasion. They dry a great quantity of grapes, and it forms a considerable
article of exportation.

The Jews are not permitted to live in Sana, they inhabit a village apart, to
the number of two thousand. In the Yemen, they are treated with more contempt,
than even in Turkey. They are the best workmen the Arabs have. These people are
permitted to go into the city in the daytime, where they work in little open
shops; and, at night, return to their village.

The Imam lives in great state at Sana; he has a numerous stud of very fine
horses, and his seraglio is composed of one hundred and fifty women: in this
blessing of life, people in the East may indulge themselves to what extent they
please, there being no limitation to the number of concubines, though only four
wives are allowed; the seraglios are, therefore, commonly in proportion to the
wealth of the master, their concubines being slaves whom they purchase. Their
idea of beauty, as may easily be supposed, differs as much from ours as their
color; the more jetty black the complexion of the female, the more she is
admired; flat noses and thick lips are considered handsome; and, therefore, the
women of Abyssinia, which country is opposite to this coast, having these
perfections in the highest degree, fetch the greatest price in the market;
numbers of them are brought here, and sent to the other parts of Arabia, every
year for sale.

The throne of the Imam of Sana, whose dominions may be said to comprehend the
greatest part of the Yemen, is hereditary. His revenues are estimated at about
500,000 crowns a month. They arise from imposts on lands, persons and goods.
Coffee is the leading article of his revenue; this is taxed a fourth part of
its value before it is exported. It is remarkable, that Pliny notices the
ancient custom of the Arabs, to grant their sovereign a duty, amounting to the
value of the fourth part of their productions. His army consists of about four
thousand infantry, and one thousand cavalry.

In time of peace, the service of a soldier in the cavalry, is confined to the
taking care of his horse, and accompanying the Imam, or, if in the provinces,
the governor, to the mosque. The Arabs take very great care of their horses,
each of which has its particular groom. They leave the heads of their horses
free, and fasten them by the legs very near the ground, which prevents their
being vicious. After the soldiers have conducted the Imam from the mosque, they
pursue each other with lances, and this is all their military exercise. As the
lands in the Yemen are very cold, they immediately put coverings over their
horses, which they leave upon them, till they are mounted again.

Most of the men have also some civil employment, which they follow, when they
are not taking the field. They are armed with lances and sabres, and some of
them carry pistols in the housings of their saddles. But they wear no uniform,
each person dressing himself according to his fancy.

In the garrison, the infantry is just as idle; they seldom mount guard, except
some few sentinels at the gates of the towns. The infantry also accompany the
governor to the mosque, marching in rank and file, with men preceding them, who
are cutting capers, with their arms in their hands, and singing like so many
madmen. On their return from the mosque, these foot-soldiers salute the
governor with some discharges of musquetry, made without any regularity; and
this ceremony is the only exercise they have.

The infantry is still worse clothed than the cavalry; most of the soldiers
are contented with simply wrapping some linen round their waist, and a
handkerchief about their head; the best dressed wear a shirt, and breeches of
blue cloth.

The Arabs have an extraordinary manner of showing their courage, resembling
the manner in which the ancients devoted themselves to death. The person who
wishes to give proofs of his attachment to his master, ties up one of his legs
behind, and continues firing till the enemies retire, or he himself is killed.
I looked upon this as a story, having no foundation in truth, says Nieubuhr,
until I was undeceived in the recent instance, which I found might be depended
on, of a Scheik, in the service of the Imam, who devoted himself in this
manner, in an engagement against his countrymen. Six slaves loaded the fusils
of this Scheik, who kept a continual fire upon the enemy; until, after being
abandoned by the Iman's troops, and his own domestics, he was massacred.

They have no artillery in their armies; the Arabs know not how to make use of
cannon; so that their cannoniers, which they have in some of their towns, are
renegado's, or fugitive Turks, who have never been thoroughly taught this art.

The Imam having nothing to fear from enemies, or pirates, in the Red Sea, has
no need of a navy. His subjects are, in general, bad sailors. The fishermen
display a courage and dexterity, in hazarding themselves at some distance from
the shore, in small sloops, without sails, and, in a manner, without oars.

Notwithstanding the natural talents of the people, the arts, for want of
encouragement, are entirely neglected in the territories of the Imam, and in
the adjoining provinces. Books are rare, the Arabs not being fond of printed
characters. They have no painters nor sculptors, it being contrary to the
precepts of their religion, to suffer the imprint of any image. Nor have they
any musical instruments, except drums and reeds, in the country of the Yemen.
Their gold and silver work is well executed, but the workmen are either Jews or
Banians.

CHAP. III. Persons, Dress, Habitations, Food, Customs, Traveling, Marriages,
Arab Women.
HAVING, in our description of Syria and Palestine, given an account of the
Bedouin Arabs inhabiting the valleys and frontiers of those two provinces; we
shall conclude our description of Arabia, with some interesting observations on
the manners and customs of the Arabs in general; a people hitherto but little
known, and which are extracted from the writings of Abbe Poiret, in his late
travels through part of that country.

How shall I paint, says the Abbe, the confused and contradictory ideas which
arose in my mind, on the first view of these Arab hordes? I had approached
within half a gunshot of thirty tents, and was preparing to go up to them,
when I was informed that the plague had just made its appearance among them. To
avoid the danger of communication, I dismounted from my horse. The spot where I
then happened to be, was on the brink of a-rivulet, the stream of which was
cool, and perfectly limpid; bushes of roses, laurels, and myrtles, formed
around me an agreeable shade; and the landscape, bounded by hills, clothed with
the most beautiful verdure, was animated by numerous herds feeding at a
distance, Thus nature, by presenting this delightful view, transported me, in
idea, to those happy ages, when men were all shepherds, and knew no other
riches than their flocks, and the productions of the earth. Occupied with these
ideas, whilst wandering over the beauties of this scene, and fixing my sight
principally upon the low smoky huts of the Arabs, I saw, all of a sudden, about
a dozen of them, directing their steps toward me. I confess, at the sight of
these ferocious men, I could not suppress an emotion of fear; which, in an
instant, dispelled all those ideas with which I had been so agreeably
entertained. They were armed, and I apprehended some attack from them; but the
Arabs who accompanied me, assured me there was no danger. As soon as they were
near enough, I saluted them according to the custom of the country, and ordered
my interpreters to tell them to keep at a certain distance, on account of the
contagion. With this request they readily complied, and squatting down in a
circle round us, conversed with their countrymen for some time. They then asked
me, if I would have any milk, I replied in the affirmative; upon which, two of
them immediately set out, and returned soon after, with each a basin full of
it. I drank some of it, and, notwithstanding their forward manner and
threatening air, was sensible they gave me a kind reception. I expressed my
gratitude by my gestures, and distributed among them a small quantity of powder
and shot, which they requested. Forgetting then the picture which had been
drawn to me of their manners, I endeavored to persuade myself, that the nearer
a man is to nature, the better he ought to be. I perceived in them the
patriarchs of antiquity, devoted entirely to the care of their flocks, and free
from that multiplicity of wants created by luxury. I beheld men, to whom I was
indebted for their hospitality, since they offered me an asylum in their tents;
and, if I did not find in them the affected politeness of Europe, I thought I
observed, at least, that rustic openness, that ought to reside in the man of
nature.

When I took leave of these Arabs, they accompanied me near half a mile; and
when we parted, they wished me, in their own language, happiness and peace.
Being informed of the meaning of these expressions, I repeated them very
affectionately, and congratulated myself, that the first Arabic words which I
pronounced, served to express my gratitude; I met with almost the same
reception, says the Abbe, from the different Arab tribes, among whom I went.

In this desert and uncultivated country, how many enjoyments, and what riches
for the naturalist! How many useful lessons for the philosophical observer! How
humiliating it is for human nature, to see almost all nations degenerate
insensibly from the virtue of their ancestors, and preserve only their vices!
This, however, is the picture which the history of all ages presents to us.
Where, at present, shall we find the sages of Greece, the learned Egyptians,
and the heroes of ancient Rome? We should in vain seek for them in their
descendants; while the Asiatic has preserved his primitive effeminacy, and the
barbarous African still thirsts after blood. How many figures, worthy of
exercising the pencil of a Raphael, are to be met with among the Moors and
Arabs! Eyes full of fire and courage, a ferocious look, manly and strange
features, an aquiline nose, nervous arms, a tall figure, a haughty gait, legs,
thighs, and shoulders almost always naked, are the characteristic marks which
distinguish the greater part of them.

Their dress is an interesting object, and believed to be very ancient. It is
said, that in some parts of the desert, several of the tribes go perfectly
naked. I have, indeed, met with some, says the Abbe, who had no kind of
vestment whatever; and others, who had a kind of light drawers; but the greater
part wear a dress, more or less simple, according to their wealth and
condition. Some, 'I mean the poorer sort,' wrap themselves up in a piece of
linen cloth, several yards in length, which they roll, each according to his
own manner, around the head and body. This dress is perfectly well described by
Fenelon, when, speaking of the customs of the Boeotians, in his Telemaehus; he
says, "Their dresses are easily made; for in that mild climate, nothing is worn
but a piece of fine light stuff, uncut, which they wrap round their bodies in
long folds, giving it whatever form they choose. Others add below either a
shirt, like those of our women, or a tunic of woollen cloth, without sleeves,
which reaches as far as their knees. The richest wear, besides this, a kind of
robe, much like the cloaks of the hermits. The fineness of their dress is also
proportioned to their fortune. I have seen several Arab chiefs clad in woollen
stuffs, which, on the first view, I have taken for very fine muslin, of an
exceeding bright white color." The Barbary wool, has always been famous for
its beauty. The women, for their dress, wear a piece of stuff like that of the
men, but they arrange it somewhat differently. They make a kind of robe of it,
which covers several of those parts that the men leave naked. Besides this, the
Arab women wear several ornaments, which certainly do not contribute to set off
their beauty. They wear their hair in tresses, and sometimes floating over
their shoulders; while the men are shaved, and reserve only one tuft in the
middle of their head. The ears, arms, and legs of an Arab woman, are ornamented
with large iron rings; sometimes they add bits of coral. Coquettes, after their
own manner, instead of rouge, which certainly would add very little
embellishment to their dark complexions, use gunpowder mixed with antimony, for
tracing out various figures on their foreheads, and above the eyelids. The men
do the same on their arms, breasts, and hands; a little superstition is,
perhaps, mixed with these mystical characters. If, to supply those colors
which they want, our European ladies were obliged to submit to an operation, as
painful as that employed by the Arabs, it may be much doubted, whether they
would wish for any other charms than those bestowed by nature. The female
Arabs, to render these marks indelible, prick their skins in numberless places
with a needle, and when the blood ceases to flow, they apply their powder,
finely pounded, and force it into the pores of the skin, by repeated friction.

The dress, which has been described, is, indeed, common among the wandering
Arabs of the mountains, and the deserts. Those, who live in cities, vary more
in their manner of dressing. Some go with their heads bare, or covered at most
with a red bonnet; others wear a turban like the Turks, with part of their
accoutrements. They use slippers too, but the mountaineers go always
barefooted.

Those who are fond of antiquities, might make curious and useful researches
respecting the dress of the African and Asiatic Arabs. What induces me, says
Poiret, to believe it is very ancient, is, that these people are absolutely
ignorant of a variety of modes. A son never thinks of dressing any otherwise
than his father; and even if he should, their industry is so limited, that
their workmen would find themselves much embarrassed, were they obliged to
change the form of their dress, however troublesome it might be.

The habitations of the Arabs are as simple as their dress; they inhabit only
tents or huts, constructed with the branches of trees and reeds. A collection
of several tents, is called a douare: there are some which contain from ten to
twenty, and even above a hundred. These tents are placed circularly, in order
that they may enclose their flocks in the middle, during the night. If there be
any vacant space between two tents, they fill it up with bushes and thorns, to
exclude ferocious animals. The form of each tent is almost like that of a tomb,
or of the keel of a vessel reversed. They are low, except those of their
chiefs, which are extensive, and have a little more elevation. The cloth of
which they are composed is of wool, very closely woven, and dyed either black
or brown. The facility with which these habitations are transported, makes the
Arabs often change their abode, according to the season, or as their wants may
require. In winter, they choose a Southern exposure, at the bottom of some
hill; in summer, they approach those places where there are plenty of pastures,
and abundance of springs.

An inventory of their furniture may be soon taken. They are acquainted with no
other bed than the earth, upon which the most delicate spread a little straw, a
mat, or a coarse carpet. A few earthen vessels for cooking, and to prepare
their courcousan; a wooden basin to draw water, and to hold their milk, when
they milk their cows; a goat's skin to churn their butter, and two portable
millstones to grind their corn, are all the apparatus of their kitchens.

From this enumeration of their kitchen utensils, it may readily be supposed,
that their repasts are neither sumptuous nor delicate; indeed, nothing can be
more simple or frugal. They make only one meal a day, which requires any
preparation. Besides this, they take nothing, or else they content themselves
with some fruit, or a few wild roots. Those, however, who are in easy
circumstances, eat two meals a day, which consists only of courcousan. It will
be proper to observe, that the wheat in the northern part of Arabia does not,
like that in Europe, produce a pure and nutritive flour; but, it is necessary
to distinguish in the grain, the mealy part from that which is hard. The first,
which is in a very small quantity, is generally found at the point of the grain
and in the middle. This flour makes very bad black bread; and, on this account,
it is never used. They give it their cattle, or mix it up in small quantities
with the part which is hard. The Arabs are unacquainted with the use of bread.
They bruise their wheat by means of two portable stones, so that it forms a
coarse kind of meal, which they call courcousan. When they are desirous of
preparing a repast, they heap up a quantity of this meal, in a vessel full of
small holes, and place it by way of a covering upon the pot, in which they boil
their flesh, so that the vapor which arises, penetrates the meal, and makes it
swell. When this operation is finished, they take out the courcousan, and put
it into another large flat vessel, supported by a foot like that of our
drinking glasses. This food serves them instead of bread; and when they eat it,
they mix it with a little soup, milk, butter, or honey. Above the courcousan
they place their roast meat, which every one tears to pieces with his fingers;
this is generally beef, mutton, fowls, or goat's flesh.

When the courcousan is prepared in this manner, the chief of the tent, or any
other Arab, of a rank superior to the rest, lays hold of the dish, and eats
first, and alone. He sits squatting down, places the courcousan before him,
and, having taken a little with his fingers, forms it into small balls in the
hollow of his hand, and throws it into his mouth with much dexterity. When the
chiefs have done, the dish passes into the hands of those who are next in
dignity: to children, for example, who never eat with their father, nor even in
his presence, unless among Arabs of a certain distinction. The women eat last;
they have nothing but what is left by the men, and even what is left by their
own children. They alone have the charge of providing these repasts. According
to the principles of their religion, the Arabs are obliged, both before and
after meat, to wash their hands, beard, and mouth; but many neglect this
ceremony. As Mahometans, they have nothing to drink but water, drawn up with a
wooden basin, from which they all drink in their turns. However, they do not
refuse wine when it is offered to them, if they are not seen. Many of them are
even known to drink to excess.

When the Arabs undertake long journies, and in places in which it is probable
they will meet with no hospitality, they carry with them a certain quantity of
their meal; and when they are pressed by hunger, make a few balls of it with
water, in the hollow of their hand. This slight nourishment suffices, and
supports them during very long courses.

There are other Arabs, whose way of living is still more wretched and
miserable. These are the unconquered hordes, who inhabit spots inaccessible.
They have no fixed possession or place of abode. If they sometimes sow a small
portion of land, and if they keep flocks, as they are then obliged to settle in
the plains, they never fail to be robbed. These wretched people, therefore,
retire to the thick impenetrable woods, to frightful defiles between the
mountains, or to caverns in the rocks. They live separate, one from the other,
and are obliged, as we may say, to nourish themselves with the grass of the
field. Wild fruits, tender roots, and the young shoots of plants supply them
with food. The greater part have firearms, which are considered as the most
valuable inheritance that a father can leave to his son. They might employ them
in hunting, but as they find it very difficult to procure powder and shot, they
keep them to defend their liberty. They prefer independence and misery to a
more tranquil life, which they could not enjoy in many parts of Arabia; but, by
submitting like the rest of their countrymen to the government of the Turks.
These Arabs are the most cruel of all, and so eagerly do they thirst after
human blood, as to make it easily be believed that there are canibals among
them. No one dares to penetrate into the defiles of their mountains. The
sovereigns of the country have, sometimes, carried thither considerable armies;
but their enterprises have always miscarried. Either the troops have been cut
to pieces in the narrow passes, or the Arabs have dispersed and taken shelter
in the interior parts of their mountains. Sometimes they descend to the level
country, and plunder the neighboring nations. Their figure is horrible; they
are lank and meagre, covered with rags, and disgusting on account of their
dirtiness. They never attack travelers, except when in large bodies; but, as
they live at a distance one from the other, when a traveller makes no stay
among them, and does not give them time to assemble, he may pass in many places
without danger.

Though half savage, in appearance, the Arabs have certain received signs to
express friendship and respect. -- Signs, which among them have as little
sincerity as among us. The most usual salutation, when the Arabs meet, is to
put the right hand on the breast, and to incline the head; and in this posture
to wish each other a good day. They enquire afterward, concerning the health
of their relations, naming them in order, and do not forget to ask respecting
the mare, the flock, the tent, etc. If they are Arabs who are acquainted, they
embrace one another reciprocally kissing each others face and shoulders, or
they only lay hold of each other's hands, and kiss one another. Those among
whom an intimate familiarity subsists, when they meet one another, frequently
do nothing but touch the extremity of each other's fingers, after which each
puts his own to his mouth and kisses them.

When the Arabs accost any person of dignified rank, such as a chief, a bey, or
a kaidi, they kiss their hand with great respect. A mark of favor, on the part
of the great man, is to present the palm of his hands to the subjects who come
to render him homage, and whom he wishes to distinguish from others; generally
he presents only the back part of his hand. In short, as a greater mark of
submission, they kiss his head, his shoulders, his turban, and his clothes.
There are some, even, who prostrate themselves, by placing one knee on the
earth. An Arab never approaches a great man, without pulling off his flippers.

When two Arabs meet on the highway, they salute each other, and ask all the
questions above mentioned. without stopping, and even when pursuing their
journey in different directions: hence, it often happens, that they are too far
asunder to be understood, when they have got to the end of their questions.
This, however, does not prevent them from going on.

In conversation, their gestures are lively, graceful, and expressive. When we
study them with attention, it is not difficult to comprehend the subject of
their discourse. Their accent is strong and sharp, and the sound of their voice
is sonorous, and may be heard very far. Their being habituated to live in the
open fields, and to speak to one another at a great distance, makes them
acquire, from infancy, a custom of speaking very loud.

The Arabs do not affix to eructation the same idea of rusticity and
indelicacy, as do the Europeans. On the contrary, when any one belches or
sneezes, they offer up vows for his health. They say saha, which signifies, may
it do you good. They use this expression upon many other occasions. When any of
them eats, drinks, or smokes, they say to him saha, a compliment much juster
than that used by us, when we drink to any one's health.

When the Arabs are at rest, their usual posture is not cross-legged, like the
Turks; they sit squatting, with their fuzee upright between their knees; for
they never quit their arms, except when in their tents. In this manner they
pass whole days in doing nothing; and consider themselves exceeding happy, when
they can give themselves up to this idleness.

The only method of traveling commodiously, in this country, is to have a tent
to ones self, says Abbe Poiret, and to lay in a sufficiency of provisions; but
sometimes this precaution is impossible. In such a case, a traveller must be
contented to put up with the tents of the Arabs, dirty and disgusting as they
are; but above all, he must accustom himself to their coarse and unpalatable
food. How often must he depart in the morning, without knowing where he will
arrive in the evening! How often, losing himself in these deserts, must he search
out his way amidst thorny brakes, thick forests, steep rocks, and burning
sands; sometimes stopped by a river, which he must wade through, by a lake
which he must walk round, or by a marsh which he cannot cross without danger;
sometimes scorched by the sun* or drenched by the rain, and at others dying
with thirst, without being able to find the smallest spring to quench it! If he
carries no provisions with him, it will be impossible that he should get any
refreshment before night. This is the only time at which the Arabs make a
regular repast, or can offer any food to a stranger.

But, when night arrives, that period of repose for travelers in Europe, it is
not so here. He must then choose out a dry situation, and well sheltered to
erect his tent; he must unsaddle his horses, unload his mules, cut wood, light
fires, and take every precaution that prudence directs to protect himself
against ferocious animals and robbers. It is safest to encamp not far from the
tents of the Arabs, when they can be found. They furnish many succors when
they are tractable; and they are always so, when they see a person with a
sufficient guard.

It is on the bare ground, or at most covered with a mat, that the Arabs
repose; and, it is thus that the traveller must resolve to pass the night,
unless he be provided with a mattrass; which, however, he must renounce, when
he meets with much rain. Besides, as all his luggage is incommodious, it will
be better to adopt at first the custom of the Arabs, to which one must come
either soon or late.

There are a multitude of national prejudices, remarks the Abbe very justly,
that one cannot get rid of without having been engaged in such journies as
these. All civilized nations resemble one another. The characteristic marks
which distinguish them, are act sufficiently prominent to observe them; we must
have a delicacy and acuteness of judgment far above the common. Every nation,
without doubt, has its peculiar character, customs and manners, but they are
all guided by common principles; and all, more or less, enlightened by the arts
and sciences, endeavor to unite around them the conveniences and comforts of
life. Amongst a polished people, genius, ever active and lively, is continually
inventing and bringing something to perfection: it embellishes the habitation
of man, and converts to his use the productions of nature; but these boasted
conveniences, these events of social life, are so many bonds, which render man
a slave to a number of fictitious wants; and make him an unhappy being, when
his riches or labor cannot supply them. Accustomed from infancy to enjoy these
advantages, we believe them to be so essential to our existence, that to
procure them, we forget the labor, the fatigue, and the pain which they cost
us. We exhaust our strength, destroy our health, and sacrifice our most
valuable moments to the acquisition of a fortune, which often escapes from us;
and even on the brink of the grave, we still form grand projects, in the hopes
of possessing a false happiness, which death in a moment snatches from us. Born
amidst such prejudices, says the Abbe, I lamented those wandering tribes to
whom our discoveries are unknown, and who have neither bread, beds, nor houses.

Experience has undeceived me. I not only know those men, whom I thought so
wretched, but I have resided among them, and lived in the same manner. I
followed their customs at first through necessity, and afterward adopted them
from habit. They eat no bread; they are ignorant of the art of cooking
victuals, and water is their only drink. But what is the con^equence? They are
more healthy, more robust, and diseases are uncommon among them. They have no
houses; but in this happy climate a piece of canvass, a hut covered with
leaves, or the hollow of a rock, is sufficient in the worst weather, to defend
one from the injuries of the air. They sleep in their clothes, and often amidst
moisture. Would it not, therefore, appear they must be attacked by that crowd
of distempers with which medicine threatens those in Europe who should attempt
the same thing? I was a little frightened, when I found myself obliged, for the
first time, to repose in an Arabian hut; I slept well, but finding my clothes
wet when I awoke, I was apprehensive for my health. Luckily I felt no other
inconvenience than that of having my sides a little sore: but this was of no
consequence; they were soon accustomed to the hard earth for a bed, as well as
my head to my saddle, for a pillow. With a little custom, one sleeps as soundly
in this manner, as in a bed surrounded by curtains. Sleep, which then never
exceeds the bounds prescribed by nature, diffuses the balsam of health through
all the organs. Respiration becomes more lively, and we seem animated by a new
existence, which one would regret to lose by too much indulgence.

Besides this, at the moment when one awakes, there is another pleasure which
few can appreciate, because few know how to enjoy the beauties of nature. In
the midst of these silent deserts, when the morning appears, the horizon glows
with its ruddy light, and its rays gild the summits of the distant mountains.
By little and little, the plains are illumined, surrounding objects appear
distinctly, the flowers expand, and scent the gale with their perfume; the
birds shake their plumage, and salute the new day; and, in a moment, all nature
is enlivened, and every where presents the most enchanting prospects. The goat
is suspended on the projecting rocks; the ox crops his food in the verdant
mead; the lamb bleats by the side of its mother; and the whole country becomes
a true picture of pastoral life. These are pleasures unknown to those who can
sleep only in some gloomy alcove.

Marriages among the Arabs is nothing but a name. They purchase one, two, or
three women, as they are able to maintain them; keep them as long as they
please, and afterward dismiss the^ without any formality. No people can be
more wretched than these women. Their husbands are real despots, who exercise
the most absolute authority over them, and treat them with the utmost contempt.
Marriage here, remarks the Abbe again, is not a contract which requires even
the consent of both parties. It is a bargain, concluded between the parents of
the woman, and the person who intends to espouse her. In order to obtain her,
he has no need to win her heart, or merit her good graces; for, if he presents
himself with one or two beautiful cows, well fed, he is certain of being
favorably received. The parents keep the cows, and deliver over their daughter
in their stead. Whether she is to be happy, or unhappy, is not their business:
she is sold. If she displeases her husband, he sends her back to her parents,
and purchases another, or even several, as we have above remarked. If the
repudiated woman happens to please another, she will cost him less; as she has
before had another husband.

To the woman is committed the whole management of the family, which is
sometimes very fatiguing; when these Arab hordes often change the place of
their residence. To grind corn, to make it into courcousan, to cook it, to milk
the cows, and to churn the butter, all belong to the women; but this is the
easiest part. Whilst the men pass their lives in idleness, they leave to the
women the severest labors. It is they who cut wood, and who, with great
fatigue, carry it on their shoulders. Their burdens are often so enormous, says
the Abbe, that I could not distinguish, till very near, under a branchy load, a
small human figure, disgusting with sweat, and extenuated with toil. It is
they, also, who often sow and till the earth. Their hardships, however, are
still greater, when it is necessary to pull up the poles of their tents. The
husband mounts his horse very peaceably, without any other encumbrance except
his arms; while the wife walks on foot, loaded with kitchen furniture, and
sometimes with the tent, when there is no animal to carry it. The husband often
has the cruelty to beat her very severely, when in such a situation she is not
able to keep up with his horse. Thus is she obliged to travel across burning
sands, having nothing either often, to eat or to drink.

The slave, rather than the companion of her husband, she can expect from him
neither tenderness nor affection. He never speaks, but as an imperious master,
who is sensible of that superiority which nature has given him over the woman,
by making him stronger. These unhappy wretches are subordinate to their
children, and even to their slaves; they never eat till these have finished,
and they are obliged to be contented with what they leave. When they are not
called abroad by labor, they remain shut up in their tents; where they sit
squatting amidst silth and vermin. They almost all have the itch, and diffuse
an infectious smell every where around them. Their dress consists only of a few
greasy rags, which they never wash. They have no linen, and carry their whole
paltry wardrobe along with them.

Employed in continual exercise, their being with child is no reason for
diminishing their labors; they are never interrupted, but at the moment when
they bring forth. They have neither midwives nor surgeons amongst them. They
all deliver themselves, and their bed of pain is the bare ground. Several of
them wash their children as soon as they are born, and wrap them up in the
corner of their robe; in other respects, they abandon them to nature, and allow
them nothing but what is necessary to support their existence. When scarcely
brought to bed, these women resume their labors; to which is added, that of
feeding their children. Though little cared for, extended on a small bundle of
stra^, scarcely covered with a few rags, without swaddling clothes, and without
bandages; these children, however, become strong and vigorous n a little time,
and soon follow their mother to the fields.

The Arabs of the mountains are much less jealous than those of the towns; none
but the chiefs keep their wives shut up. The rest, though they might wish to do
it, could not, unless they were resolved to supply their places in domestic
labors; but, in them, laziness is much more predominant than jealousy. These
women never have their faces covered, though they ought to use veils, to hide
their ugliness, rather than to conceal their beauty. Their complexion is like
soot; their skin is dry and parched, and their whole body is painted with
different fantastical figures. Scarce have they passed the bounds of infancy,
when the signs of premature old age appear on their countenances. They are
early deformed by wrinkles; but it is easily perceived, that they are only the
effects of forced labor and misfortune, and not the ravages of years. The
attracting graces of youth have not time to display themselves; and, from
infancy to old age, there is scarcely any gradation. Dead eyes, a cast-down and
disordered look, hollow cheeks, a back bent by excess of labor, signs of the
greatest misery in the whole external appearance, dejection, heaviness, and the
most gloomy melancholy, form the portrait of the greater part of the Arab
mountaineers. They marry very young, bring forth few children, and early
terminate their unfortunate career.

In cities, the women lose in point of liberty, as much as they gain in point
of labor. By the jealousy of their husbands, they are subjected to perpetual
imprisonment. Women of distinction never go abroad; those who are seen in the
streets, are of the lowest class; and even these wear a very large and thick
white veil, which reaches to their knees. They have their faces also covered
with another veil, which is applied like a mask. Their under dress is a large
white sheet, or blanket, arranged in the form of a robe. They all have long
drawers, which descend to their heels; and, on their feet, they wear
high-heeled shoes. In such a dress, these women appear as if wrapped up in a
large bale of cloth; and it is impossible to judge what they are, under such a
covering, which entirely conceals all their graces. In their houses, they lay
aside part of their dress; and, in the evening, when their husbands are at the
mosques, it is not uncommon to see them enjoying the cool air on their
terraces; but they instantly disappear at the sight of a man -- that is, of a
mussulman -- for they are very fond of the christians; and, when they perceive
them, readily expose to their view, every thing the jealousy of their husbands
obliges them to hide. With such a disposition, and above all under such a
constraint, an intrigue might be soon formed and terminated; but here, there is
no greater crime than gallantry, especially in an European. If he is caught,
death is inevitable; and there are no other means of escaping it, except
embracing the religion of Mahomet, and espousing the woman that has been
seduced. If she be married, there is no resource for either of the parties. The
woman is enclosed in a sack, and thrown into the sea; and the man is burnt
alive, or cut into a thousand pieces.

CHAP. IV. Education.
THE following observations of the Abbe Poiret, respecting the education of the
Arabs, will, perhaps, not prove unacceptable to our readers. I was surprised,
says this writer, to find a public school in one of their douares; and still
more so, to find it under the direction of a person who was blind. This Arab
collected in his tent, about a dozen children of both sexes, whom he taught to
read and write. I observed, that their countenances bore no marks of weariness
or disgust, which are too common in our schools of Europe; labor, on the
contrary, appeared to them like amusement. They had only one book, the koran,
which the master knew by heart; and, on that account, he was able to follow his
scholars, and to correct them, when they went wrong. They chaunted their
lessons, each with good humor, and in a different tone; and, though this music
was not very engaging, I saw, with pleasure, that, among these savage hordes,
the infancy of man is not abandoned to cruel and merciless tyrants, who often
blast the rising flowers of genius at an early period of life. The farthest
advanced taught the younger branches to write, under the direction of the
master. Instead of paper, they had pieces of board covered over with a kind of
varnish; a bit of reed, cut in a very rude manner, supplied the place of a pen;
and yet, with this coarse apparatus, they wrote well, and with great
expedition. When they had thoroughly learned their task, they washed their
tablets, upon which another was written; and this always some sentence from the
koran. As soon as the time of their remaining in school was expired, each child
embraced the master, (who treated them with great mildness and affability,) and
returned him thanks for his attention. How reverse is such a treatment, from
that of one of our surly pedagoues, who knows no other plan, but that of
inspiring children with sentiments of fear and disgust!

In the greater part of what are called civilized nations, children scarce come
into the world, before they are dressed out like puppets. They are made to
repeat by rote, a few Latin lines; they are taught, above all, to behave with
politeness; that is to say, to dissemble and lie; and they are afterward
whipped, for these faults, when their parents themselves are the first victims
of their own folly. Among the Arabs, the case is quite different: children
there are entirely abandoned to nature; they are seldom caressed, and never
beaten. Left to themselves, they are employed only in exercises suited to their
age: they run, sport, quarrel, and become friends; the most ardent heat does
not intimidate them; dampness and cold never hurt them; they throw themselves
into the water, when covered with sweat, and never sit down till they have
quenched their thirst. They can scarcely walk, when they accompany their
fathers, to watch their flocks; mount on the back of the fiercest bull, and
learn, without bridle, and without spurs, to manage the most untractable
courser. Familiar with every animal, they caress the sheep, play with the goat,
and, in close pursuit, follow the ox, which escapes. By these exercises, in
which they delight, and to which they are never compelled, they become nimble,
vigorous, and robust; and are enured to that kind of life for which they are
destined.

They are accustomed early to bear hunger, thirst, and the most laborious
journeys, without complaining. Their parents do not spoil them, by sedulous and
minute attention. An over tender mother, never runs to wipe the sweat from the
dirty forehead of her son; if he complains, he is not heard; and if he cries,
she is insensible to his tears, which are never the means of obtaining what he
desires. He is never prevented from doing what he chooses, but his parents never
humor his caprice. If he wishes for any thing, he must procure it himself; if
he cannot, he must give it up, and remain contented. He never asks for any
thing; he searches for it; and, by this, he accustoms himself to suit his
desires to his situation. But this want of complaisance on the part of the
parents, and this kind of independence in the children, do not establish,
between father and son, those gentle bands, and that tender relation, which, to
feeling hearts, are the highest enjoyments of life. As soon as children can
support themselves, without the help of those to whom they owe their existence,
they often abandon them; and they become afterward, strangers to one another.
Their common fate gives them little concern, unless they are united by
reciprocal interest; affection for parents, is, therefore, a sentiment almost
unknown to the heart of an Arab; a brother is often an enemy to a brother; and
the ties of blood, which are thought to be so strong among mankind, are here of
little force.

With regard to the real character of children, it is the same in Arabia, as
elsewhere. Some of them, as in Europe, are eager, lively, full of spirits, and
of petulance: their reason, though never cultivated, is much forwarder th^n
that of children in Europe. Amongst us, a boy of twelve or thirteen, scarcely
knows how to speak before people older than himself. He is timid, bashful, and
dull. On the other hand, the young Arab, wandering in the open plains
surrounded by tents, herds, and flocks, and enjoying in full liberty, all the
pleasures of youth, the bounties of nature increase his ideas, even with the
objects of his delight. As he is restrained by no dread, nor checked by any
sense of decency, he speaks his sentiments in a firm and manly tone, without
being in the least abashed. If he wishes to be heard, he is under the necessity
of attracting the attention of those to whom he addresses himself; otherwise,
he receives no reply. If he asks questions, none of them are answered, but as
they deserve it; but, at the same time, if what he says appears to be just, he
is heard with attention, and treated as a man; and this mark of distinction
inspires him with the desire of acting like one. Thus, without much trouble,
without masters, and without tutors, the young Arab, formed by nature, early
acquires those ideas which relate to his occupation; as well as that vigor and
noble carriage which announce the dignity of man. Their gestures are not stiff,
but natural; and their pace is neither too quick nor too slow. It is firm and
manly; but it is only during infancy, that the Arabs can follow the dictates of
nature. Their mild and simple manners, gradually destroyed by brutal
prejudices, by the sanguinary dispositions of their fathers, corrupted by the
shameful irregularities to which they abandon themselves, totally disappear;
and the blood-thirsty savage is substituted to the man of nature.

One of the first prejudices, instilled into a child, is an implacable hatred
against all christians; and this idea becomes so strengthened by age, that
there is not a single Arab, who does not consider it a meritorious action, to
deprive one of life I have been, says Abbe Poiret, often greatly harrassed by
these children, who flocked round me, as I approached the tents; and I was even
under the necessity of putting up with the grossest insults I received from
them. Had I attempted to have corrected any of them, their fathers would not
have failed to have taken their part, and to have revenged, at my expense, an
injury done by a dog, to a servant of Mahomet.

The Arabs hate us, at present, without knowing the reason why, remarks the
Abbe. Their ancestors, however, knew it well. The most unjust wars, to which
fanaticism gave the name of holy, carried on, both in Africa and the East,
incensed against us immense nations; who, at that time, had done no other hurt,
than that of following the religion of Mahomet, whilst we followed that of
Jesus. These enterprises were the cause of shedding much blood, and terminated
by drawing upon us, from the offended nations, a just hatred. The name of
Christian, has always continued to be execrated in all the different countries
of the Levant, in Syria, Arabia, Persia, Armenia, Egypt, Barbary, etc. Fathers
have transmitted this hatred to their children. In passing from one generation
to another, the cause has been forgotten, but the hatred has remained. It is
thus that we pay, at present, for the faults committed by our ancestors, more
than six hundred years ago.

I have many times seen some of the women, who had never met a Christian,
shudder when I appeared, and fly from me, as if I had been a monster. However,
by means of some little present, I always rendered them more tractable; and
when I had familiarized them so far that they ventured to look at me, they
appeared astonished when they found me like another man. Several of them could
not be persuaded I was a Christian; they particularly examined my gloves, which
were green, taking that to be the color of the skin. When I pulled them off,
they were in the utmost amazement. Every attempt that I made to explain their
utility, was in vain; for, as these people are acquainted only with what is
necessary, they laugh at all superfluities. They think themselves superior to
us, because they have fewer wants; and, indeed, it must be owned, they are in
the right. How often, by their raillery, have they given me useful lessons! I
was accustomed, when I eat of their courcousan, to use a spoon, instead of
forming it into balls with my fingers, like them. They laughed much at this
superfluous piece of furniture, which self-love made me renounce; and I
perceived, that, notwithstanding my awkwardness in using my fingers, they
esteemed me more, when they saw I abandoned my own customs to adopt theirs.
Thus are all the commodities, so much boasted of in Europe, treated in the
desert. In the eyes of an Arab mountaineer, luxury is contemptible; and the
strongest proof to him of our meanness, is our effeminacy.

CHAP. V. Religion.
THE Arabs follow, in a rude manner, the reliligion of Mahomet. They intermix
it with many superstitions; and, attached to certain external ceremonies, seem
to be ignorant of its real spirit. They observe very strictly the Ramadan, the
Beiram, prayer, ablution, and circumcision; but few of them, however, abstain
from wine.

There are some, who, under the title of Papas, wear chaplets, hanging from
their necks, composed of large beads, and who preside at religious ceremonies,
such as prayer, marriages, funerals, etc. but the people can readily dispense
with their services. They employ their chaplets, as in Roman Catholic
countries, to count the number of their prayers; and every time they drop a
bead from their fingers, they say, How great is God! There is only one God, and
Mahomet is his prophet. In this exclamation, and raising their thoughts toward
God, all their prayers consist. These prayers they repeat wherever they may be;
on a journey, in the midst of their labor, and in the silence of retirement.
They pronounce their words with a strong emphasis, as if animated with some
lively sensation, and struck with the majesty and beneficence of the Deity.
Their manners, however, are quite contrary to these ideas.

Ablution, among the Arabs, is not observed in so rigorous a manner, as among
the Turks. It is sufficient, if they wash some part of their bodies, such as
the arms, hands, feet, visage, and beard, which they generally do in the
morning, in the evening, and after meals. Several of them neglect this
practice; but they are more attentive to their prayers, which they every where
repeat. Wherever they may be, whether in the tents, or in the fields, they
throw themselves on their knees, cover their heads with their clothes,
prostrate themselves three times on the earth, rise up, and kneel down,
alternately, pronouncing each time, "How great is God! Mahomet is his prophet."
During the Ramadan, which continues one moon, they take no food till after
sunset; and they even abstain from water, and from smoking. They suffer their
hair to grow, and neither wash their clothes, nor shave their beards; they even
affect to appear covered with filth and dirt. They do the same when they lose a
near relation, or when they have the death of any one to revenge.

To the Ramadan succeeds the Beiram, which continues several days. The Arabs
then dress themselves in their best clothes, shave their beards, and indulge in
diversions and feasting. Different tribes visit each other reciprocally, and
all enmity seems to be forgotten: but only during this festival.

The return of the new year is also a festival, ushered in with entertainments,
consecrated to joy and pleasure. On the evening before new year's-day, as well
as upon every other grand festival, those who are appointed to invite the
people to prayer, call out much longer, and with a louder voice, than at other
times, as grand solemnities are announced among us by a greater number of bells.

The extravagant follies, to which the Arabs give themselves up at that season,
though different, have some resemblance to a Carnival. The most common farce
consists in spreading out a lion's skin over the shoulders of four Arabs,
concealed under a large carpet, which reaches to their legs. This fantastic
lion has a long chain about his neck, and is led by another Arab. Several
others play on a tabor and flute; whilst the lion, and some dancers, perform
very grotesque dances; others covers themselves with the skin of a camel,
instead of the skin of a lion. In this disguise they enter every house, to
which they can find access, followed by a crowd of the populace, and, above
all, children, who bear in their hands the figures of a camel, and a lion. They
receive some pieces of money, from every person in whose house they have
exhibited their dances.

The laws of hospitality are held sacred among the Arabs; at least, among those
who are under the direction of a chief. The Mohammedan stranger, who arrives
among them, is received with apparent cordiality; he is presented with
courcousan, and is introduced into a tent, to repose, during the night. Were he
the most avowed enemy, when he is once admitted into the douare, he has seldom
occasion to fear treachery. This, however, is not that generous and respectable
hospitality, which, formed among the ancient patriarchs, as well as among the
Romans, the sweetest bonds of fraternal friendship; which brought together
strangers of all countries, and which honored humanity by anticipating their
wants. The Arabs respect the life of their guest, whilst he is in their tents;
but, if they have resolved to destroy him, they wait until he has left the
douare; they then massacre, without pity, him, whom the evening before they
treated as a friend.

The system of predestination, so generally adopted by the Mahometans, renders
the Arabs almost indifferent with regard to whatever may befall them. They
never complain of their situation; each is contented with his own: satisfied
with the present, they forget the past, care little for the future, and
consider death as a necessary event, to which they submit without murmuring.

Have their flocks and tents been carried away? -- Are they threatened by some
great danger, persecuted by their chief, or driven from their possessions? --
Amidst the greatest misfortunes, they make use of no other expression but this,
God will have it so. I have seen, says Poiret, some of them, who, when cited by
their sovereigns, to appear before them; and, when almost certain of being
sacrificed to their avarice, departed with astonishing composure. If any
emotion of fear arose in their souls, the idea of predestination produced a
calm, and silenced the voice of nature. It is also to this comforting
prepossession that they are indebted for that indifference, with which they
behold the plague exercising the greatest ravages amongst them. How often have
I seen them, during this destructive contagion, wait for death without the
least emotion; discharge all the duties of humanity to those who were insected,
cleans their ulcers, inter the dead; and, without any precaution, put on the
clothes of those who had perished by this cruel malady! They are not, however,
ignorant of the dangers of communication; but they destroy every objection by
these words, My destiny is written; God will have it so.

The Arabs, however, do not give to predestination the same extent that we do.
They apply it only to physical events, and seldom to moral actions. They
believe in free will; and, rather attached to the exterior rites of their
religion, give themselves up to the ferocity of their character, without
seeming to reflect on the morality of their actions. Hence arise a multitude of
false deductions and inconsistencies, which are not surprising in a nation rude
and ignorant; and hence, those numerous errors in the relations of travelers,
who have resided only for a short time among those people, whose manners they
wished to describe. Whoever, for example, newly landed upon their coasts,
should advance toward the infected tent; whoever should have seen the father
of a family distribute, without a tear, to his wives and children, the cloth
which was to wrap up their bodies after death; and the latter receive it with a
stoic tranquillity, would, undoubtedly, imagine himself transported into a
society of philosophers; especially if he should be present at the festivals,
dances, and public marks of joy which they exhibit, amidst the ravages of the
plague. What would he think, on seeing a son discharge toward his father, the
last duties of humanity; and, without considering the danger of contact, take
the clothes from his body, wash it with care, and commit it to the earth with
his own hands?

Such actions, among us, would be considered as heroic. Among the Arabs, they
are only the consequences of their system. To undeceive them, on this head,
would be destroying their tranquillity, amidst the despotism and continual
alarms which oppress them. This system, in our religion, would open a door to
every crime, by depriving us of moral liberty; but, among the Mahometans, it
produces resignation to the will of the Supreme Being; and, is attended with no
other inconvenience, than that of making them neglect those precautions, which
are necessary to guard them from physical evils. Dangerous in the religion of a
Christian; it becomes a masterpiece of policy and philosophy: in that of a
Mohammedan, it differs little from that resignation to Providence, enjoined by
Christianity, but ill understood, and carried too far among Mahometans.

It is also from the principles of their religion, that the Arabs have a kind
of veneration for idiots, whom they consider as saints, and privileged beings,
favored by heaven. I saw one, says Poiret, who was perfectly naked; he
entered, with freedom, into all the tents, and presented himself before the
women, without giving the least offense to their husbands. To stop him, or to
treat him with rudeness, would have been an action worthy of punishment. He
could go and eat where he chose, and no one refused to give him what he wished
for. Even the scheik himself endured his importunities and familiarity, with a
most astonishing complaisance.

CHAP. VI. Diseases and Funerals.
THE Arabs are unacquainted with any other physician than nature; or with any
other remedies than those presented by ignorance and superstition. This nation,
which formerly gave birth to so many celebrated and able men, for curing the
ills of humanity, who were the fathers of medicine, is, at present, even
ignorant of its former splendour; and has resigned, to other kingdoms, the lamp
it first lighted. It is rather, however, from ignorance, than contempt, that
the Arabs, in their maladies, have no recourse to medicine. The European
physicians, who happen to be amongst them, are very well received; and, this
character is the only thing that can make them respect the life of a stranger.
What is very singular, is, that these men, who are often not sensible of their
being indisposed, when they really are so, become sick, at least in
imagination, when they see a physician; eager to receive his assistance, and
fearing to let slip the opportunity, they examine their health so scrupulously,
that there are few of them who do not think themselves under the necessity of
taking physic, were it only by the way of a preventative. Not daring to decide
themselves, whether they are well or not, they present their arms to the
physician, that he may feel their pulse; and they can scarce believe his
decision, when he assures them, they are in good health. They have so much
confidence in letting blood, that the healthiest think they have occasion for
this operation, which they consider as an universal remedy. For want of a
surgeon, they often bleed themselves, by a process, which would be very
terrible to those delicate people, who faint at the sight of a lancet.

The person, who is to perform the operation, begins binding a bandage round
the neck of his patient, so closely, that he is almost strangled. When the
veins of the forehead appear swelled, by the blood checked in its circulation,
the operator makes four or five incisions, with a razor; and, in a moment, the
patient's face is covered with blood, the effusion of which is assisted, by
rolling a cylindric bit of wood over the incisions. Sometimes the Arabs bleed
themselves in the feet, but always by pursuing the same method. When the
operation is finished, they wash the wounds, apply to them a little clayey
earth, softened in water, and bind them up with a handkerchief. This operation
does not prevent them from immediately following their usual occupations. To
this is all the medicine of the Arabs confined, except a few particular
remedies, preserved by tradition, and administered with a certain mixture of
superstition. They have also much faith in amulets and talismans.

The Arabs, it is true, are not acquainted with that multitude of disorders,
the consequence of luxury and intemperance. Those, to which they are most
subject, arise from their excessive filthiness, from the marshy places they
inhabit, from their excesses with women, or from the badness of their food.
These are cutaneous disorders, intermittent or putrid fevers, rheumatism, and
wasting of the humors and blood.

In continual wars with one another, the Arabs are much exposed to gunshot
wounds, and fractures; but they leave them entirely to nature. Some cure, and
others preserve natural ulcers, which they retain during life. But, if the
Arabs do not derive the same assistance from medicine as we do, they do not
feel its inconveniences: their imaginations are not frightened by the decisions
of a physician; and the various medicines, with which the apartments of our
sick are furnished, neither offend their fight, nor damp their courage. As it
is not necessary, on account of religion, or of their civil affairs, that they
should be forewarned of their last hour; they expire without thinking on death.
As long as they can move, they walk; if they cannot, they remain in one spot,
stretched out on the earth, without ever pulling off their clothes. If the sick
person foresees his last moment, he turns his face toward the East, and dies
calmly, recommending himself to Mahomet.

Those Arabs, who set little value on the lives of mankind, respect their
remains, and take the utmost care of their interment: the want of it, they
consider as one of the greatest misfortunes that can happen; and, in the
present desolation, they die with composure, when they are certain to leave
some one behind, who will bury them. The severest punishment, therefore, among
them, is to be cut in pieces, and thrown to the dogs. Their funeral ceremonies,
says Poiret, as far as I have had an opportunity of observing them, are as
follow:

Scarce has an Arab breathed his last, when his body is carefully washed; after
which it is wrapped in a winding sheet, of white cloth, reserved for that
purpose. This cloth is manufactured in the towns of Arabia; but they set the
highest value upon that brought from Mecca, and which has been blessed by the
principal Iman. The benediction is expensive; but the singular favors annexed
to it, make them forget what it costs.

As soon as the dead body is purified, it is placed upon a kind of litter, and
carried to the place of interment, either on horseback, or by the friends and
relations of the deceased. While the men are employed in digging the grave, the
women squat down in a circle round the body, which they feel and uncover; and,
afterward, converse together with much indifference; but every now and then
they break off their discourse, to give vent to their lamentations, to ask the
body questions, and to beseech it, in the most earnest manner, to return again,
and take up its abode among them. "Why," say they, "have thou quitted us? Did
we not prepare thy courcousan well? Alas! shall thy children then behold thee
no more? Ah! return again; nothing shall be wanting to thee. But thou hear
no more; thou no longer give an answer to our words; thou hear only our
sighs, etc." These dismal lamentations, which display a natural and pathetic
eloquence, would have a powerful effect in moving the heart of a spectator; did
he not see these very women, a moment after, throw aside that external
appearance of the deepest grief, talk and laugh together, and afterward return
to their former lamentations.

During these tender complaints, they tear their hair, and open the veins of
their temples, with their nails; while the blood trickles down, mingled with
their tears, and exhibits an appearance of the deepest despair. When the grave
is finished, the body is deposited in it, on its side, and with the face turned
toward the East. One of their papas puts into its hands a letter of
recommendation to Mahomet; after which a kind of arch is formed over it, with
the branches of trees, in order that the earth may not touch it. When the grave
is covered with earth, other branches of trees are laid over it, and a quantity
of large stones, to prevent savage animals from devouring the body, in the
night time. In the middle of the stones an opening is left, where they deposit
earthen vessels, and other family utensils; but this is only done to Arabs of
rank. Before they quit the grave, they erect in the middle of it, a kind of
funeral flag; which is, generally, a piece of the clothes of the deceased,
fixed to the end of a stick. When the ceremony is finished, each returns home
with the greatest tranquillity; and, without showing, in their exterior
appearance, any signs of the melancholy duty which they had been discharging.

The nearest relations and friends of the deceased go, from time to time, to
visit his tomb. They remove some stones from it; and, in part, uncover the
body, to see that the person has not returned to life; and, when the smell
convinces them of the contrary, they renew their wailings and lamentations.
Some scatter a little lime over the stones, to make this rude tomb look
somewhat brighter. On every holiday, the Arabs go in crowds, to visit the tombs
of their dead, and to bedew them with their tears.

The Arabs, also, as is customary among us, pay reciprocal visits, in order to
condole with one another. When any of them has lost a relation, all his friends
and neighbors go to visit him. The men visit the men, and the women do the
same to those of their own sex; and, on the first interview, both parties begin
to weep, and to send forth loud and lamentable cries. These cries are
proportioned, to show their dignity. When a person mourns for a superior, he
howls with all his might; for an equal, his noise is not quite so loud. Chiefs
give vent only to a few sighs, unless it be for another chief. All this is
generally prescribed. A moment after, their joy is renewed, and they think no
more of their mourning, except a stranger arrives, with whom they must commence
their howlings afresh. These ceremonies are not confined to one visit; they are
repeated during eight days, or a fortni^ht, and sometimes much longer. When
they are informed of the death of an Arab, in douare, where any of the
relations of the deceased reside, men, women, and children, all immediately
begin to howl, as loud as they possibly can. The dogs too, frightened by their
horrid din, join in chorus; but their grief is soon allayed, and tranquillity
is again restored.

In cities, those who are devout, consider it as a very great act of religion,
to convey the dead to the grave. If they see a funeral passing, they instantly
quit their occupations, and take the places of those who carry the coffin,
until they are relieved by others. The honor of interring the dead is not
entrusted to mercenary hands; it is the duty of the nearest relation. Fathers
inter their children, children their parents; and thus, in order, according to
the degree of relationship. One or more papas always assist at these ceremonies
who sing, or rec^^e some verses of the Alcoran, and give the deceased a
recommendatory epistle to the holy prophet.

MAP of ITALY. with the Islands of SICILY. SARDINIA and CORSICA.
map of Italy

A DESCRIPTION OF ITALY, FROM BUSCHIN, MARTYN, MILLER, PIOZZI, BARETTI,
KEYSLER, ADDISON, SHARP, SHERLOCK, GROSLEY, NORTHALL, etc.
CHAP. I.
THE general name of Italy was probably derived from Aetolia, a Grecian nation,
opposite to this country, from which it is separated only by the Adriatic
gulf. The southern part was inhabited by various tribes, who communicated
their names to the several subdivisions; as the Latins, Sabines, Tuscans,
Samnites, and so on.

According to the earliest accounts in history, this beautiful peninsula was in
the same situation as it is now, cantoned out into various little states, and
republics, all living in distrust, and at variance with each other.

We have different computations of the extent of Italy, according to the
different notions, that ancient and modern writers have entertained of the
proper boundaries of this country: let it suffice, however, that from the
frontiers of Switzerland, to the extremity of the kingdom of Naples, it is
about seven hundred and fifty miles in length; and, from the frontiers of the
duchy of Savoy, to those of the dominions of the state of Venice, which is its
greatest breadth, about four hundred miles; though, in some parts, it is scarce
a fourth part as broad.

It is bounded by the Alps, which separates it from France, Switzerland, and
Germany, toward the North and North-west; by the gulf of Venice, or Adriatic
sea, and the country of Trent, toward the East; by the Ionian sea, and strait
of Messina, toward the South; and the Tuscan sea toward the West.

The principal mountains in Italy are, the Alps and Apennines. The Alps, which
word, in its general acceptance, signifies high mountains, are a long chain of
hills, beginning at the mouth of the river Var; and, after many irregular
windings, terminating near the river Arsia, in Istria, in the Adriatic. They
divide Italy from France, Switzerland and Germany, and are variously
denominated according to their situation. The Appennine mountains take their
rise near the Alps, on the seacoast, in the territories of Genoa, and dividing
Italy into almost two equal parts, reach to the straits that separate it from
Sicily.

The largest and most remarkable rivers in Italy, are, 1. The Po, in Latin,
Padus, or Eridanus, which rises in one of the highest mountains in the Alps.
After receiving upwards of thirty small rivers, it empties itself into the
Adriatic, by seven different mouths.

2. The Adige, in Latin Athesis, has its source likewise in the Alps, and
waters the cities of Trent and Verona. It is the only large river in Lombardy;
and, instead of joining the Po, runs, as this river does, into the Adriatic.

3. The Arno flows from the Appennine mountains, and falls into the Tuscan sea,
near Pisa.

4. The Tiber, in Latin Tiberis, rises also out of the Apennine mountains; and,
at a little distance from Rome, empties itself into the Tuscan sea.

Italy lies between the thirtieth, or, if we include Sicily, the thirty-seventh
and forty-sixth degree of North latitude; therefore, the air of this country
must be very different according to the different situations of the several
countries of which it is composed. The Northern parts, that lie upon the Alps,
are cold, and covered with snow in winter; the hills of the Apennine, which run
almost the whole length of Italy, are also cold; but, the countries on the
North of the Apennine, are temperate; and those on the South are warm. The
Campania of Rome is unhealthy; and so is the Ferrarese, occasioned by bogs and
stagnant waters. In other parts, the air is generally pure and dry; and, though
Naples, from its Southern situation, might be thought the hottest; yet, being
almost surrounded by the sea, it is continually refreshed by breezes from
thence.

This country, says Busching, produces every thing in great plenty, for the
uses and conveniences of life. All materials for enjoyment, and a variety of
delicacies, which lie scattered, as it were, in other countries, are here
almost every where met with in profusion. These consist of corn, rich wines,
and the choicest fruits; such as oranges, citrons, lemons, olives,
pomegranates, etc. oil, sugar, almonds, raisins; mulberry-trees beyond number,
to facilitate the production of silk; tame and wild beasts, alabaster, jasper,
iron, alum, sulphur, gold, silver, etc. On this account Italy is justly styled,
by writers, the parent of plenty: the source of earthly felicity; the pride of
our globe; the garden of Europe; the beauty of the world, and even a microcosm
within itself. But the fine plants, which, from time to time, have been brought
into the Western countries from Italy, as the reputed mother of them, are not
all originally natives, the far greater part being transplanted to the Italian
soil, from the East. All the fruit trees, the produce of which the Latins call
mala, were transported to Italy, after the conquest of the Romans in Africa,
Greece, Asia-Minor, and Syria. The apricots came from Epirus, and are called
mala Epirotica; the peaches, mala Persica, from Persia; the citrons, mala
Medica, from Media; the pomegranates, mala Punica, from Carthage; and chestnuts
from Castania, in the district of Magnesia, in Macedonia. The best pears, as
their names sufficiently indicate, were sent from Alexandria, Numidia, Greece,
and Numantia. The first plumbs were imported from Armenia and Syria, and
especially from Damascus. Lucius Lucullus, was the first who introduced
cherry-trees from Pontus, which soon after became the growth of all other
countries throughout Europe.

However rich and exuberant Italy may be deemed in general, yet no small
difference is discernible, in respect to the futility, wholesomeness, and
pleasantness of its provinces. It is subject to several, and great
inconveniences, especially in the middle and lower parts, as will more
particularly appear in the description of the respective territories. In some
countries, the number of inhabitants is far from sufficient for the culture,
and improvement of the soil. On considering the multitude of people in Italy,
during the time of the Roman emperors, its present desolateness, which is most
perceptible in the dominions of the Pope, cannot but appear surprising. Mr.
Addison, a judicious observer of men and things, is of opinion, that the
Campania of ancient Rome, contained more people, than there are at present in
all Italy; and, that there is not a town of any consequence, in the whole
country, where the ecclesiastics make, if not half, at least one-third of the
inhabitants.

Italy may be considered under three grand divisions: 1. Upper Italy,
comprehending Lombardy, so as to include the principality of Piedmont; to which
may be added, the dukedom of Savoy, though on this side the Alps; the duchies
of Montserrat, Milan, Parma, Modena, and Mantua, with the republics of Genoa
and Venice. 2. Middle Italy, containing the dominions of the pope, and the
grand duke of Tuscany; with the republics of Lucca and St. Marino. 3. The
lower, or Southern part of Italy, consisting of the kingdom of Naples. We will
begin with the lower division, the kingdom of Naples, as being most proximate
to the countries we have been speaking of, thence proceed to the second
division, and end with the first, etc.

In giving an account of the several states, we will comprehend, in one
description, the countries belonging to the same prince, whether on the
continent, or in the islands.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOM OF THE TWO SICILIES, FROM BUSCHING, MISSON,
LASSELLES, RAY, KEYSLER, FORBES, CONDAMINE, GROSLEY, SWINBURNE, BRYDONE,
NORTHALL, MARTIN, PIOZZI, MOORE, etc.
CHAP II. Of the Country, Climate, Productions.
THE provinces, of which the kingdom of Naples consists, were formerly a part
of the dominions of the Roman Republic, and afterward of the Emperors. It is
now, by the vicissitudes of time, governed with the island of Sicily, by a son
of the late king of Spain. From being once a Roman colony, it partook, as did
Rome itself, of a number of very stately and magnificent edifices; which, by
the hand of time, by earthquakes and wars, are now a scene of ruins; but MAP of
the KINGDOM of NAPLES and SICILY.
map of Naples and Sicily there is a secret pleasure, to the antiquary and man
of learning, to travel over this classic ground; and view, in the many ruins he
meets with, the ancient splendour and magnificence of their Roman masters.

The population of the kingdom of Naples, according to Busching, in 1782, was
4,675,000; that of Sicily, 1,300,000; and that of the Estates belonging to the
King, 30 000; in the whole 6,005,000. Naples contains 1,274 square miles;
Sicily, 576; the Estates of the King, 14; in the whole 1,864.

The kingdom of Naples, independent of the island of Sicily, which is part of
the empire; and thus gives the title of King of the two Sicilies; I say the
kingdom of Naples itself, called Lower Italy, is bounded on the North-east by
the Ecclesiastical State, known by the name of the Pope's territories; and, on
all the other parts, by the Mediterranean and Adriatic seas. Its extent, from
South-east to North-west, is two hunhred and eighty English miles: from North
east to South-west, from ninety six to one hundred and twenty miles. It is
usually divided into four large provinces, Terra di Lavora, Abruzzo, Apulia,
and Calabria; containing the old Samnium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania, and
Brutium, with a little of Latium.

The old Appian road, made by the Romans, from Rome to Capua, and afterward to
the seaport Brundusium, runs almost through the whole extent of the kingdom of
Naples, and is a wonderful work of man; which, in some parts of it, has both on
the right and left, one continued row of ruined palaces, temples, aqueducts,
and tombs. What a glorious sight must Italy have afforded to Northern Virtuosi,
who came to see it in the time of the Upper Empire. This road is a causeway,
made of the lava of Vesuvius, that liquid fiery substance, which the volcano
has thrown out, from time to time, and which, on cooling, becomes as hard as
rock, and as smooth as marble. This causeway, says Grosley, appeared evidently
to me, to rest all along on solid masonry work, lined with small stones, of
equal size with those of the upper side, which are about eighteen inches
square, and bound together with cement, so as to form one solid block. In
comparing roads of such a construction, with modern roads, the latter seem only
as gravel walks; which, in course of time, without repair, would become mires,
impassable by carriages: whereas, this pavement has continued, in many places,
in the most perfect state, more than two thousand years; being begun three
hundred and thirty-two years before Christ, by Appius Claudius, the censor. It
is three hundred and sixty miles in length.

Fundi, is the frontier town of the kingdom of Naples, between this and the
Ecclesiastical state. It stands upon a plain, sheltered by hills, which is
seldom the case with Italian towns; but it has nothing very attractive to the
traveller.

This country is extremely hot; and subjects foreigners, unless they take great
care of themselves, to a sickly habit of body; particularly if they travel in
July, August, or September. In the lower part of the kingdom, little winter is
felt.

The summers, even at Naples, are so exceeding close and hot, that were it to
happen only once in thirty or forty years, they would call it a plague. They
sit in chairs, says Sharp, with only a thin callico gown, some days, for hours
together; wholly occupied in wiping off the sweat, that runs in channels down
their bodies. The winters here are exceedingly pleasant and wholesome; for,
notwithstanding the rain, you see no damps on the stair-cases, nor on the walls
of your chambers; their iron does not rust, as with us; nay, the paintings on
the outside of their buildings, in fresco, remain for years. It is so warm,
that the flies do not leave them all the year. The quantity of rain at Naples,
is much more considerable, than that which falls on the same space of-ground in
England. When the rainy season sets in, it commonly lasts several successive
weeks, falling, not in such showers as we are accustomed to; having rain more
or less, every month in the year, but, by pailfuls; an absolute water-spout,
says Swinburne, that carries all before it, and almost drowns the unfortunate
passenger, who is caught out of doors by the storm; and yet, Naples is so well
paved, that immediately after the rain, the streets are clean and dry. Whole
months of drought, are compensated by the deluge of a day; and, besides, the
South winds are so boisterous, in winter, as to burst open the bolts of both
doors and windows. In summer time, the air is constantly refreshed by the
sea-breeze. Farenheit's thermometer seldom rises higher than 76; whereas, at
Rome, it rises to 89. At the end of January, the thermometer is seldom lower
than 36. At Rome, it falls to 27; so that the difference, between the greatest
degree of heat and cold, at Naples, is only 40 degrees; whereas at Rome, though
more to the Northward, it is 62. But the most disagreeable part of the
Neapolitan climate is the Sirocc, or South-east wind; which, in May and June,
is very common. It is infinitely more relaxing, and gives the vapors in a much
higher degree, than the worst of our rainy Novembers. It will blow for seven or
eight days, or more, without intermission; it blows as hot, as from the mouth
of an oven, and gives such a degree of lassitude, both to mind and body, that
renders men absolutely incapable of performing their usual functions. It is
not, perhaps, surprising, that it should produce these effects on a phlegmatic
English constitution; but we have just now an instance, says Brydone, that all
the mercury of France, must sink under the load of this horrid leaden
atmosphere. A smart Parisian marquis came here, about ten days ago, in the
month of May, and was so full of animal spirits, that the people thought him
mad. He never remained a moment in the same place; but, at their grave
conversations, used to skip from room to room, with such amazing elasticity,
that the Italians swore he had got springs in his shoes. I met him, says
Brydone, this morning, walking with the step of a philosopher; a
smelling-bottle in his hand, and all his vivacity extinguished. I asked him
what made him so dull? Ah! mon ami, said he, je n'ennui a la mort; -- moi, qui
n'ai jamais scu l'ennui. Mais cet execrable vent m'accable, and deux jeurs de
plus, and je me pend!

The natives themselves do not suffer less than strangers; and all nature seems
to languish during this abominable wind. A Neapolitan lover avoids his
mistress, with the utmost care, in the time of the sirocc; and the indolence it
inspires, is almost sufficient to extinguish every passion. All works of genius
are laid aside, during its continuance; and, when any thing very flat or
insipid is produced, the strongest phrase of disapprobation they can bestow is,
Era scritto in temps del siroceo; i. e. "It was written in the time of the
sirocc."

It is not the warmth of this wind, that renders it so oppressive to the
spirits; it is rather the want of that genial quality which is so enlivening,
and which ever renders the Western breeze so agreeable. The spring, and
elasticity of the air, seems to be lost; and that active principle, which
animates all nature, appears to be dead. The thermometer, which before the wind
stood at 43, rose, whilst it blew, to 71. Sea-bathing is the best antidote
against it.

Martyn says, though consumptive people resort to Naples, for a recovery of
health, yet this is a frequent disease here. The climate seems unfavourable to
it; owing, probably, to the stillness of the bay; the height of the hills
behind the city, and the sudden transitions from heat to cold. The rains
generally continue from the end of December, to the middle of January, which is
followed by an agreeable spring, nearly resembling the summer of our Northern
climates; except, that the seas are continually stormy and dangerous. Almond
trees bloom in February, and garden vegetables are in season all the year
round. Ice is seldom seen in the level country; sometimes years pass without
snow falling, and, when it does fall, it dissolves as soon as it reaches the
ground. What is collected, is from the mountains.

In the plains, ice or snow is very rarely seen. The snow, that sometimes falls
in the mountainous parts, is gathered and kept, for cooling liquors in
summertime, instead of ice. Even so early as April, the sun darts a very great
heat, but the nights are cold. The fertility of the soil is very extraordinary;
being productive to an exuberance of all kinds of grain; and the finest fruits
and culinary plants may be cultivated and raised, at any time of the year. Oil,
wines, rice, flax, are equal to the finest of other countries. Calabria affords
great quantities of manna; and both there, and in other parts of the kingdom,
saffron grows, and is deemed as good as that brought from the East. The hills
of Pausolippo are covered with flourishing almond-trees, palm trees, and the
great American agave. Fig Trees are very common all over the kingdom; and the
evergreen lemon and orange, give the hills a most agreeable variety of colors,
and the appearance of a botanical garden; for lemons, citrons, cedrates,
pomegranates, and china apples, grow between Rome and Naples, without any
particular culture. There are whole forests of such trees, near Terracina, the
frontier between the two states; but they are, in flavor and fragrance, much
below the the Spanish and Portugal fruits. There are ripe wood-berries, and
wood-berry sorbets, or jellies, to be had in January.

Whilst I was in England, says Sharp, I never heard the words Northern Climate
pronounced, but they conveyed to me an idea of barrenness and imperfection; I
had always conceived that vegetables, and garden-fruits, attained a flavor and
savouriness, in the more Southern climes, unknown to the latitude of 51; but,
to my great surprise, I do not find, that any of their herbage is equal in
taste and sweetness, to that which grows in our gardens; and as to Italy being
the garden of the world, beautiful and fertile as some parts of it are, the
amazing quantity of barren mountains, extending from almost the one extremity
to the other, should seem to deprive it of that character; and, however bold
and uncommon the assertion may appear, I think England a better resemblance of
a garden than Italy, and should not hesitate to oppose our verdure and
enclosures, to their myrtle and orange trees; which last are not to be seen in
winter, out of green-houses, except in the Southern parts of Italy.

Their green pea (of which they have but one sort) is infinitely less delicious
than ours; and what is still more surprising, few of their fruits excel ours; I
believe none, except their water-melons, their figs, and their grapes. An
English gentleman at Naples, who imported his rasberry jam from England, made
iced rasberry of a much higher flavor, than any made at Naples immediately
from the fruit itself. A noble Venetian procured a skilful gardener from
England, in hopes of improving the culture of his garden. I conversed, says
Sharp, with this gardener, whom I found under a state of discouragement and
despair. he told me, he had not yet ever tasted a peach in Italy, of a true
flavor, and he believed he never should; for that he was thwarted and
obstructed by the other gardeners, in his attempts to reform their practice;
that he had no authority over them, but was confined to his own proper
department, which he told me would answer very little purpose.

Here are also alum, vitriol, sulphur, rock crystal, quarries of fine marble,
and a variety of minerals. Glass works make a beneficial branch of trade, as do
the Neapolitan horses, which are much esteemed.

The cream-coloured horses, such as draw our king's state coach, are a common
breed here, and shine like satin; here are some too of a shining silver white,
wonderfully elegant; the ladies exhibit a variety in the color of their cattle
which draw them.

Mrs. Piozzi tells us, that they showed her at Naples, a skew-ball, or
pye-balled ass, well proportioned, coated like a racer in an English stud,
sixteen hands and a half high; his color bay and white, in large patches, and
his temper singularly mild and gentle; she could have purchased it for two
pounds fifteen shillings English. Hares and partridges are so tame in this
country, that they will run under the carriage-wheels.

Buffaloes are here common; a peculiar cheese is made of their milk, rolled up
like stiff pieces of ribband. Of their black shining horns, they make
snuff-boxes and combs; and a buff-leather of their skins. As this creature is
unruly, they lead them with brass or iron rings, drawn through their noses. The
wool of their sheep is fine and good, and they make a great deal of silk. Of
the filaments, or a kind of hair or wool, growing on some shellfish, are made
waistcoats, caps, stockings, and gloves, much warmer than wool; and though not
so fine, and soft as silk, yet always retaining a peculiar gloss.

There are some disagreeable animals in this country, though harmless; one is
the green-lizard, of which there are great swarms, common, indeed, to most
other parts of Italy. In spring, says Keysler, hundreds of these little animals
are seen basking on the flat roofs; and as they crawl up and down the walls, if
a window or door be left open, they make their way into the houses. The
scorpion is a much greater nuisance, which harbors not only in old buildings,
and under large stones, but infests the houses in this country; so that, in
some places, it is not unusual to make the beadsteads of polished iron, and to
place them at some distance from the wall, to prevent these vermin from getting
into the beds. It is true they seldom hurt, unless attacked, or accidentally
injured, which may easily happen by a person's turning in his bed.

Another plague, almost peculiar to the kingdom of Naples, especially the
Southern parts, is the tarantula, so called from the city of Tarento, in which
neighborhood it most abounds. It is a large spider, with eight eyes; the bite,
or sting of which, is cured only by music. The patient, under the venom of this
insect, has extravagant vicissitudes of shrieking, sobbing, laughing, dancing,
etc. They cannot bear the sight of black, or blue, but seem delighted with red
or green objects; they have an abhorrence also, to eating fruit and vegetables.
A melancholy silence, and a fixed eye, are the first symptoms of this disorder;
at this time music is called in to rouse the patient to a violent motion, and
thus promoting a copious sweat. Different patients are not affected but by
different tunes. They must be lively, and chiefly with the guitar, hautboy,
trumpet, violin, and Sicilian kettle-drum. The country people, says Keysler,
who are more or less skilled in all these instruments, enforce the operation of
their music with grimaces, and odd gesticulations. Several tunes are played,
before the right one, perhaps, is found; I mean the one that sets the patient a
dancing; which exercise is involuntary, and heightened, by playing quicker on
the instruments. When nature seems to be exhausted, the music is suspended, and
the patient put to bed and sweated. His spirits thus recovered, he is called
out of bed again by the same tune, and dances till he faints with fatigue, and
falls, then he is removed to his bed; and thus, in a few days, the cure is
completed. Sometimes it has been known to return the next year; but the same
prescription is always applied. If no means of cure are applied, the patient is
carried off in a few days. The petticoats of women are apt to harbor these
vermin; and, of course, they are more liable to be bitten than men. Swinburne
is of opinion, that if persons, bit by this insect, are ever involuntarily
affected, it is an attack upon their nerves only, a species of St. Vitus's
dance; but he doubts the truth of the disorder, and so do many others, it
having never been known to affect any but the very poor: of this, we shall say
more hereafter.

Among the natural curiosities of this country, the Phrygian stone, or the
pietra fringifera, may be classed. It has neither the hardness of stone, nor
the properties of earth, but consists of an indurated mixture of earth, rotten
beech-wood, and fibers of different plants; from which, being laid in a moist
and shady place, grow in a few days, according to its size, mushrooms, weighing
often twenty pounds each. The seed lies in the substance of the stone, and is
distinguishable only from dust, by a good microscope. The growth of the
mushrooms is greatly forwarded, by pouring warm water on the stone. There are
other singularities, which we shall speak of in the places where they are found.

The Appenine mountains extend throughout the whole length of the country, and
terminate at the streights of Sicily. Mount Vesuvius, so well known for its
fiery eruptions, lies five Italian miles from the city of Naples, but distinct
from the Appenines. Its declivity, every where toward the sea, is planted with
vines and fruit trees, and is no less fertile toward the bottom. The
circumjacent plain affords a charming prospect, and the air is clear and
wholesome. The wine here produced, is very delicious, and of three sorts; two
are a yellow muscadine; and the third, abusively called lachrymoe Christi, so
called from the drops of juice oozing from the grapes when fully ripe; of the
latter, the little that is made is reserved for the king's cellar, who makes
presents of it. The South, and West sides of the mountain, exhibit a very
different view; being, like the top, covered with black cinders, fleck, and
stones. On this dismal side, the mountain is cleft asunder. Its North peak
resembles an inverted cone, striking the eye with an accumulated mass of
stones, sand, and cinders; and is properly the vulcano. It has another peak,
called the Somma. The North peak is three thousand six hundred feet above the
level of the sea; but the other peak only three thousand three hundred and
thirty. The black ashes, with which the upper part of the mountain is covered,
render the ascent very tedious and toilsome; though curious persons are
assisted in climbing, by the peasants fastening belts round their waists, of
which the climbers take hold, and are thus helped up. The higher we ascend, the
hotter is the ground, and often rumbling noises are heard from within; and, in
many places, are clefts through which the smoke constantly issues. Its mouth
alters its form at every irruption, and often the depth within is so
considerable, that curious persons have ventured down into it. Prior to an
irruption, the mountain seems to give a warning of its rage, by a dreadful
noise, shaking all the adjacent places, and afterward belching forth ashes and
stones, of three or four hundred pounds weight, and casting them to the
distance of some miles. Several times, as in the years 1694, 1737, 1751, 1754,
and 1755, and much later than this, a flaming stream of melted sulphur, metals
and minerals, has issued out of its crater, or mouth, as from a cauldron
boiling over; sweeping along with it large stones, and ravaging the whole
country, through which it shapes its course. When this fluid matter becomes
cold, it has all the hardness of stone; and, in some places, stands in huge
heaps sixty else high, which have been broken to pieces to pave the streets.
Naples is paved with this lava. The inhabitants, in the neighborhood, are
pleased with a moderate eructation every year; experience having taught them,
that then few, or no shocks of earthquakes, need be apprehended, and these but
slight. There is such a quantity of combustible matter in the bowels of the
earth, in this part of the world, that was it not for these tunnels, or
chimnies, acting as vent for the fire, earthquakes would be very frequent; and
it is remarked, that Vesuvius, and Etna in Sicily, generally vent their fury at
the same time. Indeed, as it is, earthquakes are very frequent. The city of
Herculaneum was overwhelmed with a torrent of fire, in the year 79, and all its
buildings buried within the earth, seventy feet deep. Pompeia, shared the same
fate; and so lately as the year 1783, the whole province of Calabria was laid
waste, and the city of Messina, in Sicily, overthrown, and upwards of forty
thousand persons destroyed. The earth shook so violently, for many days, that
the inhabitants near the sea coast, on the streights of Sicily, ran out and lay
upon the beach, to avoid being crushed by the falling houses; but,
unfortunately for them, a promontory, with a whole town upon it, broke from the
land, and fell into the sea, driving the waters before it; which, on their
return, overwhelmed the beach; and, on their falling backwards into the sea
again, swept off with it all that were on the shore, to the number of forty
thousand. So dreadful is this calamity!

Mrs. Piozzi arrived at Naples, at two o'clock in the morning, in very stormy
weather, at a time when Vesuvius was vomiting forth torrents of flaming lava
down its sides, and was the only object visible. At this time thunder,
lightning, rain, and wind, were contending for the mastery; and combining to
extinguish the torches, brought to light her from her carriage. She asked a
Franciscan friar, if it was the famous vulcano? Yes, replied he, that is our
mountain which throws up money for us, by calling foreigners to see the
extraordinary effects of so surprising a phenomenon! Such a calmness, in such a
storm, was more, says she, than my senses could credit. The blue lightning,
whose color showed the nature of the original minerals, from which she drew
her existence, shone around us, from time to time, in a broad expanse, and
sudden darkness followed in an instant. No object then, but the fiery river
could be seen, till another flash showed us the waves of the sea, tossing and
breaking, at a height inconceivable.

Nothing, sure, was ever more awful or sublime, than our entrance into Naples,
at that dead hour of night; not a whisper to be heard in the streets, and not a
glimpse of light to lead us on our way, but repeated flashes of livid
lightning, and the glare of the burning mountain. My poor maid, adds this lady,
had, by this time, nearly lost her wits by terror; and my French valet,
exausted with fatigue, beat down with the thunder claps, and covered with rain
and sea-spray, had just life enough to exclaim, "Ah madame! Il me semble que
nous sommes venus icy expres pour voir le fin du monde!"

And yet, there are people who live at the foot of this mountain, without any
fear. It is so prolific as to compensate for all this dread; ask them, if they
are not frightened when the vulcano rages, lest it should carry away their
houses, and they will tell you, no; so as we can raise our vines and oranges
against it for three years, (for it acts as a hot wall) our fortune is made,
and the house may go. If the red river comes, we can run away, and hang the
house.

It has been discovered, that the houses of the subterranean city of
Herculaneum, of which we shall speak more particularly hereafter, which was
built more than two thousand years ago, were erected on foundations of this
lava; a manifest proof that the great irruptions, of this mountain, are not all
subsequent to that which swallowed up the city.

Swinburne is firmly of opinion that Vesuvius has been raised, from the level
of the plains, by the sole action of fire contained in its bowels. Indeed, the
isle of Rhodes, that of Ascension, and many in the Archipelago, one which rose
out of the sea, in 1707, completely prove this assertion. For what are islands
but the tops of hills, rising just above the water, whose bases are at the
bottom of the deep; and of such a hill, whose top does not emerge above the
surface, but lies a little below it, as a shoal, should be swelled by
subterranean fires, it would rise above the ocean, and become an island.

Half way up the mountain dwells a hermit, in an excavation of the lava, who
profits so much by travelers climbing to its summit, that the vulcano must
rage indeed, before he thinks of quitting his retirement. Experience has taught
him, when to expect an irruption, and be will foretell it with a seeming
pleasure. Gentlemen stop here to regale, and for assistance to help them up.
Sometimes here are three or four fellows attending for that purpose, who will
contend, with their couteaus, for the honor of leading the way, and for the
reward in consequence. Fellows, that if you were not armed, would plunder you.

About eight miles from Vesuvius, is a half-extinct vulcano, styled by the
ancients, the Court of Vulcan; by the moderns Solfatara; though at such a
distance from Vesuvius, it has a subterraneous communication with that
mountain. Its form is circular; hills of moderate elevation surround it; and,
notwithstanding the vicinity of the fire, vines and fruit trees grow very well
on the outer declivity; the floor of the crater is white as chalk, a kind of
marly clay. It has several fissures, or chasms, that emit smoke, but it never
flames. The more Vesuvius rages, the quieter Solsatara is. The ground is every
where hollow; for if a stone be thrown upon it, or the ground be struck with a
hammer, a long subterraneous echo ensues. If a large stone be cast into one of
the holes, which have been dug, the noise is little short of thunder. It seems
to be a vulcano burnt out, and sunk into itself, leaving a crater-like ground,
enclosed with some remains of its sides, surrounding it in an amphitheatrical
form.

In this neighborhood are two or three famous lakes. The first is that of
Agnano, lying in a valley, and about a mile in circumference. The water here,
in many places, boils up to the height of two inches, without any sensible
warmth. It breeds a great number of wild ducks, and other waterfowl; and here
the king sometimes comes for the diversion of shooting. In a rock, near its
banks, is the Grotta del Cane, so called, because a dog, on whom the experiment
is commonly made, for half a crown (and several are left there for the purpose)
forcibly held, with his nose against the bottom, is suffocated in a few
minutes; but, if thrown within two minutes after into the lake, recovers;
owing, no doubt, to the fresh air. These sulphurous exhalations, are also
equally fatal to other animals. The sweating baths are certain cells, or
chambers, in the grotto of lake Agnano; two of which have an aperture, each
exhaling a very hot steam, so as to throw a person in them into a very profuse
sweat; used in venereal cases, paralytic disorders, gout, weakness of joints,
and internal imposthumes.

The second lake is the Lucina, famous among the Romans for its fine oysters,
and abundance of fish. It is now rather like a pond than a lake, having been
filled up by a mountain, formed by an earthquake, in the night of the 19th of
September, 1538. This mountain is five hundred perches high, and five Italian
miles in circumference.

PLAN of the CITY of NAPLES
1 New Castle 2 The Mole 3 The Great Co^^on House 4 New Bridge 5 Medina
Fountain 6 The Arsenal 7 The Palace Cross 8 Eggs Castle 9 Chiaja Gate 10 Chiaja
Bridge 11 The Ascension 12 Co^^^o Grotto 13 Virgillius Sepulcher 14 Mergellino
15 St. Eramo Castle 16 Calvari^ Mount 17 Mount Olivet 18 Holy Ghosts Church 19
Holy Ghosts Gate 20 St. Sebastian 21 The New J^^us 22 St. Clare 23 St. Biaggic
24 Gr. St. Augu^t 25 St. Eligio 26 Market Fountain 27 The Carminiello 28
Carmine Church 29 Carmine Castle 30 Carmine Gate 31 Loreto Church 32 Cavalry
Quarter 33 Land Custom House 34 Magdalen 35 Marys of Grace 36 Nola^^ Gate 37
The Vicarage 38 The Anunciation 39 The Archbishopric 40 Gr. St. Mary 41 The
Wisdom 42 Little St. John 43 New St. F^^ramo 44 The Kings Study 45
Constantinople Gate 46 St. January Gate 47 New Bridge Gate 48 Capuana Gate 49
The Seraglio 50 Old St. Elmmo A The Kings Palace


map of Naples

The lake of Averno, described by Virgil, has not those poisonous exhalations,
so fatal to birds flying over it; for fowls, at present, harbor there, swim
upon it, and the land all round produces fine fruit, and excellent wine; it is
about a mile round; and, in some places, one hundred and eighty feet deep. The
walls, standing near it, are supposed to be the remains of a temple of Apollo;
but, I shall speak more of these lakes hereafter.

In traveling through the kingdom of Naples, and the Ecclesiastical state,
says Sharp, an Englishman is struck at the scarcity of villages and cottages;
indeed, one may almost assert, that there is no such thing as a village, or
even cluster of houses, approaching to the resemblance of a village. As,
therefore, the country is so thinly inhabited, we find the towns swarming with
people. The towns stand on the summit of hills; and, at some distance, afford a
pleasant prospect, being built with stone, and the houses with flat roofs; but,
when you enter within the walls, a traveller is disgusted, the houses are so
offensively nasty; and not only without glass to their windows, but even
without shutters; and the marks of dirty poverty are so strong, as almost to
turn the stomach.

There are many handsome cities in Italy; particularly Benevento, Salerno,
Otranto, Bais, etc. and two in Sicily; namely, Palermo, and Messina; but the
metropolis of the kingdom of Naples, and the city most visited by foreigners,
is Naples; of this then we will now speak, and of its environs.

CHAP. III. Of Naples.
NAPLES, says Swinburne, is fabled to owe its foundation to a Siren; and
idleness, that worst of Sirens, seems to have spread its baneful influence over
this favorite city, which no length of time has been able to dispel. It has
never lost the soft voluptuous character, which it may be said to have received
from Parthenope, its supernatural foundress. The Crimeans formed a settlement
in this bay, about three hundred years after the Trojan war, and called it
their new town, Neapolis. Naples, thus happily situated, grew rich and
populous. It was, during a short space of time, the seat of war, in the days of
Hannibal; but, at almost, all other periods, enjoyed the most profound peace,
under the powerful dominions of the Romans. It was suffered to live under its
municipal laws, worship its peculiar deities, and retain its original rites and
language. This indulgence was purchased by a quota of ships, to be furnished
when demanded. Thus maintained, in peace and security, Naples became the center
of polite arts, the seat of refined taste and luxury, and a favorite residence
of the rich and voluptuous citizens of Rome. The emperors partook of the
fashionable partiality for its climate, and gave it many substantial marks of
their predilection. But the rougher policy of Vespasian altered its
constitution, and made it a Roman colony. On the division of the empire, Naples
was assigned to the Eastern monarch; and, being connected with Greece, by
language and manners, long preserved its allegiance to that crown, under a kind
of subordinate, republican government. It suffered severely from the Saracens,
who invaded Italy about the beginning of the ninth century. King Roger, after
the reduction of every other place that now belongs to the King of Naples, was
voluntarily admitted here, abolished the ducal government, and assumed the
title of King of the two Sicilies. Naples, at this time, was large and strong;
but its bulwarks were demolished by the emperor Henry VI. and levelled to the
ground by his grandson, Conrad. The emperor Frederick II. father of Conrad,
transferred the university of Bologne here, embellished the city with new
buildings, and repaired the old ones. Charles I. brother to Louis IX. of
France, conquered it, and brought it to perfection, by fixing here his royal
residence, and the tribunal of justice.

But Charles I. was a tyrant. It was in his reign, 1269, that his ill usage of
his subjects provoked them to invite Conradine, the son of their late king, who
was also emperor of Germany, to the inheritance of his ancestors. Conradine,
the prince then in Germany, was a spirited youth of seventeen: he obeyed their
summons; but unfortunately lost his life in the expedition. He was defeated,
betrayed, taken prisoner, and beheaded. Charles, at first, consented he should
be ransomed; and sent an express to the empress Margaret, his mother, for that
purpose; but the tyrant altered his mind afterward, and put him to death, with
Frederick of Austria, his cousin, and companion in the enterprise. His
afflicted mother arrived on the beach, with a vast treasure for the ransom of
her son and nephew, but found only lifeless trunks to redeem from the hands of
the barbarous conqueror. Their deaths did not remain long unrevenged. Charles,
and his Frenchmen, rendered their yoke so galling to the Sicilians, whose
honor, property, and lives, were become the sport of the licentious
conquerors, that, on Easter-Monday, 1282, the people THE DEATH OF CONRADINE.
INSURRECTION of MASSIANELLO
of Palermo raised the standard of revolt; the whole island followed the
example of the capital, and a general massacre ensued; in which every
Frenchman, their wives and children, to the number of eight thousand, one man
only excepted, who was spared for his virtue, was put to the sword without
mercy; an event known in history, by the name of the Sicilian vespers. Charles
died three years afterward of a broken heart. The empress expended the money
she brought to ransom her son, in the erecting and beautifying the church of
Maria del Carmine. Every succeeding prince added something to the embellishment
of Naples, and it soon came to vie with the first cities in Europe, for beauty,
wealth, and numbers; but ill provided for defense. It actually threw open its
gates to every invader, and received with submission, whatever commander was
the conqueror, with some few exceptions only. In 1495, it was taken by Charles
VIII. king of France; but in 1504, the French were expelled, and the crown fell
to Ferdinand, king of Spain; at whose death it devolved on his grandson, the
emperor Charles V. During the time the Austrian families were on the throne, it
was governed by viceroys, and the peace of Naples was interrupted only by
Turks, French, and a banditti, till the year 1647; when the famous insurrection
of Massaniello broke out. This man was a fisherman, who, on account of some
duties laid on fruit, stirred up the people, and found himself at the head of
150,000 men, drove the viceroy into the castle, ordered the heads of his
opposers to be struck off before him, and strutted about for a week, the
dictator of the Neapolitan republic. He required the viceroy, to abolish all
taxes, and to deliver up the writ of exemption, granted by Charles V. near 100
years before. This embarrassed the viceroy; but to appease the people, he
forged a deed, and sent it by the favorite of the people, the duke of
Matalone, whom he had confined. The fraud being discovered, the duke was torn
from his horse, maltreated by the mob, and afterward committed to prison.
Massaniello was a day or two after killed for his misconduct by his own party,
and the rebellion was quelled.

Naples, the capital of the kingdom, anciently Parthenope, lies in 41 29 North
latitude; is situated partly on the side of a mountain, and partly toward the
sea, lying in the form of an amphitheatre, with the bay before it. This is
formed of two half circles, with a promontory in the middle, so as to wear the
shape of the figure 3; the town rising in an amphitheatre behind it. It is
large, the walls being nine Italian miles in circuit; but, including the
suburbs, the entire circumference cannot be less than eighteen miles. Most of
the streets are handsomely paved; the handsomest, and that of the greatest
length and breadth, is the Strada di Toledo. The breadth is twenty-three common
paces; and, after running in a DUKE of MATALONE MALTREATED.
direct line of fifteen hundred paces, it is continued in an easy curved line,
for three hundred more; and yet has not one palace in the whole length of it.
Mrs. Piozzi says it is as strait as Bond-street, London; as long as
Oxford-road, very wide; the houses all of stone, and at least eight stories
high; in the heart of the city the streets are narrow; and, on account of the
height of the houses, gloomy. Over the shops, live persons of fashion; but
persons, of very high quality, have palaces in other parts of the city. Though
it is not, says Moore, one third of the size of London, the number of
inhabitants are computed at 350,000. Many of the streets are more crowded than
the Strand. The streets not being lighted or watched at night, is is a very
dangerous place often after dark.

That which the police, and some remains of shame restrain, in other parts,
especially in cities, are here, above all the control of law. The sulphur,
with which their vegetables and food are impregnated; the continual use of
chocolate, and other laxatives, occasion necessities, which will admit neither
delay nor circumspection; the court-yards of palaces and hotels, the porches of
private houses, the stairs and landing-places, are so many conveniences for
passengers. Persons will often throw themselves out of their coaches, and
mingle with the foot-passengers, every one taking within the walls of others,
that liberty which he allows within his own.

Veniam petimusque damusque vicessim. "Begging pardon and granting it by
turns." From this general liberty, and the little care taken by an owner or
tenant, about the cleanliness of his hotel, his house, or landing-place, it is
easily to be supposed, what filthiness and infection must be in a city, so
populous as Naples.

There is, however, one pleasure in walking through the city; the streets being
well paved, and kept in good order. No heavy loads on carriages are suffered to
be brought into town. The heaviest cart is that which carries wine; all heavy
burdens are brought on the backs of asses. Market-gardeners bring in their
vegetables by this conveyance, and carry out their dung by the same means.

The houses have all flat roofs, paved with stone, and a balustrade, that one
may safely walk on them; numbers of flower-pots, and fruit trees, in boxes, are
placed on them, and produce a very gay effect. Grosley says they look like
houses, whose tops have been consumed by fire, especially as the upper part of
these houses is blackened by smoke, and the vapors of the air, more than the
middle parts. A great number of stalls, whereon eatables are exposed to sale,
and of balconies, with lattice windows, take off from the beauty of the
streets; but they are handsome notwithstanding. This city does not, indeed,
rival either Rome or Genoa, in stately palaces; yet it can boast of fine ones,
as also of a great number of fine fountains; though the water, in most of them,
is but indifferent. Water is also conveyed to the city, from the foot of Mount
Vesuvius, by a very grand aqueduct.

The monasteries, and convents, of both sexes, are one hundred and forty-nine;
besides which, are thirty-four houses for poor boys, girls, and women; eleven
hospitals; five seminaries, for ecclesiastics; four capital churches;
thirty-two parish-churches; seventy other churches and chapels, and upwards of
one hundred and thirty oratories, or chapels of religious fraternities. Most of
the churches are deficient in good paintings, and a fine front; and their
marble monuments, are not of those magnificent dimensions, as those which
strike the eye at Rome; but every thing else, in beauty and richness, surpasses
all of the kind in other Catholic countries. The value of the jewels, and
altar-utensils, being alone estimated at several millions of dollars.

Il Duomo, or the archbishop's cathedral, though Gothic, is surprisingly fine;
it is dedicated to St. Januarius; and, in one of the chapels, is the tomb of
that saint: he was bishop of Benevonto, and is called the patron of the city.
They say he was murdered, and that some of his blood is preserved in a glass
phial, which they show; but more of this by-and-by. The dome of this cathedral
is exceedingly rich, in all sorts of sculpture, painting, gilding, and marble.
The high altar is superb, and its tabernacle set with the finest gems. The most
remarkable thing, in this church, is a chapel called Il Tesora; the
architecture of which is extremely beautiful. In it are the statues of Saints
Peter and Paul, finely executed by Finelli; and two pillars of black marble,
most beautifully spotted. The door is of brass, curiously wrought with festoons
and foliage, and cost thirty-six thousand scudi; each scudi, 4s. 2d. The chapel
is of a round form, and contains seven altars of the finest marble, and
forty-two pillars of Broccatello. Round the upper part of the wall stand
twenty-one large bronze images of saints, each valued at four thousand scudi;
and, under them are sixty large silver busts, of so many saints. Most of these
bronzes are by Finelli. The cupola was painted by Lanfranco, Domenichini, and
Parmeggiano, but these noble pieces have suffered by earthquakes, that shook
the cupola. Behind the high altar, which is detached from the wall, and
entirely of red porphyry, is the shrine with silver doors, where is kept the
head of St. Januarius, and the two phials of his blood.

In the area, between the cathedral and Capua street, stands a fine marble
obelisk, on which is erected a brass statue of St. Januarius. This obelisk is
annually illuminated, on the 19th of September, with a splendor hardly to be
conceived; whilst a numerous band of music play by it, and all the guns, in the
several forts, are fired on the occasion.

Of the four catacombs, hitherto discovered in Naples, those of St. Januarius
are both of the greatest extent, and best kept. This is a subterraneous
burial-place, hewn out of a solid rock; the passages are sixteen feet high, and
arched, and eleven wide. That the Romans buried their dead, long before the
establishment of Christianity, is out of dispute. The bodies, in these
catacombs, were deposited in cavities, on both sides of the vaults, one above
another, in a kind of ovens; the mouths of which, when full, were closed up
with a marble slab, or with tiles. There are passages branching out on each
side, but these are narrow. In many parts, they are said to extend several
miles, but they are now walled up; robberies, etc. having been committed, by
banditti, who used to lurk in these vaults. Guides, with torches, show you
these places.

St. Maria Annunziata is one of the finest churches in Naples; for the eye
every where meets with noble paintings, statues, monuments, basso relievos,
etc. The gilding alone of the high altar, and the chapel belonging to it, cost
twenty-three thousand crowns; and the other ornaments, enriched with lapis
lazuli, cornelian, jasper, agate, and a profusion of other gems, eighteen
thousand ducats more, each ducat 3s. 4d. The plate, in the vestry of this
church, a few years since, weighed above twenty-one thousand marks.

The hospital called La Santa Casa, belonging to this church, was once the best
endowed in the whole world. Its annual income, amounting to two hundred and
fifty thousand pounds sterling. All this was expended on the sick, poor,
foundlings, and other charitable purposes. The children brought up here, are
generally about two thousand five hundred; it being no uncommon thing, in the
night, for twenty infants to be put into the wheel, or machine, which stands
open, both day and night, for the reception of them; and eight wet nurses
attend every day. The boys are brought up to trade, and some to the church. The
girls, according to their capacities, do the necessary work of the hospital;
are employed in the care and instruction of the children; placed in a convent,
or married off, with a portion of one hundred, or two hundred ducats. In such
portions, ten thousand ducats have been expended in one year; and fifteen
thousand foundlings maintained. If such women, as are married, become
distressed widows, or are deserted by their husbands; or, in case they are
unhappy in such marriages, without any fault of theirs, they are readmitted,
and a particular apartment allowed them for life. The annual amount of the
dowries to other women, with which this house stands charged, by several
ancient legacies and foundations, was, at least, eighteen thousand ducats;
there being many noble families, whose daughters, at their marriage, received
two or three thousand dollars from this hospital. The physicians, etc. stood
the house, yearly, in fourteen thousand ducats. To the Santa Casa belong four
other hospitals, to which patients are sent, for the convenience of warm
bathing, etc. Such was the state of this hospital, at the beginning of this
century, when it broke, for above five millions of ducats, on which its total
ruin was feared; but it was, at last, brought before an imperial commission;
when all its revenues, except forty-two thousand ducats a year, were made over
to the creditors till they were paid; so that the girls portions now are
reduced from two hundred ducats to fifty. Other expenses are proportionably
diminished.

Here is also an institution, called Sacra Monte della Pieta; whose revenue,
amounting to fifty thousand ducats, is, for two years, lent out on pledges
without interest, in sums not exceeding ten ducats. Many wealthy persons, who
either want opportunity, or not being inclined to make purchases, or lend on
interest, or mortgages, place their fortunes here; partly for security, and
partly for the benefit of the poor.

The late king of Spain began a new palace at Capo di Monte, but, discouraged
by the difficulty of access, and procuring water, he left it unfinished.
Twenty-four rooms, however, of this neglected palace, are filled with the
collection that was removed from Parma; consisting of an invaluable set of
pictures, a library, a fine cabinet of medals, and a great number of cameos and
intaglios, particularly an onyx tazza, eight inches in diameter; but none of
these valuable articles are hung up, or properly disposed. The books are
unpacked, and all is in confusion.

In the palace of the prince di Tarsia is a library open for the public, three
days in a week. There are several other good libraries, but the principal one
is the king's.

Of all the palaces in Naples, that of the king's is the most magnificent. In
the audience-room, are finely painted the most remarkable actions of the
Spanish nation. The sala Regia, where the carnival entertainments are given, is
hung with the portraits of all the viceroys at full length. A particular
gallery is taken up with the exploits of the duke of Alva. In another saloon is
represented the war carried on by Charles V. with John Frederick, elector of
Saxony. In the palace-chapel is a subterraneous communication (a good resource
for viceroys and courtiers) to the Nuovo Castello, by the seaside, which is
well garrisoned; forty-two pieces of ordnance are mounted on the walls and
bastions; among which are some taken by Charles V. from the elector of Saxony,
at the battle of Muhlberg.

Castello del Uovo, or Egg Castle, so called from its oval figure, stands in
the sea upon a rock, joined to the continent by a bridge two hundred and twenty
paces long. This castle is said to have been anciently the palace of Lucullus.
It is supplied with fresh water conveyed under the bridge.

The third check, upon the city of Naples, is the castle of St. Elmo. It is
situated on an eminence, toward the West, and the plan is in the form of a
star, with six rays. Its subterraneous works are very spacious, and hewn out of
a rock to such a depth, as to be bomb-proof; on which account, a great number
of military stores are here kept. It can also be supplied with provisions from
Castello Nuovo, by means of a subterraneous communication. In the upper part of
St. Elmo's castle are seven cisterns of water; and, under the vaults and mines,
is a reservoir large enough for two galleys to sail on. The water, which is
always extremely cold, is drawn up by a bucket, through a kind of aperture.

One of the pleasantest parts of the city is the Piaggie, that is, the Strand,
from its proximity to the seashore. The coolness of the air, the agreeableness
of the prospect, the extent of the area, and its freedom from dust, make it the
evening resort of the quality; so that it is no uncommon thing to see some
hundreds of coaches here; but, on these occasions, persons of different sexes
never ride together in the same coach. Nothing can be more delightful than the
gardens to the right hand, on the hill, adorned with walks of orange, cedar,
and palm trees, and a profusion of the most beautiful flowers.

The bay of Naples is thirty miles in circumference, and twelve miles across.
The harbor is very spacious, and has a grand light-house, with a mole, five
hundred paces in length, which separates the main harbor from the basin. The
latter is behind the New Castle, and has generally in it four galleys; the
crews of which, both rowers and soldiers, are obliged every Lent, to come to
confession, and receive the sacrament.

The harbor is formed by the mole, which projects near half a mile into the
sea. It was begun to be built in 1302. It is in the form of a bending arm, and
about sixty feet broad, consisting of large stones, hewn and square, so closely
cemented, that it stands unmovable like a rock, and braves the fury of the
most impetuous waves. In the middle of the elbow stands the light-house, a
beautiful, lofty, round tower; at the end of the bending of the elbow, is a
small fort. There is also a chapel, near the middle of the mole, where mass is
duly said for mariners. The mole is broad enough for two coaches to go
abreast, and sufficient room for them to turn at the end. It is the most
agreeable public walk about the city, and much frequented in summer evenings,
by persons of fashion, to enjoy the fresco, or refreshing breezes from the sea.
On each side the mole, ships and other vessels are chained; and from it is a
beautiful prospect of Mount Vesuvius, the delightful country about Portici, and
the beautiful ascent of great part of Naples; the houses and gardens appearing
one above another, almost to the castle of St. Elmo. The company here have
constantly concerts of the finest music; whose sounds are wonderfully sweet, in
a still evening, owing to the water; and add considerably to the pleasures of
the place. The harbor for the galleys will contain about twenty, defended by
the old town of St Vincent, now used as a place of confinement, for disobedient
children.

Naples has several squares, but they are small and irregular; many of them
have, in the middle, a short obelisk, loaded with decorations, far from
pleasing to the eye; but the finest is that of Medina, opposite the new castle.
The upper basin is supported by the three Graces; and, on the top, stands a
superb Neptune, attended by several other figures, all ejecting water. The town
is well supplied with daily markets, so that provisions are ever fresh, and in
great plenty. Their wine is the best in Europe, and both fish and flesh are
extremely good. There are two or three good inns, for the accommodation of
travelers. The apartments are indifferent, but every thing else will be found
good, and the cooks excellent; gentlemen may have a ready furnished lodging,
such as it is, (for there are few better than what we meet with in the
poor-houses of Shoreditch) and have their provisions from the inns. Wines are
exceedingly cheap; nine gallons may be bought for 3s. 3d. and fellows, who
speak a little broken English, are ready as valet de places, to attend you
every where; but they are much greater knaves here, than the generality of
their fraternity.

Some thousands of the populace, called the Lazaroni, or black-guards, have no
other habitation than the streets; and much the greater part of the other
portion, having no employ, either from want of manufactures, or their natural
propensity to idleness, are sauntering in the streets from morning to night,
and make those crowds at Naples; which are not seen in other places, but on
festivals, elections, and other public days.

These lazaroni, says Moore, are computed at above thirty thousand; and have,
on some well known occasions, as the insurrection of Massaniello, and others,
had the government, for a short time, in their own hands. The greater part of
them have no dwelling-houses, but sleep every night in the streets, under
porticos, piazzas, or any kind of shelter they can find. Those, who have wives
and children, live in the suburbs, near Pausilippo, in huts, or in caverns; or
chambers dug out of that mountain. Some get a livelihood by fishing, others by
carrying loads to and from the shipping. Many walk about the streets, ready to
run on errands, or perform any labor in their power, for a very small reward.
As they do not meet with constant employ, their wages are not adequate to their
maintenance; the soup and bread, distributed at the gates of convents, supply
the deficiency. The lazaroni are generally represented as a lazy, licentious,
and turbulent set of people; but Dr. Moore entertained a very different idea of
their character. This idleness, says he, is evidently the effect of necessity,
not of choice; they are always ready to perform any work, however laborious,
for a reasonable gratification. It must proceed from the fault of government,
when such a number of stout, active citizens remain unemployed; and, so far are
they from being licentious and turbulent, that I cannot help thinking they are
too tame and submissive. Though the inhabitants of the Italian cities were the
first who shook off the feudal yoke; and though, in Naples, they have long
enjoyed the privilege of municipal jurisdiction; the external splendour of the
nobles, and the authority they still exercise on the peasants, impose upon the
minds of the lazaroni; and, however bold and resentful they may be, of injuries
offered by others, they bear the insolence of the nobility, as passive as
peasants fixed to the soil. A coxcomb of a volanti, or running footman, tricked
out in a fantastic dress, or any of the liveried slaves of the guests, make no
ceremony of treating these poor fellows with all the insolence, and
insensibility natural to their masters; and for no visible reason, but because
he is dressed in lace, and they in rags. Instead of telling them to make way,
when the noise in the streets prevents the common people from hearing the
approach of the carriage, a stroke across the shoulders, with the cane of the
running footman, is the usual warning they receive. Nothing animates this
people to insurrection, but some very pressing and very universal causes, such
as scarcity of bread: every other grievance they bear, as if it was their
charter. When we consider thirty thousand human creatures, without beds, or
habitations, wandering almost naked, in search of food, through the streets of
a well built city; when we think of the opportunities they have of being
together, and of comparing their own destitute situation, with the affluence of
others, one cannot help being astonished at their patience.

Let the prince be distinguished by splendour and magnificence; let the great
and the rich have their luxuries; but, in the name of humanity, let the poor,
who are willing to work, have food in abundance, to satisfy the cravings of
nature; and raiment, to defend them from the inclemencies of the weather.

If their governors, whether through weakness, or neglect, do not supply them
with these, they certainly have a right to help themselves. Every law of
equity, and common sense, will justify them in revolting against such
governors; and in satisfying their own wants, from the superfluities of lazy
luxury.

Mrs. Piozzi gives us a very different idea of this set of men; and says, that
the natural indolence of the Neapolitans makes them regardless of the comforts
and inconveniences of life. As the weather is exceedingly warm, the lazaroni,
who have but little care about appearances, go with a vast deal of their
persons uncovered, except that of tatooing their shoulders and legs, as do the
Indians, with figures indelibly marked in their skin, by gunpowder, and other
means. The man, who rows you about the delightful bay of Naples, has, perhaps,
the angel Raphael, or the Virgin Mary, delineated, on one sunburned leg, the
saint of the town, upon the other; and the glory, or seven spirits of God, upon
his brawny shoulders. They hate work, says this lady, and why? Because they
want for nothing, having few desires. A house would be an inconvenience to
them; and, though many of them have decent clothes, they throw them off till a
time of gala, and will sit by the seaside playing at moro, with their fingers.

A Florentine nobleman, continues Mrs. Piozzi, told me once, that he asked one
of these fellows to carry his portmanteau for him, and offered him a carlini;
more in proportion to a Neapolitan, than an English shilling would be to a
London porter; he had not twenty yards to go with it. "Are you hungry, master?"
cries the fellow; "No replied Count Manucei," but what of that? -- "Why, then,
no more am I," was the answer, "and it is too hot weather to carry burdens;"
and so turned about on the other side and lay still.

This class of people, say this lady, amounting to a number that even terrifies
one to think of, gives the city an air of gaiety and cheerfulness, one cannot
help rejoicing in. The Toledo-street is one continual crowd. Nothing can exceed
the confusion to a walker; and here are little gigs, drawn by one horse, which,
without any bit in his mouth, but a string tied over his nose, tears along with
inconceivable rapidity: a small narrow gilt chain to hold one, set between the
two wheels, and no springs to it, nor any thing else which can add to the
weight; and this flying car is a kind of ^iacre, or hackney coach, that will
travel a mile for fourpence halfpenny; or at the rate of a carlini, or
four-pence halfpenny, an hour.

The coat of arms, belonging to Naples, was an unbridled horse; but one of
their late kings put a bit into its mouth, as an emblem of his having brought
the Neapolitans to subjection.

I have given my readers one reason, of the populousness of the towns in the
kingdom of Naples; that of the country places being deserted. Another that
fills Naples, says Sharp, is, that it furnishes its own inhabitants, and,
perhaps, is the only metropolis in Europe that does so. London, Paris, and
other chief cities, are supplied with the people from the country; the luxury,
and expensiveness of large towns, being so great an impediment to marriage, and
populousness, they would all, in the ordinary course of nature, be depopulated
in a few years, were they not annually recruited from other parts: but, in
Naples, the case is different, from a singular custom among the gentry, in
hiring married servants, in preference to unmarried ones. In Paris, or London,
very few servants can hope to be employed, who are not single; and therefore an
infinite number, of this class of people, must pass their lives in celibacy; as
the instances in these cities are but rare, where footmen and maidservants can
support themselves, after marriage, by a different occupation.

But in Naples, it is almost an universal fashion, to give their menservants
board-wages, not admitting them to sleep in their houses. This naturally
induces them to marry, giving them a settlement so essential to the character
acquired here, by all ranks of masters; but what seems still more to facilitate
matrimony, in this order of people, is the prodigious number of young women,
ready to accept the first offer; for, in Italy, they are not taken into service
as in England, A nobleman, who keeps forty men servants, has seldom more than
two maids; and, indeed, it is so much the province of the men, to do the
house-business, that they are employed all over the country, even to the making
of the beds. This circumstance, with the difficulty she has to acquire her
living here, by any other means, is the reason why they seldom make an
objection to the certain poverty attending on marriage. The swarms of children,
in all the streets inhabited by the poor, are such as will naturally result
from this practice; and as a married couple, though they have six or seven
children, never occupy more than one room; the extreme populousness of Naples
must consequently follow from such causes.

The lazaroni are such miserable wretches, as are not to be seen in any other
town in Europe. Perhaps, among the ashes of our glass-houses in London, we may
find two or three beggars not unlike them; and they are suffered to sun
themselves a great part of the day, under the palace-walls, where they lie
basking like dirty swine, and are a much more nauseous spectacle. Being almost
naked, they suffer extremely in cold weather; and were the climate less mild,
they would certainly perish; even the greater part of the poor, who work for
their livelihood, seldom wear shoes or stockings, and their children never;
but, notwithstanding the power of use, the cold in the winter months produces
chilblains, and sore legs, to a piteous degree.

To give my readers an idea of the starving life of the poor, I shall only
mention the wages of servants, to which all kinds of wages are nearly
proportionate. A Neapolitan gentleman pays his footman five ducats a month; a
nobleman, perhaps six. All the quality, who keep pages, give them six or seven
ducats, with a livery once in two years, and another for gala days only, which
lasts ten years; but neither shoes, stockings, nor washing. With this sum they
subsist themselves and families; for this pay includes board wages; nor are the
tables of the gentry so amply provided here, as to admit of the least
depredation, as is the case in England, where married servants generally
maintain their wives from their master's larder. Now, a ducat is about 3s. 9d.
five of which make something less than 19s. the whole monthly income of the
greater number of livery servants in Naples. The custom of vails is, in a
manner, unknown, except by great chance, or at the beginning of the year, when
they receive a few trifling perquisites. The generality of servants, marrying
very young, their wives, for the most part, blessed with a numerous progeny, the
cares of which are a sufficient occupation for the wise, makes it that the
labor of her hands can add but little to their stock. The rent of a room, for
a month, is a ducat, which leaves exactly fifteen shillings for clothing and
maintaining the whole family. After this detail, it will not appear strange
that they seldom eat either meat, or fresh fish, but find themselves under the
necessity of feeding chiefly on vegetables, a cheap sort of cheese, salt fish,
and a coarse bread; which last is as dear at Naples, as at London. If it
excites wonder, how they contrive to live on these wages, it is still more so,
how it is contrived on four ducats, or four and a half, the usual price given
by lawyers and tradesmen; for every one here has the rage of keeping a footman,
down to a set of housekeepers, who hire one for the Sunday only; and there are
those who hire one on that day, for an hour or two only, so that some servants
will let themselves out to three or four different masters on the same Sunday,
one in the morning, another at noon, and a third after dinner, and so on. This
class of servants are wittily called Domenichini, or Sunday-men; Domenica
signifying Sunday. I must not omit to observe, that in great families, a few of
the upper servants are not at board-wages, but are dieted by their masters, for
the convenience of consuming what remains at table.

The king's footmen receive only eight ducats, and six carlines a month, equal
to 1l. 12s. 6d. and two carlines a day extraordinary, when his majesty is at
any of his palaces out of Naples. This extraordinary allowance is granted them,
for their particular maintenance, as they cannot partake of the same dinner
with their wives and families.

I shall close this account of the lowness of servants' wages, with remarking,
that they all prefer a carline (fourpence halfpenny) a day, for board-wages, to
the being maintained by their masters; by which one may judge, with what vile
provision they can subsist. They know nothing of the superfluities so common
amongst our poor; I mean the excessive use of strong and spirituous liquors, a
matter of such notoriety, that I do not remember to have seen in the streets,
one drunken man or woman, if I may except a few soldiers, and a few
valets-de-place. Indeed, the custom, or spirit of sobriety, is rooted so deeply
in their manners, that the luxury they indulge, is a passion for snow, or
ice-water, and lemonade. You see the very dregs of the mob, spending their
farthings, or halfpenny, on a glass of those liquors, in the coldest season of
the year; the same thing is practiced by the great, in a more elegant and
expensive manner. Perhaps the heat of the climate may have indicated this
luxury first, in the summer months, but it is now become one of the necessaries
of life; and government has availed itself of the fashion, by making a monopoly
of the snow at Naples, and selling it at a very high price, about three
farthings a pound.

It is this cheapness of servants that accounts for the showy appearance some
of the quality here make with small fortunes; but what enables them also to
support a large household, and a vast quantity of coach-horses and carriages,
is the circumstance of confining themselves to that one luxury. They have no
expensive country-houses and gardens, no hounds, no race-horses, no parliament
elections; and, in short, no great demands for the education of their children;
disposing of all the girls in convents, on very easy terms, whilst they are
children, where they are left all their lives, unless they provide them
husbands; for single young ladies are not suffered to appear in the world,
neither at spectacles, nor visits. The small expense of their tables, also, is
another means of enabling them to figure away with equipages. It is not usual
here, to dine or sup at each others houses; and there are some who never do,
except only on Christmas Day, or, perhaps, during that week; nay, in general,
are they so unaccustomed to entertain one another, that the greater number
seldom receive their friends, but upon weddings, deaths, and lyings-in. They
also carry their parsimony so far, as to lock up their fine furniture, in the
intervals of these ceremonies. It is amazing, at how small an expense the
generality of the first people live here, as to their table. It is not an
uncommon thing, says Sharp, to contract with the cook, or one of the upper
servants, to supply their dinners at so much ahead; and, I shall scarcely be
credited, when I mention so small a sum as ninepence English, wine included;
nevertheless, this is a practice not only at Naples, but at Rome, and other
parts of Italy; and is a fact that may be depended on. There are, however, a
few exceptions amongst the nobility, to this retired manner of eating. There
are some, who, when they entertain, give the most splendid, expensive, and
elegant dinners that can be conceived. The prince of Franca Villa, when Mr.
Sharp was there, in 1765, kept a kind of open table every night, with twelve or
fourteen covers; where the English, of any consequence, were at all times
received with the greatest politeness. Though it be not the custom to dine or
sup with one another, except on extraordinary occasions, their visits being
merely conversations; some few exert themselves to give balls, and even some of
the merchants adopt this practice.

Now I am mentioning visits, it may be worth noticing a certain tiresome
etiquette, prevailing in this place, of waiting in the streets, on evening
visits, till two pages give in your name, and bring down flambeaux to light you
up stairs, perhaps almost to the top of the house, as the quality live
generally a great height from the ground. All this parsimony, in other
respects, enables them, I say, to figure away with equipages, and that they do,
more than in any other place in the world. Some of their princes have forty or
fifty coach-horses; more than twenty different carriages; thirty, forty, or
fifty domestic pages; besides four, five, or six running footmen, before their
chariots. A running footman seems almost an indispensible necessary of life
here; for a gentleman never rides post, on the road near Naples, nor takes an
airing, that is not preceded by one of these poor breathless fellows. They are
useful, indeed, in the streets; for, owing to the continual noise and bustle of
the people, many of them would be run over, if it was not for these men, to bid
them get out of the way.

The estates, possessed by the dukes and princes here, two or three excepted,
are not equal to those of our English nobility. The prince of Franca Villa's is
about thirteen thousand pounds a year; and no prince makes a greater appearance
at Naples than him. The emoluments of the great officers of state, and the
salaries of all the king's servants, are much smaller than in England. The
fees, also, of lawyers and physicians, are trifling, compared with ours; and
talents, of every kind, are but poorly recompensed; so that affluence is not
diffused, through every street, as in London; but is confined almost within the
narrow circle of the nobility. The lord-steward, lord chamberlain, and master
of the horse, have each eighteen hundred ducats a year, not three hundred and
fifty pounds sterling; and about L1. 6s. a day, for their table, when the king
is not at Naples. The master of the horse has likewise a coach and six, two
running footmen and two footmen, at the king's expense. The lords of the
bedchamber have but thirty ducats a month, which is about seventy pounds a
year; and thirteen shillings a day for their table, when the king is absent:
and there are no perquisites annexed to these offices. It is, therefore, not to
be wondered at, that so many of the nobles, with small estates, though they
have a place at court, are obliged to live retired, notwithstanding the low
prices of provisions and labor.

The royal palace forms a square, with a court in the middle; has a noble
staircase, which takes up one side. The front is grand, and well executed; the
architecture is bold and noble, done by Fontana, and originally intended as a
palace for the viceroys, when under the Spanish government. A theater is built
in this palace, very commodious for operas. All the apartments abound in fine
paintings, and beautiful tapestry. The cielings have gold grounds, with white
ornaments. There are red and white marble frames to the doors, with figures and
gilt plates on them. The gardens reach to the seaside, but are nothing
extraordinary. There is always here a splendid court, and the nobility exceed
those of the court of France, in their dresses and equipages. When a lady of
quality goes there, she is conducted in the following manner: she sets out
alone in a gilded coach, with glass windows behind as well as before. This is
preceded by another neat coach, in which sits a person, genteely dressed,
called her Braceira, who hands her in and out of her coach. Another coach
follows, wherein are four pages, or more, according to her rank; and a rich
sedan chair is carried empty, by two chairmen, near the side of her coach. When
they reach the palace, the braceira gets out, and hands the lady into her
sedan; the pages walking, two and two, on each side, richly dressed. In this
manner she is carried up stairs, where she quits her sedan, and the pages
support her train, which is some yards in length, till she comes to the
drawing room door, when it is buttoned up with loops. The braceira and pages
wait her return, in the antichamber, when she is re-conducted to her coach. It
is remarked that, though the Neapolitan ladies dress themselves to great
advantage, they are not so beautiful in appearance, as those at Florence and
Rome. The state coach of the king is said to have cost ten thousand pounds, and
is the most magnificent in Europe. It is very large, and richly gilt, even the
tire round the wheels. It is usually drawn by six noble black horses, whose
harness is extremely rich, and the reins of broad, solid gold-lace; the carved
work is the finest imaginable, and the painting so extraordinary, that nothing
can exceed it. Instead of iron or brass, these parts, as well as the ornaments,
are silver, and silver gilt.

There is not, says Moore, a city in all the world, with the same number of
inhabitants, in which so few seem to contribute to the wealth of the community,
by useful or productive labor, as Naples; but the number of priests, monks,
fiddlers, lawyers, nobility, footmen and lazaroni, surpass all reasonable
proportion. The king of Naples counts a hundred persons, among his subjects,
with the title of prince; a still greater number, with that of duke. Six or
seven of these, says Moore, have from ten to twelve, or thirteen hundred pounds
a year; a considerable number have fortunes about half that value, and the
annual revenue of many, is not above one or two thousand pounds. With respect
to the inferior orders of nobility, they are much poorer. Many counts and
marquisses, have not above three or four hundred pounds of paternal estate;
many still less, and some few enjoy a title without any estate whatever; and
yet many of them make a very splendid appearance. I dined once, says Moore,
with the duke of Hamilton, at prince Iacci's; we passed through twelve or
thirteen large rooms, before we arrived at the dining room. There were
thirty-six persons at table, and each guest had a footman behind his chair.
Other domestics, belonging to the prince, remained in the adjacent rooms, and
in the hall. We afterward passed through a number of other rooms, in our way
to one, where there was a commanding prospect.

When there is no opera, the Corso, or seashore, is the great scene of
Neapolitan parade. The finest carriages are painted, gilt, varnished, and
lined, in a richer and more beautiful manner, than are yet become fashionable
either in England or France. They are often drawn by six, sometimes by eight
horses; two running footmen, gaily dressed, precede the carriage; and three or
four handsome servants, in rich liveries, hang behind. The ladies and
gentlemen, within the coaches, glitter in all the brilliancy of lace,
embroidery, and jewels. The carriages, for gala days, are purposely made, with
very large windows, that those within may be seen. Nothing can be more showy
than the harness of the horses; their heads and manes are ornamented with the
rarest plumage, and their tails set off with ribbands, and artificial flowers,
in such a graceful manner, as leads us to think they were dressed by those who
dressed their ladies.

After all, you will imagine, perhaps, the amusement cannot be very great. The
carriages follow each other in two lines, moving in opposite directions. The
company within smile and bow, and wave the hand, as they pass and repass their
acquaintance; and, doubtless, imagine themselves the most important figures in
the procession. The horses, however, seem to be of a very different way of
thinking; and to consider themselves as the chief objects of admiration,
looking on the livery-servants, the volanti's, lords and ladies, as their
natural suite, on all such solemn occasions.

Under an appearance of giddiness, levity, and merriment, the commonalty and
citizens, says Grosley, amidst labor and pleasure, conceal deep and
well-conducted views, if not in every head, at least as a body; and as a body,
they form a democracy, independent of the king, and of the nobility, joining
with the latter, when their interest so requires. The lower clergy, and the
majority of monks, with whom Naples swarms, never fail siding with them.

The citizens of Naples, thus, form a society of their own, perfectly distinct
from the nobility; and, although they are not the most industrious people in
the world, yet, having some degree of occupation, and their time being divided
between business and pleasure, they, probably, have more enjoyment than those
who, without internal resources, or opportunities of active exertion, pass
their lives in sensual gratifications.

The great theater of St. Carlo, adjoining to the royal palace, is vast, noble,
and elegant; as in describing this, we shall describe every other Italian
theater, they being all built on the same plan, we will be the more particular.
The form is a truncated ellipse, astonishingly spacious, having six rows of
boxes all round the house, similar to the new opera-house in London; thirty in
each row, except the two lowest, out of which the king's box is taken, and this
is fronting the stage, and occupies four of them, and is on a level with the
second range, or row. Each of these boxes, like a room, is furnished with a
table, pier-glass, tapestry, carpet, canopy, branches, etc. is large enough to
hold twelve persons standing; but they are so narrow, that only three ladies
can sit in front; the three next behind them, to see, must stand up, so that
all those behind these can see little or nothing. The king's is a saloon, and
large enough to contain the royal family, and part of the court. The orchestra
will hold two hundred performers. The pit contains fifteen rows of seats,
thirty in a row, separated by broad rests for the elbow, like arms of a chair;
besides an interval all through the middle, and a circuit all round under the
boxes, which will hold one hundred and fifty persons standing. The seat of each
chair, in the pit, lifts up like the lid of a box, and has a lock to fasten it.
There are gentlemen sufficient in Naples to hire, by the year, the first four
rows next to the orchestra, who take the key of the seat home with them,
leaving it locked, by which means they are always sure of their place at any
hour; and, as the intervals, between the rows, are wide enough to permit
persons to pass, without disturbing others, they are exceedingly convenient.
The usual price for the season, in which they give four new operas, is twenty
ducats, about 3l. 15s. Those who do not hire seats by the year, pay three
carlines, about thirteen-pence-halfpenny, for their place in the pit.

The price of a box, for the whole year, is two hundred and forty ducats, or
near 47l. or a less price in proportion to the length of the season. The three
lower ranges are hired by ladies of distinct on, for a year; the other three
are let out by the night; but, they must hire the whole box; yet, if any single
stranger wishes admittance, they are, if properly recommended, invited into the
boxes of the nobility. The nobility will let their boxes, when they do not go
themselves; and often, on gala nights, or at the opening of a new opera, will
do the same; for which they will get an exorbitant price, sometimes fifteen
ducats, or more. It is common not only to receive company in these boxes, but
to take ice and other refreshments, to sup and play at cards; for the size of
the theater, and the noise of the audience are such, that the performers and
band are but indistinctly heard, except when a favorite air is singing; but,
indeed, the opera is considered more as a place of rendezvous, than otherwise;
and this imperfection is not much attended to. The season generally lasts from
the fifth of November, to the beginning of September.

The decorations of the theater, instead of being like scenes, represent some
public place, the inside of a temple, or palace; the whole on three large
pieces; two along the sides, and one in front, in which painters display all
the magic of perspective. It is the custom in Italy, to light the stage only,
which renders the house dark and gloomy; but, on gala nights, or when the king
is present, it is superbly illuminated. The large glass in the front of each
box, against which two wax lights, as large as torches, are placed, and other
lights in the boxes, and on the stage, properly disposed, make the house
brilliant; but the glare and the smoke is, on the other hand, offensive.

Dark as the boxes are, they would be much more so, if those who sit in them,
did not, at their own expense, put up a couple of candles. The ladies, in the
boxes and pit of the opera-house in London, make a more brilliant appearance,
than in the boxes at Naples; where, on common nights, it is not possible to
distinguish a feature across the house. The gentlemen in the pit do not, in the
whole, make a good figure; for, though there are many officers well dressed, and
other gentlemen, yet the major part of the company are shabby; consisting of
persons who pay nothing, such as the upper servants of ladies who hire boxes;
upper servants of ambassadors; and, somesometimes, for a small fee to the
door-keepers, such servants gain admission for friends. The house and the stage
is so large, that, in windy weather, you would imagine yourself in the street,
(the wind blowing so hard in the pit and boxes) and it often occasions colds.

The performers are not paid so liberally at Naples, as at London; but,
considering the difference in the price of things, the pay of the capital
singers does not fall much short of it. Gabrielli had eighteen hundred sequins,
or nine hundred pounds sterling. The first man has three thousand five hundred
ducats; the first dancer two thousand; the first woman dancer fifteen hundred,
each ducat about three shillings and tenpence sterling.

The Impressario, or manager, is bound to very hard terms, so that his profits
are inconsiderable. The theater being part of the palace, the king reserves for
himself, and officers, fifteen boxes, without paying any thing; and the junto,
deputed by his majesty, to supervise the opera, reserve to themselves a right
of nominating singers and dancers, which obliges the managers, sometimes, to
pay them an exorbitant price; and, to add to the misfortune, the nobility here,
as in England, are slow of pay, and a manager must not compel them. The
women-dancers, by an order from court, are obliged to wear black drawers.

The exhibition is variegated by marches, battles, triumphs, all in the most
grand execution. Battles are fought between numerous fencing-masters, in rich
uniforms, and who appear all really fighting; the clashing of their weapons
keeping time with the orchestra. These battles are not without their cavalry
and mounted on horses from the king's stables, or those of the first nobility.
In triumphs, the car is drawn by the king's finest-horses, caparisoned by the
manager. The intervals between the acts, are filled up with ballets to French
music.

Composers labor to rival each other in the music of the operas; and thus,
frequently, the same piece is set several times to music. In Metastatio's
Demophoon, set by the celebrated Sassone; the arietta Misero Pargoletto, in
which Timante speaks to his son, whom he holds in his arms, the expression is
of that nature, as to draw tears from the whole audience. Clapping, in Italy,
is a signal for an encore; of course, they never clap, unless they wish to have
the singing repeated; and this is sometimes done to a fifth or sixth time; and,
in these repetitions it is, that the singer exerts every resource of nature and
art, to surpass himself in each repetition, by the variety of gradations, which
he introduces into the trills, modulations, and whatever belongs to the
expression. Slight and quick as some of these gradations may be, not one of
them escapes an Italian ear; they perceive them, they feel them, they relish
them with a delight, in Italy, called, "The foretaste of the joys of Paradise;"
where, we hope, there will be others equivalent for those nations, equally
good; but, whose organs are less sensible to the powers of harmony.

There are two other theaters, in which comic operas are performed, without
dances; and there is a neat little playhouse, in which they act comedies. All
the theaters are open on Saturday and Sunday evenings, and each of them once in
the week, besides.

The playhouse, says Sharp, is hardly better than a cellar, and is usually
called Cantina, (cellar) being ten steps down from the street into the pit,
which holds seventy or eighty people, when crowded; the price a carline,
four-pence halfpenny. There is a gallery round the pit, turned into ten or
twelve boxes, each holding four; the price eight carlines for the box. At such
a price, it is natural to suppose, that the scenes, dresses, actors, and
decorations, must be indifferent. It will not, however, be so easy to imagine
the shabbiness of the audience, which chiefly consists of men, in dirty caps
and waistcoats, in the pit; for the boxes are generally empty. All the Italian
gentlemen and ladies spit, and indelicately; not in their handkerchiefs, or in
a bye corner; but, in the cantina, they spit all about them, on the walls, on
your clothes; and their nastiness is offensive to the last degree: the
exhibition is little better than buffoonery, just as we see practiced in
England by Merry Andrews, on the stages of mountebanks, and on the outside of
booths, at Bartholomew-fair.

In the most respectable class of citizens are comprehended the lawyers; of
whom there are incredible numbers in this town. The most eminent of this
profession hold, indeed, a kind of intermediate rank, between the nobility and
citizens; the rest are on a level with the physicians, the principal merchants,
and the artists; none of whom, with all their industry, can make great fortunes.

But these citizens having fewer avocations, and no public walks, or gardens,
where they resort, are more frequently seen sauntering and conversing in the
streets. In London and Paris, the people who fill the streets are mere
passengers, hurrying from place to place, on business. They make no stop.
Whilst you sit in your chamber, in either of these cities, the usual noise you
hear from the streets is, that of the carriages; but at Naples, where they talk
with uncommon vivacity, and where whole streets, full of talkers, are in
continual employment; the noise of carriages is completely drowned, in the
aggregated clack of human voices. In the midst of all this idleness fewer
riots, or outrages of any kind happen, than might be expected in any town,
where the police is far from being strict; and where such multitudes of poor
unemployed people meet together, every day; a proof, that the national
character of the Italians is quietness, submission, and good order; and partly
to the common people, being universally sober.

Mr. Addison says, that when a Neapolitan does not know what to do with
himself, he tumbles over his papers, in order to start a lawsuit; for bow,
otherwise, would the many thousands of lawyers be supported in this capital?
The first time Mr. Sharp went to their vicaria, that is, their
Westminster Hall, he was mortified in having set out so late from home, finding
the street crowded with advocates, in their way to dinner; but, notwithstanding
the difficulty he had of threading the multitude, who were pouring out in such
numbers, he found, when he had pushed into the hall, almost as much pressing,
as is usually met with the first night of a new play at the London theaters.

Northall informs us, that the inhabitants of Naples are divided into Titolati
Mobili de Seggio, Nobilita fuori de Seggi, Civilta, and Plebe. To the first
order belong the princes and nobility; to the second, all the natives of the
country, with all strangers settled at Naples, and living in a noble manner; in
the third, are ranked doctors in all sciences, lawyers, notaries, officers of
the courts of judicature, physicians, bankers, jewellers, goldsmiths,
silk-merchants, and booksellers; the fourth class, comprehends all the rest of
the inhabitants.

Naples, with respect to its municipal police, is divided into six seggis, or
wards, five of which are governed by a committee of nobles; the other belongs
to the plebeians, and is distributed into twenty-nine quarters, under the
direction of an Eletto, or mayor. These wards meet in open porticos, which
alternately have the honor of being the theater where, in the month of May,
the blood of St. Januarius is liquified, as will be spoken of hereafter.

The city having, as has been observed, neither watchman nor lamps, one father
Rocco, a Dominican, has persuaded the people to subscribe oil for lamps, to
burn before images; he fixes these up in the most convenient places, and thus
turns their devotion to public account.

Provisions, I have observed, are plentiful and cheap; poultry, game, and fish,
are abundant; fruit and vegetables are to be had all the winter. The wants of
nature are so easily satisfied, says Marlyn, that the lower class of people
work but little; their great pleasure is to bask in the sun, and do nothing.
The lazaroni wallow about like swine. Persons of a middle rank pass much of
their time in coffee-houses; few pursue their callings, with any degree of zeal
or activity.

Architecture is by no means in a good taste at Naples. Of three hundred
churches and upwards, there is not one, says Martyn, with a front or portico,
which has any merit; many of them present nothing but a bare wall. They
endeavor to make amends by abundance of interior decorations. There is a
profusion of gilding and painting in them, but their painters have been
corrupted by the national taste for brilliancy and extravagance.

However, to rescue this fine city from the accusation of a bad taste in its
public ornaments, the king has caused the Farnesian bull to be transported from
Rome, in order to have it placed on the great fountain, in the walk of the
royal villa. This immense group consists of six figures, larger than life, and
many smaller ones, together with the rock in which they are represented; all
said to be hewn out of one block of marble. It was originally brought from
Rhodes to Rome, and placed on Caracalla's baths. It represents Amphion and
Zetus, who, by order of Antione their mother, are binding Dirce to the horns of
a wild bull.

I Stadii Publici are the buildings of the university, made from designs of
Fontana. The front is adorned with antique statues, found at Crema. Professors
read lectures here on all the sciences.

There are, in this city, three conservatories, for the education of boys in
the profession of music. These furnish a band for the church of the
Franciscans, morning and evening, during eight days in October.

The monasteries of this city are exceedingly rich. There are not less than one
hundred and seventy-eight of them including those hospitals that are under the
directions of the monks; and, as the monks are the hereditary counsel of the
populace, it is evident they do not want for counselors. The monks, who
converse with the nobility and the citizens, are very studious and artful, in
scenting inheritances; and leave no stone unturned, to procure for their
houses, either presents, or partial legacies, when they cannot grasp the whole
To the success of these practices, are owing those amazing riches, which are
displayed in the decoration of their churches, in the brilliant and very costly
spectacles frequently given there, and in the enormous quantity of plate, with
which their societies are crowded. The churches of Naples are, perhaps, as rich
in this kind, as all the churches of Italy put together.

But, though they covet riches, they are, nevertheless, charitable; there being
no poor-rates in Roman Catholic countries, as in England, the poor depend upon
the benevolence of the people; and there are numbers of families every where,
that distribute their donations to the necessitous, at certain appointed times,
some, once a week; some, oftener. The convents generally feed the poor on
certain days, who flock to the convents for what they have to dispose MONKS
feeding the POOR.
of. At these times, the friars not only give their waste meat, but dress
provisions purposely to give away, and thus gladden the hearts of many.

Every monastery has a good laboratory, which brings in considerably. Most of
the monks practice physic. Every laboratory is celebrated for some peculiar
medicine, or conserve, which is not made any where else, and for these it has a
sure demand.

I will close this account of Naples, with a declaration of Mr. Sherlock.
Though it has many disagreeable circumstances attending it, so that a man who
could live out of it, would not like to be an inhabitant of the place; yet,
there are a variety of things that will attract a traveller, to view it,
perhaps, in preference to most other cities of Europe; but, chiefly, an account
of the delightful scenes around it. It is not surprising, says Sherlock, that
Virgil should make such fine verses at Naples; the air is so soft and so pure,
the sun so brilliant and so warm, and the face of nature so rich and
diversified; that the imagination feels a vivacity and vigor, which it scarce
ever perceives in other countries.

I am not a poet, but I am one fond of verses, and I have never read them, adds
he, with more pleasure than here. Every time I went to my window, I felt myself
electrified; my spirits revived; my imagination grew warm; and my soul became
susceptible of the softest and sublimest impressions; and, no wonder, when the
objects that present themselves to my view are recited.

On the right, the hill of Pausilippo, whose form is semicircular, and adorned
to its summit with trees and pleasure houses; from its point, which loses
itself in the sea, this mountain increases insensibly, till it arrives behind
the center of Naples; and, on its summit is seen a vast tower, overlooking the
city and crowning the scene. On the left, a chain of vast high mountains,
surrounding the opposite side of the gulf, or bay of Naples; and whose rugged
boldness, forms a most happy contrast with the elegant and cultivated beauties
of Pausilippo. Shakespere and Corneille, would have looked to the left. Racine
and Pope, to the right.

Of those mountains on the left, Vesuvius is the most interesting by its form,
which is a very beautiful cone; by its height, and above all, by its vicinity
to the city. It smokes incessantly, and seems to threaten Naples with the fall
of Sodom and Gomorrah; an awful scene, it is true; yet sublime and grand to the
extreme. At its foot is Portici; and all along the coast BAY of NAPLES.
are towns hanging from the mountains, which form the portion of a circle of
ninety miles.

The sea under my windows; and, besides the ideas which that sea presents, as
the most interesting object in nature next the sun, by its grandeur, its
beauty, and its variety of appearances, it here shows all the riches of
commerce, by large ships passing and repassing every moment. Often did I rise
before day, to enjoy the breezes of the morn, and the setting of the sun. In no
horizon does he appear with more splendour; no where does he so well deserve the
epithet of Golden. He rises behind Vesuvius, to illumine the pleasant hill of
Pausilippo, and the bosom of the most beautiful bay in the universe; smooth as
a mirror, and all in motion by the vessels. The object, that terminates the
perspective, is the island of Caprea, famous for the retreat of Tiberius, and
the rocks of the Sirens; on viewing it we call to mind, that near these rocks
the prudent Ulysses stopped his ears; and that, not far from hence, the less
wise Hannibal gave himself up to the pleasures of harmony, and the caresses of
the seducing Camilla.

CHAP. IV. Of the People, Character, etc.
THE people, both of city and country, are vigorous, robust, raw-boned, full of
fire and sprightliness; active, indefatigably laborious, and, in a word, cut
out for war; they are not any thing like the Italians of Upper Italy. They
pride themselves in being descended from the Greeks, and resembling them. They
are broad and full-chested, with a short thick neck; fleshy, with a fine
complexion, and a very brisk eye. They go with the neck and shoulders, breast
and arms, almost naked. I do not include in this picture, the substantial
citizens, nor the lawyers, nor the nobility. These classes, who are no less
prudent from system, than the people from instinct, devote themselves to
idleness, as they did in Ovid's time; and sacrifice to pleasure all the
advantages of a happy constitution, and a fiery temperament. They are the most
voluptuous of men; but yet, Naples, though without so much as the shadow of
police, knows very NEAPOLITANS.
little of those disorders, which all the magistrates' vigilance at Paris and
London, can scarcely prevent. This, as I have observed, must arise chiefly from
their sobriety, and passive disposition.

The women and children do not look so healthy here, as in other parts of
Italy. A great number of women are observed, to have wens in their throats, as
bad as in some other countries; owing to their drinking, in summer, so great a
quantity of snow-water.

The common dress of the ordinary women, which ladies likewise adopt, if they
venture abroad on foot, and wish not to be known, are two black, silk
petticoats, which serve entirely to conceal their whole figures; as, when both
are tied round the waist, one is suddenly turned up; and, as they pull it quick
over their heads, a loose trimming of narrow, black gauze, drops over the face;
whilst a hook and eye fastens all close under the chin, and gives them an air
not unlike our country wenches, who throw the gown tail over their heads, to
protect them from a summer shower. The holliday dresses of the peasants, round
Naples, are very rich and cumbersome. We often see, says Mrs. Piozzi, a great,
coarse, raw-bone fellow, panting for heat under a thick blue velvet coat,
comical enough; the females in a scarlet cloth petticoat, with a broad
gold-lace at the bottom; a jacket open before, but charged with heavy
ornaments, and the head* not unbecomingly, dressed with an embroidered
hankerchief from Turkey.

Swinburne says, the young countrywomen are, in general, far from handsome,
though they have fine eyes and handsome features; their hands and feet are
clumsy, their shapes neglected, their necks not firm, and their skins
discolored, by living so much in the sun, without bonnets. Amongst them, we
may find almost every mode of hair-dressing, seen in the Greek and Roman coins.
The coiffeure of the younger Faustina, with the coil of plaited hair upon the
crown of the head, occurs, frequently, in the old town; that with the coil
lower down, which may be properly styled Lucilla's head-dress, is common among
the younger part of the sex, in the suburbs of Chiaia, and Plotinas, among the
women more advanced in years. Very little suffices to cloth the lazaroni,
except on holidays; and then he is, indeed, tawdrily decked out with a laced
jacket, and flame-coloured stockings; his buckles are of an enormous magnitude;
and seem to be the prototype of those with which our present men of mode load
their insteps. The women are also very splendid on such days of show; but their
hair is then bound up in tissue caps, and scarlet nets. Citizens and lawyers
are plain enough in their apparel; but, the female part of their family vies
with the first court ladies, in expensive dress, and all the vanities of modish
fopperies. Luxury has, of late, advanced with gigantic strides at Naples.
Forty years ago, the Neapolitan ladies wore nets and ribbands on their heads,
as the Spanish women do at this day, and not twenty of them were possessed of a
cap: but hair, plainly dressed, is a mode now confined to the lowest order of
people; and all the distinction of dress, between the wife of a nobleman, and
that of a citizen, is entirely laid aside. Expense and extravagance are here in
the extreme; the great families, adds Swinburne, are oppressed with a load of
debt; the working part of the community always spend the price of their labor
before they receive it; and the citizen is reduced to great parsimony, almost
to penury, in housekeeping; in order to answer these demands of external show.
Short commons, at home; whet his appetite, when invited out to dinner; and it
is scarce credible what a quantity of victuals he will devour. The nobility, in
general, are well served, and live comfortably, but it is not their custom to
invite strangers; the number of poor dependents that dine with them, and cannot
properly be introduced into company, prevents the great families from inviting
foreigners: another reason may be, their sleeping after dinner in so regular a
manner, as to undress and go to bed. No ladies, or gentlemen, finish their
toilets till the afternoon; on which account they dine at twelve or one
o'clock. The great officers of state, and ministers, live in a different style,
and keep sumptuous tables; to which strangers and others have frequent
invitations.

The establishment of a Neapolitan grandee's household, is on a very expensive
plan. The number of servants, and equipages, would suffice for a sovereign
prince; and the wardrobe of their wives is on the same magnificent scale; yet
no lady, of whatever rank or fortune, has more than one hundred ducats a month,
for pin-money. At the birth of every child, the husband makes his wife a
present of one hundred ounces of silver, and some valuable trinkets, according
to his fortune.

The king takes very little state upon him; he lives among his subjects, with
the old Roman idea, of a window in his heart; he rides and rows, and hunts the
wild boar, says Mrs. Piozzi, and catches fish in the bay; and sells it too, at
market, as dear as he can; but gives away the money directly, so that he is
very much beloved. The people know the worst of him, that is, he shoots at the
birds, dances with the girls, eats macaroni, and rows against the watermen in
the bay. One of them, when this lady was there, by his uncourtly effort, she
adds, to out-row the king, strained himself, and bled much at the nose; this
accident made the king conqueror, and he won the trifling wager that was laid
between them; laughed, and leaped on shore, amid the acclamations of the
populace, who huzza'd him home to his palace; from whence he sent double the
sum he won to the waterman's wife, with other tokens of kindness. For, whilst
he resolves to be happy himself, he is equally determined to make no man
wretched. When the Emperor and the Grand Duke, his brothers in law, talked to
him of their new projects, for reformation in the church, he told them, that he
saw but little advantage they brought into their states, by these new fangled
notions; that when he was at Milan and Florence, the deuce a Neapolitan could
be found in either, whilst his capital was crowded with refugees from them;
that, in short, they might do their way, but he would do his; that he had not
now an enemy in the world, public or private; and that he would not make
himself any, for the sake of propagating doctrines he did not understand, and
could not take the trouble to study; that he should say his prayers as he used
to do, and had no doubt of their being heard, whilst he only begged blessings
on his beloved people; so, if these wise brothers-in-law would see him enjoy
life, instead of shortening it, by unnecessary cares, they might come and see
him the next morning, play a match at tennis.

The truth is, the jolly Neapolitans lead a coarse life, but an unoppressed
one. Marks of abundance are seen in all parts of the town. There is no settled
market in any place; but every third shop, almost, is full of what the French
call so properly, ammunition de bouche; whilst whole boars, kids, and small
calves, dangle from a sort of neat scaffolding, all with their skins on, and
make a pretty appearance. Poulterers hang up their birds in the feathers too;
not lay them on boards plucked, as they do at Venice and London. The principal
streets, says Swinburne, are lined with sellers of macaroni, fried and boiled
fish, puddings, cakes, and vegetables of all sorts; where, for a very small
sum, which the lazaroni earn, by running of an errand, or picking of pockets,
he may find a ready meal, at all hours. The flaggon, hanging out at every
convent, invites him to quench his thirst with wine; or if he prefers water, as
most of the poor do, there are stalls in all the thoroughfares, where lemonade
and iced water is sold. The passion for iced water is so great, and so general
at Naples, that none but mere beggars will drink it in its natural state; and a
scarcity of bread would not be more severely felt, than a scarcity of snow. It
is brought in boats every morning, from the mountains behind Castelamare, and
is farmed out at a great rent by the Jesuits.

In the Christmas season, the Italians are peculiarly ingenious in decorating
their shops, and setting out their wares. Every grocer, fruiterer, etc. mingles
orange, lemon, and myrtle leaves among the goods exposed at his door, as we do
ever-greens in our churches; but with infinitely more taste. Some odd pretty
moveable coffee-houses too, or lemonade-shops, set on wheels, adorned with
gilding, painting, etc. and covered with ices, orgeats, and other refreshments;
as it were in emulation, each of the other, and in a strange variety of shapes
and forms, help toward the finery of Naples. I have counted thirty, adds Mrs.
Piozzi, of these galante shops, on each side of the street; which, with their
necessary illuminations, make a brilliant figure by candlelight, till twelve
at night; when all the show ceases, and every one puts out his candle and goes
to bed. Till that hour, however, few things can exceed the merriment of Naples;
while volantes, or running-footmen, dressed like tumblers before a show,
precede all carriages of distinction, and endeavor to keep the people from
being run over; yet, whilst they are listening to some street orator, as shall
be presently described, they often get crushed and killed: yet as Pope says,

See some strange comfort every state attend.

The lazaroni, who has his child run over by a man of quality, has a regular
claim on him for no less than twelve carlines, about five shillings English. If
it is his wife, he gets two ducats, live or die; and for the master of the
family, not a housekeeper, (for house he has none) three ducats is the settled
compensation, for they do not stand here for trifles. The truth is, human life
is lower rated in all parts of Italy than with us. They think nothing of an
individual, but see him perish, (except by the hand of justice) as a cat, or a
dog. A young man, says this same author, sell from our carriage one evening, at
Milan, a friend whom our coachman had picked up. There was a crowd in the
street, and an embarras, and the fellow tumbled from behind, and died on the
spot. No one even spoke upon the occasion, or I believe thought about the
matter, except one woman; who supposed he had neglected to cross himself when
he got up behind.

In Naples, says Dr. Moore, they are accustomed to street orators; these are
men who, spouter-like, will repeat stanzas from Ariosto, or any other poet, in
a pompous, recitative cadence, peculiar to the natives of Italy, and who hold
the book in their hands, in case their memory should fail them. They
occasionally comment on the passages they recite, in prose; in order to bring
the poet's expression nearer to the capacities of their hearers. The Doctor
tells us, he listened to one some time, and that his auditory increased every
moment; men, women, and children, bringing seats from the neighboring houses,
to sit down round him. His cloak hung loose from one shoulder, his right-arm
being disengaged for the purposes of oratory. Sometimes he winds it with a
slow, smooth motion, according with the cadence of the verses; sometimes he
pressed it to his heart, to give energy to the pathos of the poet. Now he
gathered the hanging folds of the right side of his cloak, and held them
gracefully up, in imitation of a Roman senator; and anon he swung them across
his left shoulder, like a citizen of Naples; he humoured the stanza by his
voice, which he could modulate to the key of any passion; from the boisterous
bursts of rage, to the tender notes of pity and of love. But, when he came to
describe the exploits of Orlando, from Ariosto, he trusted neither to the power
of his own voice, nor the poet's genius; but, throwing off his cloak, and
grasping his cane, he assumed the warlike attitude, and stern countenance of
that hero; representing, by the most animated actions, how he drove his spear
through the bodies of six of her enemies at once; the point, at the same time,
killing a seventh, who would also have remained transfixed with his companions,
if the spear could have held more than six men of an ordinary size upon it, at
a time.

The knight of Aglant now has couched his spear,
Where closely pressed the men and arms appear;
First one, and then another, helpless dies;
Through six at once, the lance impetuous flies,
And on the seventh inflicts so deep a wound,
That prone, he tumbles lifeless to the ground.
HOOLE. His audience illiterate, as we may suppose them, seemed to feel the
pathetic and sublime, as well as the ludicrous parts of the ancient bard.

At Rome, these street-orators entertain their audience with entertaining
passages from history; that whilst it amuses the populace, and keeps them from
less innocent and more expensive pastimes, it gives them some general idea of
history. Street-orators, therefore, are a more useful set of men, than another
class, of which there are numbers at Rome, who entertain companies with
extemporaneous verses, on any given subject, and who are called Improuvisatori.

Little concerts, of vocal and instrumental music, are heard every evening in
some particular street; and on the beach of the bay; and young men and women
are seen dancing to the music of ambulatory performers.

To the mere spectator, the amusements of the common people afford more delight
than those of the great, because they seem to be more enjoyed by the former,
than the latter. After insipid characters in high life, whose internal vacancy
leads them to seek amusement in public places, and whose insensibility prevents
them from finding it, have, probably, brought this appearance of a want of all
enjoyment into fashion; those who wish to be thought of what is called the Ton,
imitate the mawkists insipidity of their superiors in rank, and imagine it
distinguishes them from the vulgar, to suppress all the natural expressions of
pity, joy, or admiration; and to seem, upon all occasions, in a state of
complete apathy. These amiable creatures frequent public places, that it may be
said of them, "They are not as other men are." You will see them occasionally
at the play houses, placed in the boxes, as so many frights with unchanging
features; and whilst the rest of the audience yield to the emotions excited by
the poets and the actors, these men of the Ton, preserve the most distressed
serenity of countenance; and, except pronouncing, from time to time, Pshaw! and
Stuff! -- one would think them the express representation of the Pagan gods,
who have eyes, but do not see; and ears, but do not hear.

Not so a Naples auditory; no busts that gather round the street orators here.
I saw very lately, says Moore, a large cluster of men, women, and children,
entertained to the highest degree; and, to all appearance, made exceedingly
happy, by a poor fellow with a mask on his face, and a guitar in his hands. He
assembled the crowd by the songs that he sung, accompanied by his instrument;
and by a thousand merry stories he told them with infinite drollery. This
assembly was in an open place, facing the bay, and near the palace. The old
women sat listening, with their distaffs, spinning a coarse flax, and wetting
the thread with their spittle; their grandchildren sprawling at their feet,
and amused with the twirling of the spindle. The men and their wives, the
youths and their mistresses, sat in a circle, with their eyes fixed on the
musician, who kept them laughing for a great part of the evening, with his
stories, which he introduced occasionally, with tunes on the guitar. At last,
when the company was most numerous, and at the highest pitch of good humor, he
suddenly pulled off his mask, laid down his guitar, opened a little box that
stood before him, and addressed his audience in the following words: "Ladies
and Gentlemen, there is a time for all things; we have had jesting enough;
innocent mirth is excellent for the health of the body, but other things are
requisite for the health of the soul. I will now, with your permission, my
honorable masters and mistresses, entertain you with something serious, and of
infinitely greater importance; something, for which all of you will have reason
to bless me, as long as you live." Here he shook out of a bag, a great number
of little wooden crucifixes. "I am just come from the holy house of Loretto, my
fellow Christians," continued he, "on purpose to furnish you with these jewels,
more precious than all the gold of Peru, and all the pearls of the ocean. Now,
my beloved brethren and sisters, you are afraid that I shall demand a price for
these sacred crosses, far above your abilities, and something correspondent
with their value; by way of indemnification, for the fatigue and expense of the
long journey I have made on your account, all the way from the habitation of
the blessed Virgin, to this thrice renowned city of Naples; the riches and
liberality of whose inhabitants are celebrated all over the globe. No, my
generous Neapolitans, I do not wish to take the advantage of your pious and
liberal dispositions; I will not ask for these invaluable crucifixes (all of
which, let me inform you, have touched the foot of the holy image of the
blessed Virgin, which was formed by the hands of St. Luke; and, moreover, each
of them has been taken in the Santissimo Scodella, the sacred porringer, in
which the Virgin made the pap for for the infant Jesus) I will not, I say, ask
an ounce of gold, no, not even a crown of silver; my regard for you is such,
that I shall let you have them for a penny a piece."

This morsel of eloquence, no doubt, was a great pennyworth; and, when we
recollect the sums that some men are paid for their oratory in England, though
they never can produce so pathetic a specimen; we must naturally conclude, that
eloquence is a much rarer commodity in England, than in Italy.

Writers seem to attribute to the Neapolitans, a barbarity of disposition.
Sherlock says, they are good people, but have adopted by instinct, the citizen
of Geneva; and they cultivate neither the arts nor the sciences, through fear
of corrupting their morals. If the nation is barbarous, it is far from being
harsh, or severe; on the contrary, it is very good-natured, and desirous of
contributing to the pleasure of foreigners. They are naturally good, but are
absolutely in the state in which nature produced them; and they perpetrate all
crimes, and are guilty of all sorts of rudeness, without being conscious of
doing wrong. Having had no education, they have no principle. A man of the
first quality will tread on your toes, and not make you the least apology;
acquainted with you the next day, he cannot do enough to oblige you; he will
carry you to a concert, offer you his box at the theater; he will do all he
knows; but all he knows is little. It is the same with the women, they have all
an inclination to be amiable, but they know not how.

The race of Sirens are not yet extinct here; there are many young women who
sing divinely; of Circes there are scarce any; but we see, in the assemblies,
several of the companions of Ulysses. The easiness of the women, and the
Scirocco enervate the bodies of the men, and music enervates their souls; so as
to render useless all the beauties which nature has lavished on this charming
country. In no other place will be found more natural talents, or more
circumstances favorable to the arts; but the causes abovementioned, added to
the indolence inspired by the climate, and the absolute want of Maecenases to
patronise them, render Naples, as savage as Russia; and, as a proof of this
assertion, all the Russians, that visit the place, are struck with the
resemblance between the Neapolitans and their countrymen.

After giving my readers the opinion of Mr. Sherlock, who seems to write with a
tenderness for human nature. It may not be amiss to observe what Keysler says
upon this subject. According to some, says he, there is a greater evil still
remains, than either the scorpion or tarantula. The worst creatures, say these
people, in this delicious country, are the inhabitants themselves; who,
besides, their execrable and unnatural lusts, are of a vindictive, treacherous,
and bloody disposition.

Though national charges generally imply ignorance, narrowness of soul, and
uncharitableness; it is certain, that the history of Naples, almost beyond any
other, abounds in sad instances of excessive depravity of human nature.
Tophana, the noted female poisoner, who first invented the Aqua Tophania, was
living in prison, when Keysler was there; and few foreigners left Naples,
without seeing this infernal hag. She was a little old woman, who had entered
into a kind of religious sisterhood; and, on this account, if not on a worse,
her life was spared. She is said to have poisoned some hundreds of people, and
was remarkably liberal of her drops, which she gave by way of alms, to wives,
who, from several intimations, she knew would not be inconsoleable for the loss
of their husbands. Five or six drops of this liquid, would dispatch the person
who took them; and they could be lowered, or tempered, so as to take effect in
any determinate time. This water, says Keysler, still continues to be privately
made at Naples, under the appellation of Acquetta di Napoli; and not many years
since, a small cask of it was, according to orders, sent to a certain country;
but since, lemon-juice has been found an antidote against it; this vile
composition has fallen into some disrepute.

It must be in consequence of the precariousness of punishment, says Sharp,
that this city furnishes many more delinquents, in proportion to its size, than
our wicked London. There are in the prisons, at Naples, generally between two
and three thousand; some say more; besides about two thousand in the galleys,
lying in the harbor. Even murderers, sometimes, escape unpunished. It is
scarce credible, but a magistrate of this city declared to a gentleman, who was
asking some questions on the subject, that, the preceding week, the populace
had been very orderly, for that only four murders had been committed. This,
adds Sharp, I had from a noble Neapolitan, who attested it as a fact; perhaps
it might be exaggerated; but they certainly do not hold murder in so horrid a
light here, as in colder climates. A young gentleman informed me, that on the
road to this place, from Rome, he saw at a distance a scuffle among some
postillions, in which, as it turned out afterward, one of them was stabbed
dead. On enquiry into the matter, he was cooly answered, that it was only a
colpo di coltello, (a stab with a knife.)

The indifference with which the crime of murder is regarded, among the lower
classes of the Italians, is further illustrated by the following anecdote. A
gentleman of Naples, in passing occasionally before the king's palace, had
frequently noticed a man of singular appearance at work. He was chained to some
others, and assisted in removing rubbish, and bringing stones for a new
building, the foundation of which had just been laid. The man, by having often
seen him pass, recollected his person, and always took off his hat, as he found
an opportunity. The gentleman, not knowing how to account for his attention,
was induced, one day, to inquire the cause of his civility and of his chains.
To the first part of the query he answered, in the Neapolitan style, that it
was " il suo devere, his duty;" and to the second he said, that he was in that
predicament for una minchionerioe, a trifle." "Ho ammazzata solamente una
donna," said he, "I have only killed a woman."

The inhabitants of this country, says Keysler, have, in all ages been
remarkable for a voluptuous manner of living. The luxury of Capua and Atella is
well known, and Naples is by Ovid styled,

-- in otia natam
Parthenopen --
"Naples of luxury the native seat." It must be owned that in no great city, in
Europe, are the prostitutes so numerous and abandoned. These Done libere, as
they are called, amount to eighteen thousand in this one city; and one
particular part of it is a receptacle for two thousand; and yet it is no
uncommon thing for ecclesiastics to lodge in these infamous parts of the town.
This totally corrupts all the youth; and the clergy, being exempt from the
civil jurisdiction, and connived at by their superiors, that the sacred order
may not be disgraced by punishments, set the worst of examples.

They tell us, says Moore, that the very air of Italy contributes to its
profligacy. Propertius entreats his Cynthia not to remain too long on shore,
which he seems to think dangerous to the chastest maiden.

Tu modo quam primum corruptas desere Baias,
Littora quoe fuerant castis inimica puellis. That is, "I entreat you to
forsake as soon as possible, the corrupt coast of Baia; a coast most unfriendly
to modest maidens."

Martial asserts, that a woman, who came here as chaste as Penelope, if she
remained any time, would depart as licentious and depraved as Helen. I have
certainly met with ladies, after they have resided some time at Naples, who, in
point of character and constitution, were thought to have much stronger
resemblance to Helen than Penelope; but, as I have no faith, adds Moore, in the
sudden operations of physical causes, in matters of this kind; I never doubted
of these ladies having carried the same disposition to Naples, as they brought
from it. Though there are not wanting those who affirm, that the influence of
this seducing climate, is evident now, in as strong a degree, as it is
described to have been anciently; that it pervades people of all ranks and
conditions, and that in the convents themselves:

Even there where frozen chastity retires,
Love finds an altar for forbidden fires.
For my own part, continues this author, I must acknowledge, that I saw nothing
whilst I was there, to justify the general imputation abovementioned. There
are persons who contend, that the Neapolitans are of a colder constitution* and
more philosophic in the command of their passions, than any people in Europe.
Do not the lower class of men, say they, strip themselves before the houses,
which front the bay, and bathe in the sea, without the least ceremony? Are not
numbers of these athletic figures, during the heat of the day, seen walking and
sporting on the shore perfectly naked, and with no more idea of shame, than
Adam, felt in his state of innocence; whilst the ladies from their coaches, and
the servant maids and young girls, who pass along, contemplate this singular
spectacle, with as little apparent emotion, as the ladies in Hyde-park, behold
a review of the horse-guards?

Grosley says, princes are as common at Naples, as marquisses at Paris. The
luxury of the nobility lies chiefly in their equipages. Their mules, or horses,
are the finest that can be got; the length of the traces is one chief mark of
grandeur and distinction; and their lacqueys are very handsome well-made
fellows, in rich liveries, trailing swords of an enormous length; whereas the
master's sword, which is more like a poniard, is carried by the first lackey at
a button-hole.

The peasants in this country, according to Keysler, are so flothful, as to
prefer begging, or robbing, to labor and industry; but, in the city of Naples,
there is something of an industrious spirit, and several flourishing
manufactures are there carried on. It is a phrase here, that a king, to keep
the people quiet, must provide three F's; namely, Feste, Farine, and Forche;
that is, "Festivity, Flour, and Gibbets," the people being excessively fond of
public diversions; clamorous on the dearth of corn; and seditious, unless kept
in awe by severity.

The fishermen of St. Lucia, says Swinburne, are the handsomest men in Naples.
They have the true old Grecian features, and such well-proportioned limbs, as
might serve for models in any academy of design. Indeed, the whole race of men
in this city, according to Sharp, are more robust and athletic, than the run of
mankind in London, and carry larger burdens.

Wives are in such subordination to their husbands, that, though the lower
class, particularly fishermen's wives, is always fighting and scolding, they
never resist their husband's authority; but, when he comes, to separate the
combatants, and carry home his dishevelled spouse, she goes off quietly with
him; and seems to stand as much in awe of her consort, as the Russian wives do
of theirs, and suffers herself to be beaten by him with as little murmuring. I
was once, says Swinburne, shown a woman here, who, during the life of her first
husband, was a pattern of modesty, and evenness of temper to the whole parish;
but, in contracting a second marriage, surprised and scandalized the
neighborhood with her perpetual riots, and boisterous behavior. On being
reprimanded by the curate, she ever frankly acknowledged, that her former
husband understood the management of a wife, and used to check her intemperate
bursts of passion, by timely correction; but that her present helpmate was too
mild to apply the proper chastisement, which every wife requires more or less.
Men seldom interfere in feminine brawls; when they do, they generally content
themselves with abusing, threatening, or shaking a cudgel, or pitchfork at
their antagonist, till the crowd comes in to part them. Sometimes a man is
stabbed, but this is rare among the fishermen. Manners vary with the districts;
in some they engage with bludgeons. These are the true lazaroni of Massaniello;
in others, the attack is made with knives, and other deadly weapons; but the
Neapolitans are by no means so blood-thirsty and revengeful, as represented. It
requires more than a slight provocation to lead them to extremities.
Drunkenness is not a common vice at Naples, of course, quarrels are rare. It is
also uncommon to see any thing, in public, like gallantry, among the people; no
soldiers, or sailors, leading their doxies; or girls going about in quest of
lovers; all which, in other countries, give rise to riot and bloodshed. Though
at Naples, there is only a nominal police, yet house-breaking is unknown, riots
still more so; it bears no proportion to the murders committed in the distant
provinces, where I am credibly informed, says Swinburne, no less than four
thousand persons are killed annually. Most of these crimes are perpetrated with
guns, in the mountainous countries, where a great ferocity of character and
wildness of manners prevail.

Cicisbeos are as general here, as in other parts of Italy. Many people in
England imagine, the majority of Cicisbeos, to be an innocent kind of dangling
fribble, but they are utterly mistaken; nor do I find that it is understood
here, says Sharp, that the ladies live in greater purity with their Cicisbeos,
than with their husbands; and generally speaking, with much less. If only
one-half of the ladies practiced this custom, the other half would despise
them; but, in fact, very few have any pretense to upbraid the rest with bad
conduct. To say the truth, if you invite five ladies to dinner, you must lay
ten plates; as each, for a certainty, brings her Cicisbeo with her.

How is it probable, that husbands and wives should have any love for each
other, when they are always brought together, without the least participation
of their own; nothing being consulted by parents, but fortune and family.

Children here, have very little tendency to support the friendship and harmony
of the married state. A certain knowledge of every wife's attachment to a lover
extinguishes all social affection, and all fondness for the offspring; and it
is only the eldest born who, the husband is sure belongs to him; and for that
security, it is generally requisite the birth should take place the first year,
as the women seldom hold out longer without a Cicesbeo.

The Calabrese have some very capricious notions. One is, says Swinburne, that
every child, whose mother has been true to her marriage vow, must necessarily
resemble the father. It is thought a reproach, to have been fuckled by any one
but one's own mother.

They repose great confidence in judgments, and expect to see every one who
jeers at the defect of another, afflicted with the same. Inoculation has been
attempted at one place near Reggio; but from ill success and superstitious
aversion, those who have undergone the operation, are marked by some
opprobrious nickname.

If a person dies in the fields, it is believed his spirit will appear in the
same place, in white robes; and that the only way of laying it is, to send out
young boys to approach silently, and to cover it with a volley of stones. Not
long since, says Swinburne, a Dominican priest, sitting in his white garment,
on a hill near Tropea, taking a sketch of the country; was supposed to be the
spirit of an old mad woman, who had dropped down dead some time before, on that
very spot; and was near being killed by the youths of the neighboring village,
before he could convince them of the little conceits of their error.

The funeral behavior, and measure of grief of the Calabrese, are regulated by
the strictest etiquette. The virtues, as well as vices, of a deceased father of
a family, are recapitulated by the oldest man in company. The widow repeats his
words, adds comments of her own, then roars out loudly, and plucks off handfuls
of her hair, which she strews over the bier. Daughters tear their locks, and
beat their breasts, but remain silent. More distant relations repeat the
oration cooly, and commit no outrage upon their persons. When the kinsman of a
baron, or a rich citizen dies, a number of old women are hired to perform all
these ceremonies, and howl for the family.

At Naples, the forms are rather different. I was one day, says Swinburne,
present at the funeral of an old fisherman. The actions of his widow were so
overstrained, as to be truly ridiculous; she tore off her hair and clothes, and
yelled in the most hideous manner, till her step-sons appeared to take
possession of the goods. She then turned, her fury upon them, and beat them out
of the house. The priests now came for the body, and she opposed their entry
for a decent length of time; but, at last, suffering herself to be overpowered,
flew to the window with her daughters and her mother (who, from having outlived
many relations, had scarcely a hair left on her head) and there beat her
breast, scratched her cheeks, and threw whole handfuls of hair toward the
bier, with the frantic gestures of a demoniack. The procession was no sooner
out of sight, than all was quiet; and in five minutes I heard them laughing and
dancing about the room, as if rejoicing to be rid of the old churl.

In some parts of the country, it is a rule to fast the whole day of interment.
Two women, in a village near Salerno, mother and daughter of a farmer, at whose
removal from the house, they had acted their parts with great applause, locked
themselves up; and, in order to gather strength, after the fatigue they had
undergone; began, in defiance of custom, to fry some pieces of tripe for their
dinner. As ill luck would have it, a couple of relations, who living at a great
distance, had come too late for the ceremony, knocked at the door, to pay their
respects to the disconsolate widow. Great was the difficulty they found in
gaining admittance: all the parade of grief was again displayed, the dinner
slipped into a napkin, and hid under the bed, and nothing heard in the room but
groans and lamentations. The strangers entered with composed mien, and were
endeavoring, with little success, to administer comfort to their unhappy
kinswomen; when behold! a dog they had brought with them, winded the fry, and
dragged it out into the middle of the floor, to the great anger of the
visitors, and utter confusion of the mourners, whose reputation was
irretrievably ruined in the esteem of the whole parish.

CHAP. V. Of the Environs, East of Naples.
THE environs of Naples are highly entertaining to the classical scholar, the
antiquary, and the naturalist. To the West are Puzzuoli, and Baiae; to the
East, Vesuvius, the subterranean cities, and the museum at Portici.

The commencement of the road, from Naples to Puzzuoli, lies through the grotta
di Pausilippe, which opens into one of the suburbs. Formerly, it was necessary
to cross Mount Pausilippo, which, from its delightful appearance, is said to
have derived its Greek name, implying grief appeasing; but, at present, that
labor is unnecessary; a broad subterraneous road being cut through the
mountain. This passage is conducted, chiefly, through large rocks, and
sometimes through strata of sand. It is at both ends, between ninety and an
hundred feet high, in order to throw in more light. Toward the middle, where
the top is lower, two large vent-holes, for light and air, are made through the
roof of this grotto; but the light is not sufficient; and travelers are,
besides, extremely incommoded with the dust, in this subterraneous passage. The
bottom of it, which in the time of Charles V. was paved with broad stones, like
the streets of Naples, is cleaned several times in a year; and then it is
pretty free from dust; but, as it is a road extremely frequented, this
convenience is of no long duration. The breadth is between eighteen and twenty
feet, so that there is sufficient room for two carriages to avoid each other,
and, to prevent any inconvenience on this head; it is usual, in the dark
places, to call out to any person coming the contrary Way, to know on which
side they intend to keep. When they answer alla montagna, "to the mountain," it
signifies the Naples side; which, to those coming from the city, is on the
right hand; and alla marina, "to the sea," denotes the left hand side. We have
often drove through this passage, says Lady Millar, but never without flambeaux.

Its length is something more than half an Italian mile. On the left hand, near
the middle, is an oratory hewn out of the rock, with a lamp continually burning
in it. The grotto is, by the vulgar, supposed to have been made by magic, and
that Virgil was the sorcerer who wrought it. The poet, it is true, gives a
description of the Cumaean grotto, but this the learned populace apply to the
grotto of Pausilippo; and conclude, since he has so circumstantially described
an ancient sybil, or prophetess, that he must have been a wizard. If a man,
says Addison, would form to himself a just idea of this place, he must fancy a
vast rock, undermined from one end to the other, and a highway running through
it, near as long and as broad as the Mall in St. James's park.

Opinions vary concerning the first openers of this grotto. This kind of rocky
substance is perforated with so much ease, and the custom of carrying on
subterraneous galleries, seems to have prevailed at so very early a period of
society, that some authors have ascribed the work to the giants, or the
Cimmerians, who were wont to make caves, their places of residence, as well as
the repository of their plunder. Others assert it to have been done by
Cocceius, an architect, of the Augustan age. From Seneca's expressions,
complaining of its inconveniences, we gather, that it was then open only for
foot passengers.

Possibly, the cutting of a road through the mountain, was at first not thought
of, but the great quantity of stones fetched out of it, for the buildings in
Naples, and Puzzuoli, might occasion such a deep excavation on both sides;
that, at last, for the convenience of traveling, government employed workmen
to pull down, and clear away the intermediate space: besides, it is not to be
supposed the way was at first in such a good condition, as it is at present.
Seneca, in his fifty-seventh letter says, Nihil illo carcere longius, nihil
illis faucibus obscurius; i. e. "This dungeon is intolerably long and extremely
dark." From whence it may be inferred, that the apertures, which in Strabo's
time, through which light entered at the sides, were soon after stopped up,
either by earthquakes, or want of proper care.

Neapolitan historians agree, that king Alphonso, of the Arragon family, caused
this passage to be considerably widened; and Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy,
under the emperor Charles V. is known to have given orders for levelling and
paving the ground, as likewise for enlarging the two vent-holes, which had been
bored through by order of Alphonso I. That it was entirely wrought by art, is
unquestionable, from the marks it bears of chizels, and other tools used by
stone-cutters. The earthquakes that have made such havoc, among the numerous
remains of antiquity in these parts, have hitherto spared this useful work. Its
safety is, probably, due to the solidity of the rock, in which there does not
appear any veins, or mixture of sulphur, or any kind of inflammable particles.
Under this mountain is a large quarry, from which they dig stone, that is
frequently used in the buildings at Naples. On the side of the mountain next
the sea, and amongst the rocks, grows the plant Opuntia, or Indian fig, on
which is found the cochineal. Upon the top of this grotto, are still some
remains of an antique aqueduct, which conveyed water from Serino, to supply a
reservoir called Piscina mirabile, of which we shall speak hereafter.

The dust in this grotto, says Swinburne, is intolerable in summer, and the
scantiness of light at all seasons of the year, distressing; for, that which is
admitted through the apertures abovementioned, is no security against the
danger of being run over, crushed against the wall, or at least hurt by the
faggots which asses are continually bringing from the woods. I never could
accustom myself, says the above author, perfectly to this subterraneous road,
but with hasty steps sought to leave it as the seat of noise, gloom, dust, and
unwholesome damps; wondering, at the same time, how passengers ventured into
such a place at all hours, singly, or in company, without any guard to prevent
assaults, or sufficient light to detect a lurking assassin. Were a similar
thoroughfare necessary, near any other capital, it would require all the
exertion of the magistracy, to preserve the lives and properties of the
inhabitants, who had occasion to pass through it; near London, none but a
madman would venture into it. It is certainly no small matter of surprise, to
find this passage so secure, in a country so ill provided with officers of
police; it reflects honor upon the national character, and, indeed, it behooves
me to give testimony in its favor; as I never, says Swinburne, met with any
insult, nor saw reason to expect one, during my long abode among the
Neapolitans, or my innumerable and pervious rides and walks, through different
parts of the kingdom.

Above the Eastern entrance of this celebrated grotta, on the brink of a
precipice, in a vineyard belonging to the Marquis Salcitro, are to be seen the
ruins of an ancient mausoleum. It was originally built in the form of a
pyramid; but the lower part of it, which is all that is now remaining, is not
much unlike a large oven. The way to it is not to be found without a guide;
and, on the side toward Pausilippo, it is so narrow, and runs along such a
high precipice, that it is somewhat dangerous to persons subject to giddiness.
This ancient ruin, generally passes for the monument of the poet Virgil; but
without sufficient grounds, says Keysler, to warrant such conjecture. In the
wall within it, are ten small niches, or cavities, apparently designed for
urns. According to Alphonso de Hereda, late bishop of Ariano, the marble urn in
which Virgil's arches had been deposited, stood here on nine small, marble
pillars, of which, at present, there is not the least appearance; and what
became of such a remarkable piece of antiquity, is also a great mystery. Some
pretend, that at the earnest solicitations of the inhabitants of Mantua, they
were presented to that city; but others affirm, that the Cardinal of Mantua,
found means to get them into his possession. The third opinion is, that the urn
was transported to Genoa, but that the pillars were applied to some other use.
This is certain, that at Mantua, where they pride themselves not a little, on
account of their city being the birthplace of that immortal bard, they know
nothing of the place of his burial. Stessano, in his account of the churches of
Naples says, that in his time, which was no longer ago than 1560, both the urn
and the pillars were in being, with this distich, then legible, near them:
Mantua me genuit: Calabri rapuere: tenet nunc
Parthenope: cecini pascua, rura, duces.
"I sung slocks, tillage, heroes; Mantua gave
"Me life; Brundusium, death; Naples, a grave."
DRYDEN.

This inscription was set up again in 1684, by order of the Duke di
Pescolanciano, to whom this garden then belonged. The Mausoleum is now
overgrown with shrubs and bushes, among which are a few laurel trees, supposed
by the credulous, to grow again spontaneously, though often rooted up. At
present, the only inscription in the whole Mausoleum, is the following: Quoe
cineris tumulo hoec vestigia? Conditur olim
Ille hoc qui cecinit, pascua, rura, duces.
"What traces now remain within this tomb,
Where once reposed that sacred bard, who sung
Of swains, of tillage, and heroic deeds."


Many a solitary walk, says Moore, have I taken to this place. The earth which
contains his ashes, we expected to find clothed in the brightest verdure.
Viewed from this magic spot, the objects which adorn the bay, become doubly
interesting. The poets verses are here recollected with additional pleasure;
the verses of Virgil are interwoven in our minds, with a thousand interesting
ideas; with the memory of our boyish years, or the sportive scenes of
childhood, of our earliest friends and companions, many of whom are now dead;
and of those who still live and for whom we retain the first impression of
affection, and who are at such distance, as renders the hope of ever seeing
them again uncertain. No wonder, therefore, that in a contemplative mood, our
steps are often directed to a spot so well calculated to create and cherish
sentiments congenial with the state of our mind. But then comes an antiquarian,
with his odious doubts, to disturb the pleasing source of our enjoyment; and,
from the fair and delightful regions of fancy, conveys us in a moment to a
dark, barren, and comfortless desert; -- he doubts whether this be the real
place where the ashes of Virgil were deposited; and tells us an unsatisfactory
story about the other side of the bay; and that he is rather inclined to
believe, the poet was buried somewhere there, without determining any
particular spot. Would to Heaven, that these doubters would keep their minds to
themselves, and not ruffle the tranquillity of true believers!

But after all, why should not this be the real tomb of Virgil? Why should
these enthusiasts, who delight in pilgrimage to this spot, be deprived of that
pleasure? Why should the poet's ghost be allowed to wander along the dreary
banks of the Styx, till antiquarians erect a cenotaph to his memory? Even they
acknowledge he was buried in this bay, and near Naples; and tradition has fixed
on this spot, which, exclusive of every other presumption, is a much stronger
evidence in its favor, than their vague conjectures against it.

Of the ancient monuments at Naples the most entire, and unquestionably the
most curious, is Virgil's tomb, says Grosley. This monument, which by Misson
and Montfaucon, is represented as a pyramid almost ruined, is a lanthorn or
turret, about twenty feet high, on open arcades; the solid parts of which were
formerly adorned with pillars. This structure stands on a platform, cut in the
Eastern side of the hill of Pausilippo, in sight of the two bays of Naples; the
harbor, the castles, part of the city lengthways, and fronting Mount Vesuvius.
Unquestionably, it was, in order to make it so conspicuous, that its elevation
so much exceeds the proportion of its base. It commands the entrance of the
favorite grotto; and, by the excavations daily carrying on in this part of the
mountain, commands it so, that at present it is scarce two feet from the brink
of a precipice, a hundred and eighty feet deep; and, if these excavations be
continued, they must certainly undermine this valuable monument.

On the external surface of the cupola, in which it terminates, is a prodigy
much celebrated by the Italian poets; I mean its being exactly crowned with a
laurel, though the only nourishment the tree receives is, what its roots meet
with in the joining of the stones. All travelers are sure to have a pluck at
this tree, which they do by means of a rope, with a stone at the end of it. You
may be sure, says Lady Millar, in her description of this celebrated tomb, "I
am possessed of some of the leaves of this sacred tree; how happy should I be,
if drinking a decoction of them, would inspire me with Virgilian poesy! The
side of the mountain where the tomb stands, instead of any trees of this kind,
is covered with yews and firs. Virgil's laurel, however, recruits its daily
losses, and perpetuates itself with renovating vigor. In the sixteenth
century, there was only one stem which stood in the center of the cupola, where
we will suppose it to have been planted by some Neapolitan, a warm admirer of
Virgil. About the beginning of the last century, a fir blown by the wind, from
a collateral foot of the mountain, fell with its top on the stem thus choking
it; but nature herself repaired the accident, setting, as layers, the
compressed ramifications of the root, which now have spread over the cupola's
whole surface.

Beautiful points of view offer themselves every step in ascending this
mountain; the summit of which is covered with villas and gardens, planted with
evergreens, belonging to several noble families at Naples. Further on, toward
the North, is the convent of the Camaldoli, from which there is a most sublime
sea-view, and a most beautiful land-one. Hence you may go through forests of
chestnuts, opening sometimes to noble views, till you reach the glacis of the
castle of St. Elmo; where the whole city and suburbs appear in one collective
picture. The Carthusian convent, adjoining to the castle, is, perhaps, the best
situated monastery in Europe.

On this mountain, in the Villa Mazza, are the remains of Pollio's fish ponds,
so often mentioned in the works of ancient writers; the expense he was at in
embellishing them, the extravagant passion he had for his fish, which, by care
and feeding, grew to a remarkable size; the cruel food with which he supplied
them, and the rebuke he met with from Augustus, in whose presence he bad
ordered a slave to be thrown into the pond, for a trivial offense; are
circumstances that have rendered these reservoirs famous.

Puzzuoli is situated about seven miles from Naples. It had its ancient name,
Puteoli, either from a sulphurous stench, or from the great number of putei,
or holes, which are made here, on account of the sulphur works, and by digging
for sand; which in ancient times was found very serviceable for building,
especially under water. Quis enim satis miretur, says Pliny, pessimam ejus
terroe partem ideoque pulverem appellatam in Puteolaris, collibus opponi maris
fluctibus, mersumque protinus fieri lapidem inexpugnabilem undis, and fortiorem
quotidie, utique si Cumano misceretur coemento: i. e. "Who can sufficiently
admire, that the worst part of the soil, in the mountains of Puteoli, which is
called dust, or sand, should be made into a bulwark against the sea; and, when
sunk under water, should soon become a stone, impregnable by the waves, and
every day grow stronger; especially if it is mixed with Cumaean cement." It is
asserted, by some authors, that this city was founded five hundred and
twenty-two years before the Christian Era, by one Decius, son of Neptune; and,
according to others, by some one else. It is most agreeably situated on the
margin of a small bay; and the great quantity of beautiful stones, and gems
cast up by the sea, is a sufficient proof of its former splendour and
magnificence. The greatest part of these stones, are of a blue, or a red cast,
with several pieces of Verde antico, porphyry, etc. and seem to have been used
in Mosaic work; there are frequently found agate, cornelian, amethyst, jasper,
onyx, beryl, lapis lazuli, etc. and many of them cameos, and intaglios.

On every hill, and vale of the environs, appear the ruins of extensive villas,
once embellished with all the elegancies of combined arts; now traced only by
half buried, mouldering walls, and some marble fragments; left, as it were, to
vouch for the taste and costliness with which they were constructed. In the
last period of the commonwealth, and during the gaudy era of the Coesars,
almost every person, of exalted rank, had a house in this country, which the
sagacious antiquaries of Puzzuoli point out to you, without doubt or hesitation.

The town of Puzzuoli, and its environs, says Moore, presents such a number of
objects worthy of the attention of the antiquarian, the natural philosopher,
and the classic scholar; that to describe all, with the minuteness they
deserve, would fill volumes. The cathedral, now under the protection of St.
Januarius, and St. Proculus, was formerly a temple, dedicated to Augustus.

It is built of large stones, without cement. No more of the ancient temple
remains, than some Corinthian columns, with their capitals, and part of the
entablature, of Parian marble, and beautiful workmanship, in one of the
side-walls of the cathedral.

The temple of Jupiter Serapis, in this city, is accounted a very interesting
monument of antiquity; being quite different from the Roman and Greek temples,
and built in the manner of the Asiatics; probably by the Egyptian and Asiatic
merchants, who settled here; this place having been the great emporium of
Italy, until the Romans built Ostia and Antium. The ruins of this temple are in
the finest preservation of any round Naples. It was originally encompassed by
forty-two square rooms, which are now almost reduced to ruins; yet still some
columns of beautiful white marble are to be seen, fluted, and highly finished.
The whole was paved with large slabs of marble, and the edifice completely
encrusted with the same. It is curious to see the massy rings fixed in the
pavement, to which the victims were fastened, and the copper pipes, or drains,
to convey away their blood: here is a pierced square of marble, of exquisite
workmanship, which served as a drain stone; for it is placed in the center of a
quadrangular part of the temple, precisely under the open part of the roof, in
order to receive and carry off the rain water, which entered at the opening.
Half of its buildings are still buried under the earth, thrown upon it by
volcanic commotions, or accumulated by the crumblings of the hill.

The enclosure is square, says Swinburne, environed with buildings for priests,
and baths for votaries: in the center remains a circular platform, with four
flights of steps up to it; vases for fire, a centrical altar, rings for
victims, and other appendages of sacrifice entire and not displaced; sixteen
columns of African marble, that sustained the roof and the statues, have been
removed to the new palace at Caserta, the pedestals of the statues only
remaining.

In that part of the town, called la Piazza, is placed a square pedestal of
white marble, found in the year 1690. Each side has a bas-relief. Although they
are much injured, we may distinguish fourteen figures, by which are represented
so many cities of Asia-Minor. The pedestal is inscribed to Tiberius, and
probably a statue of him had been placed upon it; erected, according to the
opinion of some learned men, by these fourteen cities that were near being
entirely demolished by an earthquake, in his reign, to whom he had sent very
liberal supplies. It is esteemed a most beautiful bas-relief, and a work of
excellent taste.

The ruins of its ancient edifices, are widely spread along the adjacent hills
and shores. An amphitheatre still exists, entire in most of its parts. It is
said to have stood formerly within the walls of the city, but is now near a
mile distant from it. This is a proof of the great decay of the town, from its
former extent and splendour. The arena, which is now a garden, is two hundred
and fifty feet long; the porticos of entrance, which were below the steps, or
seats, for the spectators, and the dens for wild beasts, with a stone trough in
each, to hold water for them, are still to be seen. Here, it is said, St.
Januarius and his companions were thrown, to be devoured by wild beasts; but
the latter were, it seems, not wanting in respect due to such holy personages,
and never offered to lay a paw on them. At the entrance of St. Januarius's
prison, now converted into a chapel, is an inscription, signifying, that it was
consecrated by the bishop of Puzzuoli, in 1689; and promising an indulgence of
forty days, to those who devoutly visit that sacred spot in this amphitheatre.
Suetonius says, Augustus assisted in person at the games celebrated here.

There is a curious antiquity here, called the labyrinth of Dedalus; it is near
the amphitheatre, but, by the learned, supposed to have been a reservoir to
serve the city of Puzzuoli with water. To every one of these apartments there
are four doors, which makes the place extremely intricate. A little further is
an arched vault, supported by eleven pillars, incrusted with tartar; and, at
present, it is a winec-ellar. This, likewise, seems to have been a reservoir.
Half a league from Puzzuoli, are the columbarias, or tombs, the descent into
which is by ladders. There is nothing very curious in these repositories of the
dead; they are of a simple structure, with small niches, in which urns, filled
with the ashes of the family, were deposited.

This town is chiefly inhabited by fishermen; their children run after
strangers with plates full of mosaic pieces, of various colors; amongst which
may frequently be found medals, intaglios, and engravings on gems; these the
sea throw upon the beach, and are purchased for a trifle. Some of them are
genuine, but many are false; and these mock antiquities are frequently imposed
on ignorant strangers; which are no more than the refuse of lapidaries shops,
procured from Naples; but, whoever has a little intelligence in these matters,
cannot easily be deceived.

The ruins of Cicero's villa, near this city, are of such extent, as to give a
high idea of the wealth of this great orator. Had fortune, says Moore, always
bestowed her gifts with so much propriety, she never would have been accused of
blindness. Neither this villa, nor that at Tusculum, nor any of his
country-seats, were the scenes of idleness or riot. They are distinguished by
the names of the works he composed in them; works which have always been the
delight of the learned; and which, still more than the important services he
rendered his country, have contributed to immortalize his name.

Here it was he wrote both the books, entitled Quoestionum Academicarum. The
ruins of this famous academia of Cicero, says Lady Millar, are a mile and a
quarter round; but this immense building is now so demolished, there is no
possibility of ascertaining its regular plan; though we took the trouble of
walking, or rather stumbling over the rubbish, through a number of rooms, we
could not find one that could be termed a large one, in a modern English house.
Some of the pavement still remains, composed of small dies of white marble,
forming a mosaic pattern; most of the rooms were vaulted, and many of the
arches still remain entire.

It is evident that the sea has covered the greatest part of this building, as
considerable vestiges, which plainly appear to have been part of the structure,
are discernable at low water: this is highly probable, for an additional
reason; the academia was so close to the sea, as to admit Cicero's guests to
have amused themselves by fishing from his windows.

The mole of the harbor of Puzzuoli, is a stupendous work. There are now
fourteen piles remaining, built with a sort of stone called Piperno, and faced
with brick; these piles are connected by half-ruined arches. The common people
usually call it, Il ponte di Caligula, as if it were the ruins of the bridge
built by that emperor, from Puzzuoli to Baiae. This error, Suetonius's life of
that emperor very satisfactorily Confutes, where he says, that what Caligula
built, was no more than a bridge of boats, covered with earth, and reaching
from Baiae to the Puzzuoli mole; so that the piers are not only plainly
distinguished from the moveable bridge of Caligula, but he has likewise called
it by the name of moles, which is even now applied to any congeries of rocks,
or stone, that serves for the security of an harbor. That the pilasters in the
sea, before Puzzuoli, did not belong to a bridge, is likewise further apparent,
from their not being placed in a strait line, but forming a curve toward the
North.

The sea, about Puzzuoli, abounds in fish, especially of the testaceous kind.
Here is also a fish called Cavallo Marino, which is not quite an inch in
length, and is generally dried for keeping. The head of this little fish very
much resembles that of a horse: it is often bruised with vinegar and honey, and
applied, by way of plaster, to the part bitten by a mad dog. This species of
fish is also found on the other side of Italy, along the coasts of the Adriatic.

The purple dye of this place was in such esteem, among the ancient Romans, as
to be said to have rivalled that of Tire; it is the blood taken from the vein
in the shellfish, probably the perriwinkle, and of which there is so small a
quantity, as not to exceed one drop in each fish.

Sylla having abdicated the dictatorship, is said to have retired, and passed
the remainder of his days in this city.

CHAP. VI. The same Subject continued.
PURSUING the path toward Naples, says Swinburne, in his description of the
environs, I arrived at a convent of Capuchin Friars, which commands so fine a
prospect, that many painters have chosen it as a station for delineating the
bay. Saint Januarius is supposed to have completed his martyrdom on this spot,
by the axe, after facing the wild beasts with impunity. He was bishop of
Beneventum, in the third century; but did not supersede Saint Asprenius, in the
patronage of Naples, till eleven hundred years after his death.

The cistern that contains water for the use of this convent, is a basin,
supported solely by one column; it was thus contrived, clear of all contact
with the walls of the cellar, from a discovery being made, that poisonous
vapors transpired through the ground, and contaminated the water in the common
reservoirs.

The bay, between Puzzuoli and Baiae, is about three miles in breadth. In the
circuit of this bay lies Monte Barbara, anciently Mons Gaurus, the favorite of
Bacchus; undoubtedly of volcanic origin, though beyond the records of history.
It was this mountain, which is now one of the most barren spots round Naples,
that was formerly so celebrated for its Falernian wine. The common people have
a notion, that immense treasures lie buried in it, guarded by evil spirits.

Directly opposite to Il Monte Barbaro, toward the West, lies Il Monte Nuovo,
or the new mountain, which rose instantaneously in the night of the nineteenth
of September, 1538, during an earthquake, which caused a terrible devastation
in the neighborhood. "It may seem still more wonderful," says Gassendi in his
physics, "that not only mountains shoot up in the continent, but even islands
in the middle of the sea. As to mountains, nothing can be more notorious than
that of Puzzuoli, which was, in one night, formed by a congeries of pumice
stones and ashes, to the height of above a thousand paces."

Though this alteration happened at the time of an earthquake, it was not
caused by it; earthquakes, indeed, often overturn mountains, but never produce
any; to do this, the irruption of a volcano is required. Swinburne, in his
description of this phenomenon, says, in 1538, after previous notice by
repeated quakings, the convulsed earth burst asunder, and made way for a deluge
of hot ashes and flames; which, being shot up to an immense height into the
darkened atm^sphere, fell down again all round, and formed: circular mound,
four miles in circumference, and one thousand feet high, with a large cup in
the middle. Immediately after the explosion, the wind rose furiously, and
wasted the lighter particles over the country, burning and blasting all
vegetation in its progress: wherever these ashes, impregnated with poison,
adhered to the grass, death became the lot of all beasts that broused upon it.
The terrors occasioned by this shock, threatened the abandonment of the whole
district; scarcely a family durst remain even within sight of this horrid heap;
which had overwhelmed a large town, filled up a lake, and buried under it a
very extensive tract of cultivated lands.

Part of this mountain is cultivated; but the larger portion of its declivity
is widely overgrown with prickly broom, and rank weeds, that emit a very
foetid, sulphurous smell, The crater is shallow its inside clad with shrubs,
and the little area at the bottom planted with fig and mulberry-trees; a most
striking specimen of the amazing vicissitudes that take place in this
extraordinary country. Near the foot of this mountain, the subterraneous fires
act with such immediate power, that even the sand, at the bottom of the sea, is
heated to an intolerable degree.

A long neck of land prevents the waves from washing, into a sedgy pool, the
poor remnants of the Lucrine lake; once so renowned for the abundance and
flavor of its shellfish, of which large beds lined the shallows; while a deep
channel in the middle afforded riding and anchoring for vessels, and a passage
into the inner basin of Lake Avernus. A small canal now serves to discharge the
superabundant waters. I suppose, says Swinburne, that originally the Lucrine
lake was only a marsh overflowed by the sea, till Hercules gave it extent and
depth, by raising a mound across, and damming out the salt water; and
afterward, that Augustus formed the Julian port, by raising this wear to a
sufficient level, and thereby procuring depth of water for a navy to float in.
Virgil, in his praises of Augustus, says, An memorem portus, Lucrinoque addita
claustra:
Atque indignantem magnis stridoribus aequor,
Julia qua ponto long sonat unda refuso,
Tyrrhenisque fretis immittitur cestus Avernis?
Virg. Geo. lib. ii. v. 161. "Or shall I praise thy ports, or mention make,
Of the vast mound that binds the Lucrine lake,
Or the disdainful sea that shut from thence,
Roars round the structure and invades the fence?
There, where secure the Julian waters glide,
Or, where Avernus' jaws admit the Tyrrhene tide."
DRYDEN.

Sergius Orata, says Pliny, primus optimum saporem ostreis Lucrinis
adjudicavit. "Sergius Orata was the first who distinguished the delicate
flavor of the oysters of the Lucrine lake." Non me Lucrina juverint conchylia!
"Not Lucrine oysters would my palate please," says Horace in one of his odes.

It was in this lake, according to the testimony of Solinus, and other ancient
writers, that there was in Augustus's time, a dolphin made so tame by a boy,
that he would sit upon him, and cross the lake on his back, from Baiae to
Puzzuoli.

Lake Avernus lies about half a mile distant, on the left hand, in the road to
Cuma. This lake, like the mountain Gaurus, is exceedingly altered, but much for
the better. According to ancient historians, no fish could live in it; and its
noxious vapors ascended to such a height, that birds flying over it dropped down
dead. Lucretius in his sixth book speaks thus of it: "Next of Averno sung, and
whence the name,
And whence the rage and hurtful nature came;
So called, because the birds that cut the sky,
If over those plains they but chance to fly,
By noxious streams oppressed, fall down and die."
CREECH's Translation.

The noxious quality attributed to this lake, and the sulphurous exhalations
so fatal to birds, who should attempt to fly over it, are likewise particularly
mentioned in the sixth book of Virgil. This lake is at present stocked with
variety of good fish, and the birds not only fly over it unhurt, but wild
ducks, and other aquatic fowls are to be seen upon it; and the adjacent
vineyards produce a very good sort of wine. Servius (ad Aenead iii. v. 442.)
ascribes the noxious air about this lake, in ancient times, to the thick and
lofty woods that then surrounded it, which hindered the dispersion of the
effluvia; adding, that Augustus, having ordered the wood to be cut down and
extirpated, the country soon put on a cheerful appearance.

Swinburne, in his description of this lake, tells us that the landscape,
though confined, is extremely pleasing; the dark blue surface of these
unruffled waters, said to be three hundred and sixty feet deep, strongly
reflects the tapering groves, that cover its sloping enclosure, of about only
half a mile in diameter: shoals of wild fowl swim about, and king-fishers shoot
along under the banks; a large octagon temple, in ruins, advances majestically
to the brink; its marble ornaments have long been removed, but its form and
size render it a noble object. It was, probably, dedicated to the infernal
gods, to whose worship these solemn shades were formerly consecrated. Black
aged groves then stretched their boughs over the watery abyss, and, with
impenetrable foliage, excluded almost every ray of wholesome light; mephitic
vapors, ascending from the hot bowels of the earth, being denied free passage
to the upper atmosphere, floated along the surface in poisoned mists. These
circumstances produced horrors fit for such gloomy deities; a colony of
Cimmerians, as well suited to the rites as to the place itself, cut dwellings
in the bosoms of the surrounding hills, and officiated as priests of Tartarus.
Superstition, always delighting in dark ideas, eagerly seized on this spot, and
hither she led her trembling votaries, to celebrate her dismal orgies; here she
evoked the manes of departed heroes -- here she offered sacrifices to the gods
of hell, and attempted to dive into the secrets of futurity. Poets enlarged
upon the popular theme, and painted its awful scenery with the strongest
colors of their art. Homer brings Ulysses to Avernus, as to the mouth of the
infernal abodes; and, in imitation of the Grecian bard, Virgil conducts his
hero to the same ground. The holiness of these shades remained unimpeached for
many ages: Hannibal marched his army to offer incense at this altar.

After a long reign of undisturbed gloom and celebrity, a sudden glare of light
was let in upon Avernus: the horrors were dispelled, and with them vanished the
sanctity of the lake; the axe of Agrippa brought its forest to the ground,
disturbed its sleepy waters with ships, and gave room for all its malignant
effluvia to escape. Modern writers, says Swinburne, charge ancient authors with
exaggeration, in describing the virulence of its exhalations; but I think them
entitled to more respect, for even now the air is feverish and dangerous; as
the jaundiced faces of the vine-dressers, who have succeeded the Sybils, and
the Cimmerians in possession of the temple, most ruefully testify.

Boccacio relates, that during his residence at the Neapolitan court, the
surface of this lake was suddenly covered with dead fish, black and singed, as
if killed by some subaqueous eruption of fire. At present it abounds with
tench; the Locrine with eels. The change of fortune, in these lakes, is
singular: in the splendid days of Imperial Rome, the Lucrine was the chosen
spot for the parties of pleasure of a voluptuous court; they are described by
Seneca, as the highest refinement of extravagance and luxury; now a slimy bed
of rushes covers the scatered ponds of this once beautiful sheet of water; and
the dusky Avernus is now clear and serene; offering a most alluring surface and
charming scenes for similar amusements.

Opposite the temple, says Swinburne, I entered a cave, usually styled the
Sybils Grotto; it seems more likely to have been the mouth of a communication,
between Cuma and Avernus, than the abode of a prophetess; especially as the
sybil is positively said by historians, to have dwelt in a cavern under the
Cumaean citadel. A most acute and indefatigable unraveller of antiquarian
clews, thinks it was part of the canal that Nero projected from the mouth of
the Tiber, to the Julian port.

The entrance to the cave of the sybil, as it is commonly called, is about
three yards wide, near five feet high, and two hundred and twenty, or two
hundred and thirty yards to the end: here is a narrow way, descending to two
small cells, where there are baths. From the largest of these, they say, there
is a corridore, or passage, ending in an outlet, now made up with bricks; and
that there is a third cell, with a winding staircase, leading from it to the
top of the mountain, but now stopped up by dirt.

Northall notices only one room. After advancing about two hundred paces, there
is a passage which leads to some baths, where the second grotto is. It is a
little room, about fourteen feet long, and eight broad, and of a height
proportionable. On the walls are some small remains of gilding, and mosaic
work: but it seems very mysterious, how the sybil could live in so confined a
place.

Keysler, likewise, who seems to have visited this supposed residence of the
sybil, notices only one apartment, at the extremity of the passage; in which,
says he, there is a kind of stone trough; by some antiquarians imagined to be
the sybil's bath; and, by others, her bed: on the walls are several figures,
made of small stones, and shells of different colors, curiously arranged. The
pavement is also a mosaic work, but cannot be seen distinctly, as it is covered
with water. Here, says Keysler, the Lago Averno is twenty-five fathoms deep,
and almost entirely surrounded with a rising ground; so that a canal of
communication with the sea, which need not be above the length of half an
Italian mile, would make it one of the most commodious harbors in the universe.

On the side of the Lucrine lake, toward the sea, is a hill, with a deep rent
on its summit; which the poor illiterate people are taught to believe, was made
at our Savior's crucifixion; and that it was the passage through which he
descended into the Limbus patrum, in order to release the Patriarchs; and to
this superstitious notion, the mountain owes the name of Il monte di Christo.

Between Averno, and the city of Cuma, is to be seen part of the Via Appia,
where two hills are joined by means of a noble arch, called Arco Felice, built
with large bricks; its height is seventy, and its breadth fifty-five feet: the
passage under it is twenty feet four inches. It is supposed, says Martyn, but
without any probability, to have been a gate of the city of Cuma.

From this high ground, there is a view of the dreary, flat shore of Patria,
where, on the edge of a large pond, are some heaps of stones, the ruins of
Liternum. Hither P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, withdrew from the accusations
of his enemies, and spent his latter days in philosophical retirement: by this
voluntary exile, he preserved his person from indignity, without being indebted
for his safety to a dispensation of any positive, though unjust law of his
country. Seneca mentions having slept in the villa, which two hundred years
before had been the asylum of that hero: he describes it as a substantial
building, in a garden, surrounded with high walls, and flanked with towers, to
defend it against a sudden attack; in it was a cistern, capable of containing
water enough for an army to drink; and, for the private use of the master, a
small gloomy bath, after the simple fashion of those times. This shore was,
probably, less unwholesome, when Scipio lived here, than it is in its present
uncultivated state, overflowed with foetid pools of brackish water.

If tradition can be relied on, Scipio's ashes were deposited here, and the
word Patria still remaining fixed in the wall of a watchtower, and giving name
to the adjacent lake, is a fragment of his angry epitaph: ingrata neque enim
mea ossa habebis. "Ungrateful country, you shall not even have my bones." It is
at least certain, that no urn, or monumental inscription, belonging to this
illustrious member of the family, has been found in the sepulcher of the
Scipios, lately discovered at Rome.

From hence, says Swinburne, we rowed about six miles Eastward, to the
insulated rock, on which stood the citadel of Cuma, (the first city founded in
Italy by Grecian emigrants) once the seat of commerce, the parent of Naples,
and the capital of a state that ruled the seas, before either Rome or Carthage
were heard of: its prosperity was of long continuance, while yet the power of
infant Rome remained crampt within the narrow limits of her own plains. Under
the sway of Aristodemus, Cuma afforded an asylum to Tarquin the proud, the
deposed king of Rome.

As Rome advanced in her fortunate career, the glory of all her neighboring
powers faded away before her; the Cumaeans, in their turn, submitted to the
yoke, and were treated with lenity; but real liberty was gone, and the trade
abandoned her shores. The Goths reduced it still lower; and at last, being
merely a receptacle for thieves, it was in 1207, totally ruined and forsaken.

This rocky hill is the produce of an eruption, and hollowed into many spacious
caverns; amongst which we look, in vain, for the grotto, where the Cumaean
sybil pronounced her oracles; that sanctuary was destroyed in the Gothic war.
Agathias informs us, that it was scooped into the form of a temple; the roof of
which served as a foundation for one of the principal towers of the fortress.
The hermitage of Warkworth, in Northumberland, says Swinburne, celebrated by
the pen of Dr. Percy, may serve to give an idea of this sybilline grotto. When
Narses invested the citadel, he caused this rocky cover to be cut through in
several directions, and then propped up with beams; as soon as every thing was
in readiness for the assault, the wood was set on fire. Upon the props being
consumed, the rocks gave way, and brought the walls down headlong with them
into the temple; and, on these accumulated ruins, the Imperial troops entered
the breach.

Between Cuma and Misenum, lies the lake Acheron or Palus Acherusia, so well
known among the ancients; and, from its black water, is by Virgil termed
tenebrosa palus, "the gloomy lake." For the increase of its fishery, a canal
has been made from the main sea into this lake, by which means the waters of it
have been much mended, and rendered fitter for fish to live in. Most of the
fishermen live upon a little island in the middle of the lake; but the fish
they catch, are chiefly eels and barbles. At present it is called Lago di
Fusaro. Here, says Swinburne, my conductors showed me the ruins of the tomb of
Caius Marius. As I am apt to believe that popular tales have always some
foundation, however feeble to rest upon; I think it probable, that the ashes of
a Roman of that name were deposited here; but it cannot be those of the famous
Consul; because Sylla caused his remains to be taken out of the tomb and
scattered to the wind.

In these parts, as our antiquarians tell us, Servilius Vatia had a seat, to
which he retired under the tyrannical reign of Tiberius. Vatia, on account of
the retreat he had chosen, was cried up as the happiest of the Romans; so that
it was a common saying, O Vatia solus scis vivere: "O Vatia, you alone know how
to live." But Seneca seems to have been of a different opinion; for, in his
fifty-fifth epistle, he says, ille latere sciebat non vivere -- Nunquam aliter
hanc villam Vatia vivo proeteribam, quam ut dicerem. Vatia hic situs est. "He
knew how to secret himself, not how to enjoy life. -- Nor did I ever pass his
house, without saying, Vatia lies there."

Just below the above lake is the Mare morto. The ancients pretend that dead
bodies were carried over this lake, from Misenum to the Elysian fields. It is a
double pool, says Swinburne, of which the outer division is open to the sea;
the inner one, occasionally shut up for the purpose of fishing. A slip of sand
divides it from the channel of Procida; and, at the extremity, rises the
solitary, shelving promontory of Miseno; the ruins of a city of that name are
scattered at its foot; and the remains of a theater very apparent. A fine
fragment of marble cornice is still left, to bear testimony of the elegance
with which it was decorated, in the richest luxuriance of the composite order.

Miseno is said to derive its name from a companion of Aeneas, who was buried
here, according to Virgil.

At pius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum
Imponit, suaque arma viro, remumque tutamque,
Monte sub aeria, qui nunc Misenus ab illo
Dicitur, oeternumque tenet per soecula nomen.
"But good Aeneas ordered on the shore
A stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore,
A soldiers faulchion, and a seaman's oar.
Thus was his friend interred, and deathless fame,
Still to the lofty cape consigns his name."
DRYDEN. On this peninsula, a villa was built by Caius Marius, with a degree of
elegance, that gave great offense to the most austere among the Romans, who
thought it ill suited to the character of so rough a soldier. Upon the same
foundation, Lucullus, the plunderer of the Eastern world, erected an edifice;
in comparison of which, the former house was a cottage; but even his
magnificence was eclipsed by the splendour of the palace, which the emperors
raised on the same spot. To these proud abodes of heroes, and monarchs, which
have long been levelled to the ground, a few fishing huts, and a lonely
public-house have succeeded; hither boatmen resort to tipple, perhaps on the
identical site, where the voluptuous masters of the world quaffed Chian and
Valernian wine.

Near this spot is the Piscina Mirabilis; it is a subterraneous cistern,
divided into alleys, by rows of square pillars, from which springs an arched
roof; the incrustation, formed anciently upon the plaistered walls, by the
sediment of the water; is now so strong an alabaster, as almost to defy the
pick-axe; and so thick and compact, as to be susceptible of a very fine polish.

It is much disputed by whom this reservoir was built. Some attribute it to
Lucullus; others are of opinion that Agrippa had it made, for the convenience
of the fleet, or for watering the gardens; and the chambers near it, says
Keysler, called cento camerelle, seem to have been designed for the same
purpose.

The channel, where the fleet of Agrippa moored, has now but one craggy cobble,
stationed to ferry over passengers. I crossed it, says Swinburne, to the
Elysian fields; which are bounded on the North side by a small eminence,
covered with vine-bearing trees; the face of the bank is hollowed into
numberless caves, and places of sepulture; and an ancient way leads from the
ferry toward Capua, between rows of monumental buildings; which by an unusual
permutation of property, from being filled with the ashes of the dead, are now
occupied by living peasants. The cause of this road, and its environs, being so
uncommonly crowded with tombs, exists in the superstitious creed of the Pagans,
who held inhumation necessary to salvation; and a grave, the only door through
which a soul could pass to a future state of bliss. According to the spirit of
this tenet, neither the inhabitant who died peaceably in his bed at Misenum,
nor the mariner, who met his fate in battle, or in shipwreck, was suffered by
his friends to remain without the honors of a tomb: to every person, even of
moderate rank, a suitable mausoleum was erected, to procure for his departed
soul, free ingress into the Elysian shades. These circumstances coincide,
admirably, with the fables and traditions handed down, concerning this country,
from a very early period. Homer brings Ulysses hither, and here he fixes the
scene of his Stygian machinery; thus the Mare morto passed for Acheron, and the
adjoining fields for the vale of Elysium, to which the dead were wafted in the
boat of Charon. This was literally true, with regard to such persons as died at
Misenum.

Off this promontory lie the islands Ischia and Procida; well worthy the
trouble of a visit, says Martyn, from any curious traveller: the former of
these, for richness of soil, abundance of products, and beauty of situation,
may vie with the most celebrated spots on the globe: these advantages have
drawn many settlers to its shores, and added eight thousand inhabitants to its
lists, in the last thirty years.

The ancients believed Ischia to have been raised out of the bosom of the deep,
by the force of central fires: the Chalcydians were the first adventurers, that
dared to set foot on this igneous soil, and were amply repaid for their riches,
by the immense wealth they drew from the settlement: however, continual
earthquakes and eruptions, forced them to abandon the place. Hiero, king of
Syracuse, who was indefatigable, in advancing the commercial interests of his
dominions, sent a colony to this island; but the emoluments falling short of
his expectations, he soon withdrew his people; since that epoch, Ischia has
usually obeyed the masters of the adjacent continent. All Ischia is of fiery
origin; but its North-west angle is more disturbed, and more overturned by
eruptions, than any other part of it. On this side of the island are some
vapour-baths, erected on a neck of land, strongly impregnated with sulphur, and
other minerals, the usual concomitants of volcanos.

At the distance of a mile, south of these sudatories, is the town of Foria,
inhabited by an industrious people; they employ a considerable number of small
vessels, in the carriage of their fruit and wines; but, the want of a harbor,
exposes them to great losses in stormy weather. The houses of this burgh are
solidly built; but the streets are almost too narrow for an ass, with a pair of
panniers. The environs are extremely fertile; the young women, says Swinburne,
I met coming down the mountain, with baskets of figs upon their heads, were
tall and handsome; their features regularly fine, their eyes sparkling, their
shape and gait light and airy beyond expression.

On the declivity of the central mountain of the island, is a crater; circular,
shallow, and embanked with a vast mound of cinders; it is full of lava, twisted
and curled, as if, while in a fluid state, it had been stirred round with a
stick. No vegetation has as yet taken place on these substances, though they
have been exposed to the air since the year 1301. The eruption lasted near two
months, and caused such devastation in the human and animal species, by the
malignity of its vapors, and poisonous qualities of its ashes, that whoever
could escape, fled from this land of horror. I arrived at the summit of this
mountain, adds Swinburne, just as the sun had extricated his orb out of a mass
of heavy vapors, that still hung upon the Appennine: as his rays diverged, the
fogs that floated on the sea vanished, and a view rose gradually to the sight,
of which so weak a pencil as mine, can never give an adequate idea. As the
magnificent view from Mount Epomeo, seems the most interesting object of
curiosity in the island, we shall proceed with our author's description of it.
The distant part of the picture, says Swinburne, displayed the most admirable
marine, and terrestrial scenery, while the foreground exhibited the richness of
a fertile, populous island. This vast expanse, of sea and land, lay unfolded
before me like a chart; on which every object was marked with precision.

The pinnacle of Epomeo, is a white rock of tufa, in the heart of which is hewn
a church, cells, galleries, and other conveniences for seven hermits, under the
patronage of St. Nicholas. These recluses subsist upon alms, collected thrice a
week about the island, while the season permits; but, during some months of the
year, the snow lies so deep in this peak, as to shut them out from all
communication with mankind. They have some plots of garden; but seem to exert
themselves little in the culture, or the improvement of them; the cells are
dirty, and their inhabitants appear to have no turn for study, or mechanics;
their prior is a Frenchman, who, twenty years ago, was governor of Ischia, till
moved with compunction, for the sins of his military life, and despairing of
purity of conscience in the soul atmosphere below, he became an anchoret in
this exalted region; he has been twelve years confined to his truckle-bed by
the gout; but retains a fresh florid complexion, and tolerable spirits. The
passage to the cells is contrived to wind through the rock, so as to admit
views of almost every part of the island; toward the South, the declivity is
very gradual to the sea, and clothed in the richest garb of vegetative nature;
the North side of the mountain is more abrupt and destitute of verdure; at the
foot of its tremendous point lies a circular basin; from whence, in former
times, issued flames and fiery torrents that overwhelmed the country; but its
operations have ceased, during such an immense series of years, that the
borders are tumbled in, and almost every distinctive feature of a crater
obliterated.

Procida, anciently Prochyta, which lies between the cape of Misenum and
Ischia, about two miles distant from each, is a small island about six miles in
circumference. The earliest writers of history speak of Procida, as land torn
from the continent by the violence of earthquakes, and fiery commotions. The
upper part of the cliffs of this island, in which many spacious caverns have
been worn by the waves, or left empty in the convulsive boilings, that raised
the island above the waters, is a tufa stone of various hues, brown, white,
yellow, and purple. The King's palace, which he sometimes visits for the sake
of shooting, stands on the point of this excavated promontory.

This island gave birth to, or was, at least, the property of John of Procida,
a man of great fame in the annals of the thirteenth century. Though rich, and
nobly born, this extraordinary person did not disdain the practice of physic;
but improved a strong natural genius, by every help the scanty knowledge of the
age afforded. The great features of his character were sagacity, activity,
daringness, and perseverance; with these qualities he undertook to avenge his
countrymen of the Provencals; who, under Charles of Anjou, had reduced both
Sicilies to slavery, and destroyed the house of Suabia. This plan for
destroying the French being settled, he insinuated himself into the private
meetings of the Sicilians; and, by incendiary discourses, fed the fire of
discontent, till he saw the proper moment for blowing it up into a flame: at
his nod, though, perhaps, the crisis was hastened by some accidental outrages,
all Sicily rose in arms at the fatal sound of the evening bell, known by the
name of the Sicilian vespers; and almost every Frenchman perished.

The fishing, of this little island, brings in a handsome profit, owing to the
extraordinary expertness of the Neapolitan diverse. I have frequently known
their stay under water, says Swinburne, to exceed two minutes, and have been
assured, that some can, and do remain longer. Their common method of taking
oysters, sea-urchins, and other shellfish, is, to plunge in, head foremost,
amongst the rocks; and with a strong knife, wrench the shells off the stones to
which they adhere; then, rising to the surface, throw their booty into a
floating basket tied to their foot: but the violence of the exertion, and the
pressure of the water, weaken their lungs, and shorten their lives; few reach
the age of thirty years. When they go in search of the razor-fish, called in
Neapolitan cannolicchi, they walk up to their shins in the sea, backwards and
forwards, with the greatest gravity and attention; moving their feet sideways
along the sand, till they feel the sharp edge of a razor-shell, then they dart
down with amazing rapidity, and seize their prey. From this stately deportment,
comes the local proverbial expression, of a person walking about in a brown
study; he is fishing for cannolicchi.

In the center of the gulf, of which this fragment of Cape Misenum makes the
extreme Western point, are the mutilated remnants of Baiae, that elegant resort
of the gay masters of the world. The hot springs, and medicinal vapors that
abound in its environs, must very early have excited the attention of
valetudinarians; as bathing was the constant solace of the Greeks while in
health, and their remedy when diseased: but Baiae does not seem to have
attained a degree of celebrity superior to that of other baths, till the Roman
commonwealth began to be in the wane. As soon as the plunder of a conquered
world was transferred, from works of public use and ornament, to objects of
private luxury; the transcendent advantages, which Baiae offered to Roman
voluptuaries, flying from the capital in search of health and pleasure, were
attended to with enthusiasm: the variety of its natural baths, the softness of
its climate, and the beauties of its landscape, captivated the minds of opulent
nobles, whose passion for bathing knew no bounds; abundance of linen, and
disuse of ointments, render the practice less necessary in modern life; but the
ancients performed no exercise, engaged in no study, without previous
ablutions, which at Rome required an enormous expense in aqueducts, stones, and
and attendants: a place, therefore, where waters naturally heated to every
degree of warmth, bubbled spontaneously out of the ground, in the pleasantest
of all situations, was such a treasure, as could not be overlooked. Hither, at
first, retired for a temporary relaxation, the mighty rulers of the empire, to
string anew their nerves, and revive their spirits, fatigued with bloody
campaigns and civil contests. Their habitations were small and modest; but,
soon, increasing luxury added palace to palace; so that ground was wanting for
the vast demand. Enterprising architects, supported by infinite wealth, carried
their foundations into the sea, and drove that element back from its limits; it
has since taken ample revenge, and recovered much more than it ever lost.

From being a place of resort, for a season, Baiae now grew up to a permanent
city; whoever found himself disqualified by age, or infirmity, for sustaining
any longer an active part on the political theater; whoever, from an indolent
disposition, sought a place, where the pleasures of the town were combined with
the sweets of a rural life; whoever wished to withdraw from the dangerous
neighborhood of a court, and the baneful eye of informers, flocked hither, to
enjoy life, untainted with fear and trouble. Such affluence rendered Baiae as
much a miracle of art, as it was before of nature; its splendour may be inferred
from its innumerable ruins, heaps of marbles, mosaics, and other precious
fragments of taste.

It flourished in full glory down to the days of Theodoric the Goth; but the
destruction of these enchanted palaces, followed quickly upon the irruption of
the Northern conquerors, who overturned the Roman system, sacked, and burned
all before them; and destroyed, or dispersed, the whole race of nobility. Loss
of fortune left the Romans neither the means, nor, indeed, the thought of
supporting such expensive establishments; which can only be enjoyed in
perfection, during peace and prosperity. No sooner had opulence withdrawn her
hand, than the unbridled sea rushed upon its old domain; moles and buttresses
were torn asunder, and washed away; whole promontories, with the proud towers
that once crowned their brows, were undermined, and tumbled headlong into the
deep; where, many feet below the surface, pavements of streets, foundations of
houses, and masses of walls may still be descried. Internal commotions of the
earth contributed also largely to this general devastation; mephitic vapors,
and stagnated waters, have converted this favorite seat of health into the den
of pestilence, at least during the estival heats; yet Baiae, in its ruined
state, and stripped of all its ornaments, still presents many beautiful and
striking subjects for the pencil.

As we rowed under the lofty headlands, says Swinburne; our Cicerone pointed to
vaults and terraces, and allotted them respectively to the residence of some
illustrious personage of antiquity. The sands abound with fragments rolled from
the ruins; and some men employ themselves in the summer time, in dragging the
bottom of the sea with small baskets; and seldom fail of bringing up with the
sand, a medal or cornelian, that repays them for their time and labor.

At the bottom of the bay, and at the foot of the steep rocks; which serve as a
foundation to the ruins, called Nero's house, are some dark caves of great
depth, leading to the hottest of all vapor baths: no one can remain long in
them, or, indeed, penetrate to the end, without an extraordinary degree of
strength and resolution. These baths, thirty in number, are said to have been
adorned with Greek inscriptions, and statues, denoting by their expressions and
attitudes, what particular part of the human frame was affected and relieved
from its pains, by each particular bath. Parrino informs us, that three
physicians of Salerno, apprehensive of the ruin, that the surprising efficacy
and reputation of these waters would bring upon their college, came hither in
the dead of the night, mutilated the figures, defaced the letters, and, as far
as their time would allow, disturbed the course of the springs; but the
historian adds, very gravely, that Hygeia, ever watchful over the health of
Naples, revenged this barbarous outrage, by conjuring up a storm, that buried
the three doctors in the sea, before they could reach their home or triumph in
the success of their villainy. The springs at the bottom of the grotto are so
hot, as to boil an egg hard almost instantaneously. Martyn says, these baths
are much frequented; and that there are sometimes, from the hospitals of the
annunciation alone at Naples, above nine hundred patients.

As for the city of Baiae, which stood on this coast, there is not the least
remains to be seen of it. The fort, lately built here, is called Baia, and
stands upon a rock; but the air of it is so unwholesome, that the governor
sleeps every night at Puzzuoli, which is on the opposite side of the bay, about
three miles distant. Sometimes prisoners are brought to this fort, which is
more dreaded than any other prison in Italy.

On the sea shore, facing Baiae, is an ancient temple of Mercury, which may be
looked upon as the pantheon in miniature, for it is not above twenty-five
common paces in diameter. It is quite round, with an aperture in the center of
the roof, for the admission of light; two persons, directly opposite to each
other, and whispering close to the wall, may converse with each other, without
being overheard by the company in the middle.

Not far from this temple, and nearer Baiae, is an octangular shell of a temple
of Venus. Behind this temple is a dark apartment hewn in a rock, called La
stanza di Venere, or Venus's apartment; the roof of which is embellished with
bas-reliefs. These pieces represent nothing obscene or immodest, but only
mythological stories and emblems; as a man pursuing a woman, a cupid, several
swans, fishes, festoons, etc.

After passing a precipice that projects over the sea, the remains of
Hortensius's villa are to be seen. This celebrated orator, Cicero unjustly
calls Triton, because he had accustomed the fishes in his ponds to come to his
call, and fed them with his own hand.

Near Hortensius's villa is shown an ancient ruin, said to have been the
monument of Agrippina, who was put to death by Nero, her own son. Within it, on
the left hand, is an apartment, to which we ascend by a ladder, where are
several bas-reliefs of plaster, representing a sphynx, a griffin, and other
imaginary animals. A figure of a woman, about two feet high, to be seen here,
passes for Agrippina herself; and; adjoining to this, is a smaller apartment,
where antiquarians say that her remains were deposited; but with what truth, or
even probability, is not easily determined. For Tacitus affirms, that even
after the death of her unnatural son, the tomb of Agrippina, consisted only of
an heap of earth thrown together, between Misenum, and the villa of Julius
Coesar. That this unfortunate princess had a seat in this neighborhood is
unquestionable, as appears from Tacitus; but the same author points out its
situation near the Lucrine lake.

Between Baia and Cape Miseno, are, likewise, several other remains of
antiquity; but, by the explanations of them, are mostly grounded on uncertain
conjectures, Among other pieces, there has been dug up hereabouts, a statue of
Venus, twice as big as the life, holding a globe in one hand, and three golden
apples in the other; from whence some antiquarians conclude, that Venus
Genetrix must have had a temple in this neighborhood; and, as Julius Coesar
had a country-seat near Baiae, others still farther allege, that he founded
and built this temple.

On this coast there is likewise an ancient temple, called Boaula or Boalia,
ascribed to Hercules; who, according to the ancient fable, brought hither the
oxen which he had stolen in Spain. Even still, a small district here bears the
name of Baulo or Baula, concerning which Silius Italicus says, Hercules videt
ipse littore Baulos. Lib. xii. "Herculean Bauli founded on that shore He
viewed."

The antiquarians are at a loss where to look for Bauli, or the villa where
Nero conducted his mother, after her coming from Antium. According to Tacitus,
it must have stood between Cape Misenum, and the Lago Bojano.

That the Elysian fields extend themselves toward the Dead Sea, is taken for
granted; but as for the exact situation, some look for it about the district of
Baula, where, at present, stands a mean village; others place the Elysian
fields, near the Mereato del sabato, as it is called. Others again are
positive, that the Elysian fields must have been in the neighborhood of Cuma.
All these spots, the fertility of the soil excepted, which produce delicious
fruits and wine, exhibit nothing so beautiful and striking, as to deserve the
appellation of Elysian fields.

It was at Bauli, which is very near Baiae, observes Lady Millar, that the
monster Nero contrived the means of assassinating his mother. Acinetus, who
commanded his fleet at Cape Misenum, was the man who suggested to him, the
contrivance of a false bottom to the ship, on board of which Agripina embarked,
after a great feast given by her son, to ratify their reconciliation. Here it
was also, that the famous triumvirate Coesar, Pompey, and Mark Anthony, met and
consulted: and here it was, adds Lady Millar, we sat down amongst a number of
peasants, not in a wine-house, but at the door of one, extremely hungry and
fatigued, and fed most heartily on very coarse bread, anchovies, and eggs; but
our beverage was Falernian wine, very justly celebrated by Horace, the growth
of the Monte Falerno, one of the mountains that bounded our view.

The whole of this beauteous bay, formerly the seat of pleasure, and at one
period, the most populous spot in Italy, is now very thinly inhabited; and the
contrast is still stronger between its ancient opulence and present poverty,
than between the numbers of its ancient and present inhabitants. It must be
acknowledged, that we can hardly look around us in any part of the world,
without perceiving objects, which, to a contemplative mind, convey reflections
on the instability of grandeur, and sad vicissitudes and reverses, to which
human affairs are liable; but here those objects are so numerous, and so
striking, that they must make an impression on the most careless passenger.

In returning from Baia to Puzzuoli, there is a road close by the sea, hewn
through a rock, and near it is an inscription in Latin.

"Instead of the road raised by Hercules, amidst the fury of the waves,
repaired by Coesar, when dictator, for self-interest, and restored by Agrippa
for ostentation, and after all ruined by the violence of the sea; Pedro
Antonio, of Arragon, in the reign of Charles II. having, for the health of the
public, put the baths in a good condition, has, on the firmness of a rock,
substituted this road, contrived by a wiser Hercules, destined to a better
purpose, and which will stand in no need of a Coesar, or an Agrippa. Traveller,
go on cheerfully along the Arragonian road to Baiae, where, as the marble
underneath informs thee, are noble baths, not subservient to luxury, but
conducive to health. 1668."

CHAP. VII. Of the Environs, West of Naples.
HAVING now taken a view of the environs East of Naples, we will proceed to the
Western side, which is no less interesting, on account of Herculaneum, Pompeii,
and the museum at Portici.

A broad, level road, by the seaside, and through a village, where many of the
nobility have villas, leads to the palace at Portici, at a small distance from
which is the entrance into Herculaneum; a city buried by a torrent of lava,
that issued from the mountain, in the first year of the emperor Titus
Vespasian. The thickness of the heap that covers it, has been much increased,
by fiery streams vomited, since that catastrophe, and now forms a mass of
twenty-four feet deep of dark-grey stone, which is easily broken to pieces. By
its non-adhesion to foreign bodies, marbles, and bronzes, are preserved in it,
as in a case made to fit them; and exact moulds, of the faces and limbs of
statutes, are frequently found in this substance.

The elder Pliny lost his life in this irruption; he, and his companions, says
his nephew, the younger Pliny, went out from his house in order to escape. They
had pillows upon their heads, with napkins, as the best and only defense
against the storms of stones that fell around them. It was day every where
else, but here a deeper darkness prevailed than in the most obscure night;
which, in some degree however, was dissipated by torches, and other lights of
various kinds. They proceeded as far on the shore as they could, in hopes of
finding some means of putting out to sea, but found the waves run extremely
high and boisterous. There, says this author, in his letters, my The DEATH of
PLINY.
uncle having drank a draught or two of cold water, threw himself down upon a
cloth, that was spread for him; when, immediately the flames, and a strong
smell of sulphur, which was the forerunner of them, dispersed the rest of the
company, and obliged him to rise. He raised himself up, with the assistance of
two of his servants, and instantly fell down dead; suffocated, as I conjecture,
by some gross and noxious vapor, having always had weak lungs, and frequently
subject to a difficulty of breathing.

The precise situation, of this subterraneous city, was not known till the year
1713; when it was accidentally discovered by some laborers, who, in digging a
well, struck upon a statue on the benches of the theater. Many others were
afterward dug out, and sent to France by the prince of Elbeuf; but little
progress was made in the excavation, till Charles, infanta of Spain, ascended
the Neapolitan throne: by his unwearied efforts, and liberality, a very
considerable part of Herculaneum has been explored; and such treasures of
antiquity drawn out, as form the most curious museum in the world. It being too
arduous a task to attempt removing the covering, the king contented himself
with cutting galleries to the principal buildings, and causing the extent of
one or two of them to be cleared: of these the theater is the most
considerable. On a balustrade, which divided the orchestra from the stage, was
found a row of statues; and, on each side of the pulpitum, the equestrian
figure of a person of the Nonian family; they are now placed under the porticos
of the palace; and, from the great rarity of equestrian statues in marble,
would be very valuable objects, were their workmanship even less excellent than
it is; one of them, in particular, is a very fine piece of sculpture.

Since the King of Spain left Naples, the digging has been continued, but with
less spirit and expenditure; indeed, the collection of curiosities brought out
of Herculaneum and Pompeii, is already so considerable, that a relaxation of
zeal and activity becomes excuseable.

This city, says Northall, must have been situated where Portici is at present,
for we knew we crossed under the main street, by hearing the coaches rattle
over our heads. It has been called by the poets, the city, or the salt pits of
Hercules. Urbs Herculea, Salinoe Herculeoe. This was one of the most ancient
cities of Europe, and is supposed to have been built before the Trojan war.
Dionysius, of Halicarnassus, relates, that it was founded by Hercules; and,
though many of the relations of Dionysius are fabulous, yet there are many
reasons why his account of this city ought not to be suppressed, or rejected.
According to him, Hercules, having destroyed the tyrants and robbers, who
infested Spain and Gaul, passed the Alps, and entered Italy, where he built
Pompeia, and afterward Herculaneum, at which place his fleet met him. The
Romans became masters of the city, two hundred and ninety-three years before
Christ. The agreeable situation of this coast induced many Romans to build
villas there; and it appears there were several at Herculaneum. Cicero mentions
one belonging to Fabius and Seneca, another built by C. Coesar. It appears,
likewise, by a description given by Statius, of these villas, that they were
decorated with the finest paintings and sculpture, by Aleppo, Phidias,
Polycletus, and other Greek masters; which will account for the great number of
exquisite remains, of ancient art, found in the city of Herculaneum.

It is at Portici, six miles from Naples, that the superb museum of antiques,
found at Herculaneum and Pompeia, is deposited. Were there nothing but the
cabinet of Portici and Pompeia, worth viewing in Italy, they alone would
considerably repay any traveller, for all the inconveniences he must suffer
from bad roads, bad inns, etc. should they be even more wretched, says Lady
Millar, than some that we have experienced.

From these gloomy vaults, speaking of the descent into Herculaneum, I
returned, says Swinburne, with eagerness, to contemplate the riches they once
contained, now arranged in a wing of the palace of Portici. This museum
possesses not only statues, busts, altars, inscriptions, and other ornamental
appendages of opulence and luxury, but also an entire assortment of the
domestic, musical, and chirurgical instruments used by the ancients; tripods of
elegant form and exquisite execution; lamps in endless variety; vases and
basins of noble dimensions; chandeliers of the most beautiful shapes; pateras
and other appurtenances of sacrifice; looking-glasses of polished metal;
colored glass, so hard, clear, and well stained, as to appear like emeralds,
sapphires, and other precious stones; a kitchen completely fitted up with
copper pans, lined with silver; kettles, cisterns for heating water, and every
necessary for culinary purposes; specimens of various sorts of eatables,
retaining their form, though burnt to a cinder; corn, bread, fish, oil, wine,
and flour; a lady's toilet, fully furnished with combs, thimbles, rings, paint,
earrings, etc. the busts fill several rooms; but very few of the originals,
whom they are meant to imitate, are known. The floors are paved with ancient
mosaic; few rare medals have been found in these ruins; the most curious is a
gold medallion of Augustus, struck in Sicily, when he had been saluted emperor
fifteen times. The fresco paintings, which, for the sake of preservation, have
been torn off the walls, and framed and glazed, are to be seen in another part
of the palace; the elegance of the attitudes, and the infinite variety of the
subjects, stamp them as performances worthy of the attention of artists and
antiquarians; but no pictures, yet found, are masterly enough to prove, that
the Greeks carried the art of painting, to so great a height of perfection, as
they did that of statuary; yet, can we suppose, those authors incapable of
appreciating the merits of an Apelles or a Zeuxis; who, with so much critical
discernment, have pointed out the beauties of the works of a Phidias or a
Praxiteles; beauties, that we have still an opportunity of contemplating? Would
they have bestowed equal praises on both kinds of performances, if either of
them had been much inferior to the other? I think it is not probable, and we
must presume, that the capital productions of ancient painters, being of more
perishable materials than busts and statues, have been destroyed in the fatal
disasters that have so often afflicted both Greece and Italy. Herculaneum and
Pompeii were but towns of the second order; and not likely to possess the
masterpieces of the great artists, which were usually destined to adorn the
more celebrated temples, or the palaces of kings and emperors.

A more valuable acquisition, than bronzes and pictures, were thought to be
made, when a large parcel of manuscripts was found among the ruins; hopes were
entertained, that many works of the classicks, which time has deprived us of,
were now going to be restored to light; and that a new mine of science was on
the point of being opened. But the difficulty of unrolling the burnt parchment,
of pasting the fragments on a flat surface, and of decyphering the obscure
letters, have proved such obstacles, that very little progress has been made in
the work. A priest invented the method of proceeding; but it would require the
joint labors of many learned men, to carry on so nice and tedious an
operation, with any success. Perhaps, such an employment would be well
calculated to fill up the idle hours of the nuns; whose delicate fingers are
best adapted to so nice an operation. At present, the work is suspended, and
manuscripts lie in dusty heaps, as useless to the learned world, as they had
been for the preceding seventeen centuries. One volume, that was unrolled and
completely read, contained a Greek treatise, against the bad effects of music
in a republic.

Among the antique marbles, the figures of animals, as well the fabulous, as
those that imitate nature, are finely done; they were used to convey water into
the baths, and there is much humor expressed in their countenance; especially
in those of the chimeras, basilisks, etc. An elegant statue of Diana, in white
marble carved after the purple gown, worn by the Roman ladies of antiquity; the
garment is edged with a lace, exactly resembling point; it is about an inch and
an half broad, and has been purple and gilt, great part of which still remains.
The statue, busts, bas-reliefs, in bronze, which are very numerous, are of such
exquisite workmanship, that it is not in the power of the most able artist of
this day, to execute representations, in metal of any kind, that can rival, or
even bear a competition with many of them.

All the rooms, about ten in number, are paved with antique mosaic, exactly as
they found their present floors in Herculaneum; these rooms, being constructed
of similar dimensions for their reception; and no two of them are of the same
pattern, The Al'y Grec borders, encompass every different floor, and are
curious in their regularity, and linear intricacy. One pavement particularly
deserves notice, it represents a Roman camp, forming an exact square; in the
middle, of each side, is a gate fronting the center. Towers of three stories
high, at equal distances, encompass the whole; they are all alike in size,
except those at the angles, which appear larger, and more considerable than the
others. The seats, for the musicians, found in the orchestra at Herculaneum,
are curious; the frames and legs being still perfect; they are of bronze, and
have been gilt; some of the gilding still remains; the legs represent two
serpents on each side of the stool; which, forming a kind of cross, somewhat
like two Ss, describe the serpentine line of beauty, and produce a most
graceful effect. Here are also inscriptions, setting forth the names of those
who used the bath at Stabia.

Amongst the utensils in bronze, the scales and weights deserve notice, for the
delicacy of their workmanship. It appears, that the weights commonly used, were
busts of gods, or heroes, suspended by a ring. The scales are of various sizes;
besides a great many instruments for weighing, like those called in England
steelyards; to which the weights, resembling human figures, seem to have
belonged. The moulds for ices, and various instruments for ornamenting pastry,
clearly prove the luxury of those times to have far exceeded, in fertility of
invention, that of our day: a great variety of strainers, pierced in the most
curious manner, and which are frequently found in pairs, one fitting into the
other; but, for what use designed, is not easy to determine; many of them are
in silver, others in bronze. Here are culinary utensils, of more various shapes
and sizes, than can be found in the best furnished modern kitchen.

One of these rooms is built, and furnished, in the exact conformity with a
kitchen discovered entire; it contains a number of articles, many of them so
complicated, that their use does not clearly appear; each vessel is of bronze,
and of fine workmanship: upon the whole, it seems indisputable, that the
ancients employed more refinements in their entertainments, than the moderns;
and must have served up a much greater variety of dishes than we do. The
dressers, stew-holes, stoves, boilers, fish-kettles, resemble ours, though they
seem to have been better contrived. The lamps to light the apartments, and the
candelabras to sustain them, show a surprising fertility of invention and
execution. Here are also tunable bells, of different sizes, for their cattle,
resembling those in England, called tintinabula; also keys, letters to stamp
with, perhaps to mark linen; instruments of agriculture, surgery and
mathematics. Another article, of culinary use, which would be very convenient
and agreeable in England, is a kind of portable kitchen, which does not exceed
the size of a commodious plate-warmer; in the center is a vase for water; under
it a furnace for fire, with an invention for boiling meat at the same time that
it heats the water; this vase has a double bottom, and three little flews, or
chimneys for carrying off the smoke; the double bottom admits of stewing any
thing in the manner called by the French a la braise: this would be a most
convenient machine, for those who like to eat in parks or gardens. They have
cups and saucers in silver, of superior sculpture to any I have ever yet seen;
and resembling in make those now used for tea and coffee: their handles are so
curiously contrived, as to balance them, and prevent their overturning, however
carelessly held when full.

The instruments of music, I particularly remarked, are the following; the
seringa, or flute of several notes, formed of bone, and which may be frequently
seen as the insignia, in painting, if not always accompanying the God Pan, and
the satyrs: the Crotali; these are like basins, or deep saucers, with broad
brims; they were struck against each other, and are of brass. The Sistrum, in
shape like a horse-shoe, crossed by several wires passing through holes, and so
made, as to admit of their slipping from side to side; when this instrument is
waved by the hand, the wires produce a loud noise. The Tibioe, or double flute;
this is made of metal.

In armoury are many shields, iron boots, spears, etc. In short, were we to
describe all the curious articles, that have been dug out of this celebrated
city, it would fill a volume. Such accounts have been published, and to these
we must refer the reader, whose taste for antiquities, will lead him to such
enquiries.

Sixteen miles North of Naples stood the ancient city of Capua; which is said,
at one period, to have vied in magnificence with Rome and Carthage. Hannibal's
army is said to have been conquered by the luxuries of this place. Whether
Capua brought on the ruin of Hannibal, or not, it is certain that Hannibal
occasioned the ruin of Capua. The Capuans, having broken their connection with
Rome, and formed an alliance with her enemy, were besieged by Fulvius and
Appius. Hannibal exerted all his abilities for his new friends, but was not
able to bring the Romans to a battle, or to raise the siege; and Capua fell a
victim. Capua was a flourishing city, three hundred and fifty years before the
birth of Christ; and, in the time of Augustus, contained three hundred thousand
inhabitants, and a great number of magnificent buildings. It continued in a
state of grandeur during the continuance of the Roman empire, but afterward
suffered greatly from the Goths; next fell into the hands of the Lombards, and
was, at last, burnt by the Saracens, in 842. Twelve years after this, its
inhabitants removed to New Capua, then built, about three miles from it.
Several villages are erected on the site of Old Capua, and one of them bears
its name; but the only remains of its former grandeur, worth noticing, is an
amphitheatre; the lower order, Tuscan, with a Doric over it. In its present
imperfect state, the architecture appears clumsy; it was built with brick, and
faced with stone or marble; but the facing is all carried off. Many of the
ruins have been removed into the new town; the walls of the townhouse are
lined with them, and exhibit gigantic grotesque heads, which adorned the
key-stones of the amphitheatre; private houses are also enriched with fragments
of these ruins, and the Cathedral can boast of many of them.

Modern Capua is but a small place, fortified with a rampart. The streets are
narrow, dirty, ill-paved, and thin of people. There is but one inn in the town,
yet it is an archbishopric. No city in Italy contains a greater number of
ancient inscriptions, brought here from old Capua; and a statue, of king
Charles II. of Spain, is erected in the marketplace. The country, between this
and Naples, (distance sixteen miles) is fertile, and delightful in the extreme.
The causeway, though of a much later date than the Appian way, it is not at all
inferior to it; and, in many parts, the rows of trees, planted on each side,
form a fine visto, more than a mile in length. The country, on each side, is
diversified with cornfieldsd, gardens, and vineyards; and the vines climbing up
the lofty trees, and interwoven with their luxurious branches, from a kind of
natural festoon.

The king is building a palace at Casserta, on the plain where ancient Capua
stood, out of all proportion to the revenues of the kingdom; and, when
finished, will be one of the most spacious and magnificent palaces in Europe.
This immense building is of a quadrangular form, 750 feet English, by 580;
about 112 feet high, comprehending five habitable stories, which contain such a
number of apartments, as will accommodate the most numerous court, without any
accessory buildings.

The quadrangule is divided into four courts, each about 252 feet by 170. In
each of the two principal fronts are three corresponding gates; forming three
openings, which pierce the whole building. The middle gates form the entry to a
magnificent portico, for coaches. The grand staircase is adorned with the
richest marble; and all the apartments correspond with the external appearance.
Moore tells us, that when he was there in 1777, among the workmen employed in
finishing this palace, were one hundred and fifty Africans, taken prisoners
from the states of Barbary, with whom Naples is always at war. There were about
as many Christian slaves, condemned to work there, for crimes against the laws;
they are, however, better clothed and fed than the Africans.

The gardens, belonging to this palace, are equally extensive and magnificent.
A great number of fine statues, most of them copies of the best antiques, are
there in readiness to set up, when the gardens are finished; which, probably,
are by this time. Here was a very large elephant, kept by African slaves. In
the garden is an artificial water, and an island with a kind of castle on it,
regularly fortified, and a numerous train of artillery; some of them nine or
ten pounders. I no sooner entered this fort, says Moore, than I wished uncle
Toby and corporal Trim had been of our party; it would have charmed the soul of
the worthy veteran, and his faithful servant.

At Lorrento, on a bay of the sea, eighteen or twenty miles South of Naples,
the town that gave birth to Tasso, in 1544, are the noble ruins of a villa
mentioned in Statius's Sylvoe, that belonged to Pollius Foelix; it appears to
have been accurately described by that poet; for, though the smaller features
are disfigured, the great out-lines of the place are still discernable.

CHAP VIII. Of the several Cities, etc.
AVELLINO is a city, about thirty miles west of Naples, in the road to Tarento;
we enter it by a fine avenue, a mile long, between two rows of poplars,
remarkable for their height, bulk, and closeness of foliage. The country, from
Naples, is delightful; particularly the immense plains of Nola, (remarkable for
the invention of bells) which are one entire grove of tall elms and poplars,
planted in rows, to support the vines growing at their feet, and stretching
their branches from tree to tree, in beautiful garlands. Between the lines, the
husbandman sows corn and pulse, without any fallow; and, to prevent the land
from being exhausted, raises early crops of Lupins and beans, which he hoes up
before they seed, and buries for manure. The harrowing, and rolling, is
performed by oxen. This soil is a sandy volcanic loam, very rich and vegetative.

Avellino is a considerable city, extending a mile in length, down the
declivity of a hill, with ugly streets, but tolerable houses. The churches have
nothing to recommend them, being crowded with monstrous ornaments, in a
barbarous style, apparently borrowed from the Spaniards. The cathedral is a
poor building. The good people of this town need not run to Naples, to see the
blood of St. Januarius; for they have a statue of St. Lawrence, with a phial of
his blood; which, for eight days in August, entertains them with a similar
miraculous liquefaction. Their only edifice of note is a public granary, of the
composite order, adorned with antique statues, and a very elegant one, in
bronze, of Charles II. king of Spain, whilst a boy. The number of inhabitants
is between eight and ten thousand. The bishop's revenue about 1,125l. sterling
a year. The magistracy consists of a syndic, and four eletti, all annual; which
offices are engrossed by a certain number of families, that neither
inter-marry, nor associate with the rest of the burghers. There is a
manufactory here that dies cloth, made up of various qualities and colors, but
chiefly blue; the duty of which brings in a revenue, to the prince, of 3,750l.
yearly. They make also here, a great deal of macaroni, which is in great repute
all over the country.

Avellino abounds with cattle and provisions of every kind; a good mule sells
for eleven pounds English, and a bullock for nine pounds. Each street is
supplied with wholesome water, but their wine is indifferent. The volcanic soil
produces little corn, but fruit in abundance, particularly the hazel nut.
Nut-bushes cover the face of the valley; and, in prolific years, bring in a
profit of 60,000 ducats, equal to 11,250l. English. They are what we call
Spanish nuts.

The women of this neighborhood are handsome, and take great pains to deck out
their persons to advantage. Once a week they wash their hair, with a lie of
wood ashes, that changes it from a dark brown to a flaxen yellow, of many
different tints in the same head of hair. This I take, says Swinburne, to be
the true flava Coesaries of the Latin poets. Experience has taught me to
discover many traces of ancient customs, in the modes and habits of the modern
Italians. Attentive observation will recognize the Preficoe of the ancients, in
the appearance and actions of old women, hired in Calabria, to howl at burials.
A classic scholar cannot stroll under the groves of the plain, without calling
to mind Horace's -- Durus
Vindemiato et invictus; cui soepe viator
Cecisset, magna compellans voce cucullum.
SAT. vii. That is, "The rough and invincible vine-dresser, before whom the
traveller often relaxed, calling him cuckold;" for he will see this
vine-dresser sitting among the boughs, lashing raw lads, and bashful maidens,
as they return from market, with the same gross wit, and rough jokes, that gave
such jest to the farces of Atella.

That verse in Virgil, "The lopper shall sing to the winds under the lofty
rock."
Hinc alta sub rupe canet frondator in adversus.

ECL. i. Naturally strikes us, when, in our walks, under the rocky clifts of
Pausilippo, we see the peasant swinging from the top of a tree, on a rope of
twisted willows, trimming the poplar and the luxuriant tendrils of the vine,
and making the whole vale ring with his rustic ditty.

Great likenesses may be found among the paintings of Herculaneum, of the
Neapolitan girls dancing to the snapping of their fingers, and the beat of a
tambourine; their petticoats whirling about them. A young fisherman of Naples,
naturally throws his limbs into the most graceful attitudes; and it was, no
doubt, from the study of similar figures, that the Grecian statuaries, drew
their nice ideas of beauty, and perfection of form.

If an antiquary longs for a Roman dish, Sorento will supply him with the teats
of a sow, dressed in the antique taste, by the name of Verina. The rigging of
small vessels, at the present day, answers the description of ancient sailing;
and, without examining the trim of these boats, it will not be easy to
comprehend the maneuvers of Ulysses, or Aeneas, in their various navigations.

In descending the last ridge of hills, between the Eastern and Western courts
of Italy, we come into the extensive plains of Puglia; in the center of which
stands Foggia, a principal town of the province of Capitanata, without walls,
citadel, or gates. It is neatly built of white stone, and has two or three good
streets. The custom-house has a handsome edifice. This town, with many others
on the coast of the Adriatic, was ruined in 1732, by an earthquake, and has
been rebuilt with neatness and regularity. In summer the air is unwholesome;
and all, who can remove, desert it, during the hot months. In winter, it
contains twenty thousand inhabitants, including strangers. All the large
streets, and open squares, are undermined with vaults, where corn is buried,
and preserved sound, from year to year.

This town has been of some consequence in former years, and still is, being a
staple for corn and wool, and where the toll of sheep is paid to and from
Puglia; for vast quantities of sheep descend in autumn from the mountains of
Abruzzo, into the warm plains of Puglia, to yean; and, in May, return to the
high country. The invention of this duty is ascribed, by Varro, to the ancient
Romans; who, on subduing the Italian states, were accustomed to allot the
improved lands to their non-citizens; whilst they left the wastes, and less
cultivated tracts, to the original possessors, on their paying a tenth of the
produce of the corn-lands, and a fifth of all other fruits. Breeders of cattle
and sheep, were to compound with the censors. In later times, the emperor
appropriated all such common lands to themselves, and caused them to be
considered as royalties. As this traffic increased, the crown, not being
possessed of a sufficient range of pasture for the great flocks, purchased
other lands of the Puglian proprietors. These royal pastures are bounded by
stones, and are known by the name of Taooliere; they extend sixty miles in
length, and thirty in breadth, and are capable of feeding one million, two
hundred thousand sheep: in return, the shepherds of Abruzzo bound themselves
for ever, to drive their flocks here yearly, from the mountains, and to pay
certain duties, or toll, for every one hundred head of sheep. This duty is
called the dogana, and is one of the richest mines of wealth, belonging to the
crown of Naples. It has been continually increasing. Soon after its
institution, it cleared 72,000 ducats; in 1730, it produced 235,972. At
present, the neat profit, arising to the king, from letting the pastures, is
about 40,000 ducats; but with the duties in tallow, wool, etc. this amounts to
400,000.

On account of the great variety of field sports, to which the adjacent hills
and plains are peculiarly adapted, this town was a favorite residence of the
German princes. Charles I. of Spain, erected a sumptuous palace here, and died
in this place, in his way to Brindisi, in 1285. The Puglian sportsmen run down
hares with greyhounds, and pursue the wild boar, with one lurcher, and two or
three mastiffs. The hunters ride with a lance, and a pair of pistols.

A few miles from Foggia are some faint traces of walls, said to be those of
Arpi, or Argyripae, once the capital of a kingdom, founded by Diomed, after the
siege of Troy. The flat pastures, about this place, and Manfredonia, for twenty
miles, abound in asphodels, thistles, wild artichokes, and fennel-grant; of the
last are made bee-hives, and chair-bottoms. The leaves are given to asses, and
the peasants eat the tender buds, when boiled, as a delicacy. This plant, says
Swinburne, who traveled over the spot, covers half the plain, between Foggia
and Manfredonia; and grows so high, that there is an instance, in one of the
wars, between France and Spain, of the Spaniards having marched through it
undiscovered, close up to the French entrenchments. The artichokes are given to
buffaloes.

Manfredonia is a city, built by Manfred, in 1261. In order to found it, under
the most favorable auspices, he called together the most eminent professors of
astrology, a science he had great confidence in; and caused them to calculate
the happiest hour and minute for laying the first stone. The port was secured
from storms by a pier; the ramparts were built of the most solid materials;
and, in the great town, was hung a bell of so considerable a volume, as to be
heard over all the plain of Capitanata, to alarm the country in case of
invasion. In spite, however, of all the precautions taken by Manfred, neither
his pains, or the horoscopes of his wizards, have been able to render it
opulent or powerful. It carries on a direct trade in corn, with Venice and
Greece, but has scarce six thousand inhabitants. It was pillaged by the Turks
in 1620. All sorts of vegetables abound here, and are infinitely superior to
those raised in the volcanic soil of Naples; and fish is plentiful and cheap.

About twenty miles South of Manfredonia, on the coast, in the way to Brindisi,
are the fields of Cannae, famous for the victory obtained over the Romans by
Hannibal, in the 536th year of Rome. The traces of the town are very faint,
consisting of fragments of altars, cornices, gates, walls, vaults, and
underground granaries. It was destroyed the year before the battle. The scene
of action is marked out to posterity, by the name of Pezzo di Sangue; "field of
blood:" The peasants frequently turn up spurs, and heads of lances, with the
plough; and horse loads of armor and weapons, have been, at different times,
carried away. The bread of this place is as brown as mahogany, and quite
gritty, owing to the incompact texture of the stone, with which the millers
grind their corn. They beat out their corn here, by the trampling of a great
number of mares, tied in a string by their tails, and whipped round and round.
In the Terra di Otranto, they do this by a pair of oxen, who drag between them
a heavy rough stone, that forces out the grain.

Barletti is another city on the coast, a little more to the South. It has a
ruinous aspect, its walls tumbling down, and its ditches filled with rubbish;
but the city within, though thinly inhabited, is magnificently built. It
conveys the idea of some mighty state, reduced by conquest to a province, or
depopulated by pestilence. Its streets are wide and well paved, the houses
large and lofty, and built with hewn stone; which, from age, has acquired a
polish like marble. Some of these venerable mansions have the stones cut
angularly, after the Tuscan manner. Many houses still retain painted arches,
short twisted columns, and other remnants of the taste of the Saracens, who are
supposed to have built them; whilst others are decorated with all the
embellishments of the old Grecian architecture. The cathedral is remarkable for
its antique granite columns. Ferdinand I. was crowned here.

In the marketplace stands a bronze colossal statue, seventeen feet three
inches high, supposed to represent the emperor Heraclius, who began his reign
in 610. He is standing, dressed in a military habit, crowned with a diadem, a
short cloak hanging from his left shoulder, and thrown over his left arm, which
holds a globe; his right arm is raised above his head, and grasps a small
cross. The image is rude and incorrect, and the attitude awkward; Swinburne
supposes it to have been cut in Italy, and dressed after the Roman fashion. The
citadel is spacious, and commands the port, which is a labyrinth consisting of
several irregular piers, where ships are moored, but not sheltered from the
North. The exports here, are salt, corn, almonds, and liquorice, which last
grows here spontaneously in the swamps.

The next city southward is Trani, a seaport town also, and an archbishopric.
There is, here, a collegiate seminary, but the students seem averse to study.
From time immemorial, no work is done in Trani after dinner, so that the whole
afternoon is spent by the inhabitants in dozing, chattering, or sauntering.
Though the exportation of corn from this place is considerable, it seems the
only business stirring. Industry seems to have forsaken the cities on this
coast; there are too many of them; so that, jealous of each other, they
enfeeble their trade; and, being averse to all friendly intercourse, never
study their interests. All sorts of vegetables here are plentiful, and
exquisite; the market-people sell beans and peace by weight, and use pebbles in
lieu of weights.

Trani is tolerably well built with stone, on uneven ground. The harbor is
encircled by the town, and has scarcely depth of water enough to float a boat.
The corn ships anchor two miles from the shore. The cathedral was erected six
hundred years ago, and is a mean building. Here is also a castle, consisting of
some gloomy towers; but the monastery of St. Clare is a sumptuous enclosure. If
there was a good road on this coast, it would be delightful to travel it, with
the Adriatic on one side, and olive groves on the other. There are other cities
between Trani and Brindisi, viz. Bisceglia, Molfetta, Giovenazzo, and Bari. As
they have nothing remarkable, we shall pass them and speak of Bari.

Bari makes a great figure at a distance, it is defended by double walls, and
an old castle, occupying a rocky peninsula, of a triangular form, about a mile
in circumference. The houses are, in general, mean, but built on a soil raised
by the ruins of former edifices, near thirty feet above the level of the sea.
From the rampart, says Swinburne, at every turn of the eye, we catch a
different view of the sea and coast, stretching from the mountains of Garganus,
to the hills of Ostuni. The towns, that rise along this line in various degrees
of shade, have a beautiful effect, and nothing can be more picturesque, than
the fleets of fishing-boats, steering for their respective harbors, on the
approach of night. On shore, the bloom of spring, and lively foliage,
contrasted with innumerable white cottages, form an enchanting rural scene.

This city is also an archbishopric. The cathedral has no extensive beauties,
and its revenues do not exceed 1,125l. English. Its steeple is one of the
highest in the kingdom, about 253 feet from the ground: among the treasures of
this place, is an iron diadem, with which some Barian writers pretend the
Norman kings were crowned. Religious orders abound in Bari, and some of them
have rich gaudy churches, with good paintings. Here are twelve convents for
men, five for women, and three hospitals. The inhabitants are about 16,700, are
an active pains-taking set of people, and carry on a good trade, in oil and
almonds. They also export to the Venetian islands, a large quantity of pot-ash,
soap, aniseed and garlic.

Brindisi was the ancient Brundusium, that gave birth to Pacuvius, and where
Virgil died. In this city Octavianus first assumed the name of Coesar; and here
he concluded one of his short-lived peaces with Antony. The barbarians, who
ravaged every corner of Italy, did not spare so rich a town; and, in 836, the
Saracens gave a finishing blow to its fortunes. The phrenzy for expeditions to
Palestine, (it being one of the ports where pilgrims and warriors took
shipping,) contributed powerfully to the re-establishment of this city. It was
also benefited by the residence of the emperor Frederick, whose frequent
armaments for the Holy Land, required his presence at this place of rendezvous;
but, the loss of Jerusalem, the fall of the Grecian empire, and the ruin of all
the Levant trade, after the Turks had conquered the East, reduced Brindisi to a
state of inactivity and desolation, from which it has never been able to
emerge. The Appian way, passing Bari, terminated at Brundusium.

Brindisi, as it now appears, is a great city, if the extent of its walls be
considered; but the inhabited houses do not fill above half the enclosure. The
streets are crooked and rough, the buildings poor and ruinous; and it has no
very remarkable church, or edifice. The canons of the cathedral retain the
ancient custom of having handmaids; but, as they take care to choose them,
says Swinburne, of canonical age and face, we may suppose these focarioe, to be
only chaste representatives of the help-mates allowed the clergy, before popes
and councils had reprobated them. These women are exempt from taxes, and enjoy
many privileges. When they die, they are buried gratis, and the funeral is
attended by the chapter, with great solemnity; a mark of respect not paid to
any relations of the canons.

Near the port, stand the walls of a palace, erected by Walter de Brienne, in a
very bad taste. Its materials are gray stone, divided at regular distances,
with broad courses of black marble. Little remains of ancient Brundusium,
except innumerable broken pillars, fixed at the corners of streets, to defend
the houses from carts; fragments of coarse mosaic work, the floors of former
habitations, the column of the light-house, a large marble basin, into which
the water runs from brazen heads of deer, some inscriptions, ruins of
aqueducts, coins, and other small furniture of an antiquary's cabinet. The
castle, built to protect the Northern branch of the harbor, is large and
stately.

The port is double, and the finest in the Adriatic. The outer part is formed
by two promontories, that stretch off gradually from each other, as they
advance into the sea; leaving a very narrow channel at the base of the angle.
The island of St. Andrew, on which is a fortress, lies out between the capes,
and secures the whole road from the fury of the waves. In this deep pit, or
space, large ships may ride at anchor. At the bottom of the bay the hills
recede, in a semicircular shape, to leave room for the inner haven, which, as
it were, clasps the city in its arms; or rather encircles it in the figure of a
stag's head and horns. This form is said to have given rise to its name
Brundusium; in the old Messapian language signifying a deer's head. Nothing can
be more beautiful than this interior port, or better adapted to trade and
navigation. It is very deep, and extends in length two miles and a half; in
breadth, 1200 feet in the widest part. The hills, and the town, shelter it on
all sides. The north ridge is plentifully cultivated and planted; but, that to
the South is bare of wood, and all sown with corn. In ancient days, the
communication between the two havens, was marked by lights, placed on
Corinthian columns. Of these, one remains entire on its pedestal, is built with
a green and white marble, its capital adorned with figures of Sirens and
Tritons, mixed with the Acanthus leaf, and upon it is a circular vase, which
formerly held the fire. The whole kingdom of Naples cannot show a more complete
situation for trade; and yet it has neither commerce, husbandry, nor is it
populous. From the obstructions in the channel of communication, between the
outer and inner haven, arises the tribe of evils that desolate this unhappy
town. Julius Coesar may be said to have begun its ruin, by attempting to block
up Pompey's fleet. He drove piles into the neck of land, between the two ridges
of hills; threw in earth, trees, and ruins of houses, and had nearly
accomplished the blockade, when Pompey sailed out, and escaped to Greece. (See
the plate, where the references are marked by birds.)

1. Roman way. 2. Castle. 3. Light-house. 4. Point of land where Julius Coesar
formed the blockade. 5. The old way into the harbor. 6. The new way. 7. The
castle of the Isle of St. Andrew. 8. The Atlantic.
BRINDIS ANCIENTLY BRUNDUSIUM.


In the fifteenth century, the prince of Tarento sunk some ships in the middle
of the passage, to prevent the royalists from entering the port, which became a
resting place for sea-weeds and sand, and thus blocked up the passage. In 1752,
the evil was increased, so as to prevent the waves beating through; and, from
this period, the port became a fetid green lake; no fish but eels could live in
it, nor any boat ply, except canoes of a single tree. The low grounds at each
end were overflowed, and converted into marshes; which every summer created
such a pestilence, as in a few years swept off the greatest part of its
inhabitants. From the number of eighteen thousand, they were reduced in 1766,
to five thousand livid wretches, tormented with agues and malignant fevers. In
1775, fifteen hundred died during the autumn. Well may Swinburne call this a
woeful change of climate. Forty years ago, the air of Brindisi was esteemed so
wholesome, that the convents of Naples used to send their consumptive friars
here, for the recovery of their health. This induced the remaining citizens to
apply for relief, to one of the kings, Marcestus, who was a native of the
place, and the port has been re-opened in consequence. It will now admit large
boats; the sea rushes in and out at all tides; and the canal, which is seven
hundred yards long, in a direct line from the column, is cleared; its parapets
defended by piles and fascines; and it is in contemplation to erect stone piers
on each side. Sir William Hamilton says, in 1789, the canal is now so choked
up, as to have only seven feet in depth of of water, in many places, and the
pestilential air is as prevalent as ever. The engineer who undertook to clear
it failed; but another is appointed, who means to widen the canal to
sixty-seven feet, and make it twenty-one feet deep; but there is every reason
to fear, says Sir William, that the proposed remedy will prove ineffectual, and
that this unfortunate city is doomed to speedy destruction. The workmen, in
clearing the channel, have found some medals and seals, and have drawn up many
piles, says Swinburne, that were driven in by Julius Coesar. They are small
oaks, stripped of their bark, and still are as fresh as if they had been cut
only a month; though buried, above eighteen centuries, seven feet under the
sand. The soil about the town is light and good, produces excellent cotton,
which is manufactured into gloves and stockings at Brindisi.

CHAP. IX. In Continuation.
THE next city, of any note, is Lecce; this lies between the North latitudes of
40 and 41 in the peninsula, called the heel of Italy; the breadth of which is
about thirty miles. Lecce is on the Eastern coast, Gallipoli on the Western.
The country here is open, interspersed with some coppices of small, jagged
leaved oaks; the fields decorated with loose stone walks. The Adriatic sea,
here, is not more than sixty miles over; the snowy tops, of the Grecian
mountains, are, in a clear day, visible. The villages, in this peninsula, make
a very pleasing appearance, the houses being built with white stone; but the
churches are ornamented in a very barbarous style, and the face of the country
is too rocky, and too bare of trees, corn, and grass, to be agreeable.

Lecce, the capital of Terra di Otranto, the seat of its tribunal, and the
second city in the kingdom, is better paved and built, than any town in this
province. If the builders here had the smallest taste, the buildings would make
a noble figure; for the stone of the country is so fine, white, and soft, when
taken from the quarry, that it may be molded like wax, and will receive any
form from the chisel; yet, when exposed to the air, becomes hard and durable;
but the architecture here, says Swinburne, is cramped into such crowded,
uncouth decorations, as to be far inferior to that of the Goths and Saracens.
Many of the paintings in the churches, and houses of the nobility, are by
Verrio, a native of Lecce, long employed in England; he died in 1707. The
number of people here does not exceed thirteen thousand; very inadequate to the
extent of the city, which has the reputation of being, to the kingdom of
Naples, what Thebes was to Greece; and a native of Lecce, is said to be
distinguishable from his fellow subjects, by his heavy manner, and dull
comprehension. It has, notwithstanding, an academy of Belles Lettres. Lecce is
twenty-four miles from Brindisi, and is a bishopric. Music is here cultivated
with a degree of enthusiasm, and many of the nobility are good performers, and
proud of exhibiting on solemn festivals. Leccean music has a very plaintive
character, peculiar to itself.

Otranto is a small city, stands on a hill, and contains only three thousand
inhabitants. Its harbor small, but convenient. The cathedral is Gothic, and,
agreeable to the mode in Puglia, has a subterranean sanctuary. The columns are
of beautiful marble, and granite; the pavement, a rude species of Mosaic,
called Saracenic, like the tomb of Edward I. in Westminster-abbey. These
mosaics are composed of pieces of porphyry, serpentine and cubes of gilt glass,
disposed in stars, coiles, or chequers. The compartments of the halls are
bordered with them; and the small twisted columns, that support the pulpits and
canopies, are ornamented with a spiral shape of the same work.

Otranto was a Roman colony, and is an archbishop's see. It was invaded by the
Turks in 1480, invested, stormed, and pillaged; its prelate was slain at the
church door; eight hundred principal inhabitants dragged out of the gates and
butchered, and their bodies left unburied for twelve months. Swinburne says, he
was entertained here with the music of some of those itinerant performers, that
play at Christmas, in the streets of Rome and Naples. Their native country is
Basilicata, where the inhabitants of the Apennines learn, from their infancy,
to raise the mattock with one hand, and play on the bagpipe, or flagelet, with
the other. With these people, music is rather a talent awakened by necessity,
than an act of pastime or luxury. Their usual employment is draining of lands;
but as such work is not always needful, they travel with their musical
instruments for a maintenance, all over Italy, France, and Spain. Some have
gone as far as America, and brought back much wealth with them. Their concerts
are generally composed of two musicians, who play in unison, with two long
large bagpipes, one an octave higher than the other; whilst a third sounds a
kind of hautboy; and, at the end of each ritornel, chants a rural ditty, to
which the bagpipes play an accompaniment. The instruments are all made by the
shepherds themselves, in those forms and sizes, which tradition has handed down
to them, and experience has taught them to imitate.

Being in the country of the tarantula, Mr. Swinburne took some pains to
investigate every particular respecting that insect; but could find no person
bitten with it, the season of the year not being far enough advanced. He,
however, prevailed on a woman, who had formerly been bitten, to act the part,
and dance before him. Many musicians were summoned, and she performed it, as
they all declared, to perfection. At first, she lolled stupidly on a chair,
whilst the strains were dull; but, when the men touched the chord, supposed to
vibrate to her heart, she sprang up with a hedious yell, staggered round the
room like a person drunk, holding a handkerchief in both hands, raising them
alternately, and moving in very true time. As the music grew brisker, her
motions quickened, and she skipped about with great vigor, and variety of
steps, every now and then shrieking very loud. Wherever a person bit is to
dance, a place is prepared for them, hung round with ribbands, and bunches of
grapes. The patients are dressed in white, with red, green, and yellow
ribbands, these being the favorite colors; on their shoulders they cast a
white scarf, let their hair fall loose about their ears, and throw their heads
as far back as they can bear it. They are exact copies of the ancient
priestesses of Bacchus. The orgies of that god, whose worship under various
symbols was more widely spread over the globe, than that of any other divinity,
were doubtless performed with energy and enthusiasm, by the lively inhabitants
of this warm climate. The introduction of Christianity having abolished all
these heathenish rites, and the women not daring to act any frantic part, as
bacchantes, Swinburne is of opinion, that, unwilling to give up so darling an
amusement, they devised other pretenses. Accident may have led them to the
discovery of the tarantula; and, on the strength of its poison, the Puglian
dames still enjoy their old dance, though time has effaced the memory of its
ancient name and institution. It has been proved that the tarantula is a
harmless insect, and the insanity, said to be occasioned by its bite, and cured
by music, is an imposition only on the credulous. It is a large spider with
eight eyes, placed four, two, and two.

Gallipoli lies on the Eastern shore of the peninsula, about thirty miles from
Otranto, in the gulf of Tarento. It stands on a rocky island, joined to the
continent by a bridge, near which flows a fountain of very fine water. From the
remotest antiquity, this station was so very favorable to commerce, that every
maritime power wished to secure it; but, the crown of Naples has so deserted
it, that it has neither harbor, nor shelter for shipping. Its inhabitants do
not exceed six thousand; but they are easy in their circumstances, lively,
merry, and, in general, well informed. The air is rather consumptive. The
buildings are tolerable, and some of the churches have good paintings. Good
muslins, cotton stockings, and other parts of apparel are here manufactured,
and purchased by the Provencals. The cotton trade brings in about thirty
thousand ducats yearly. Their wine is good, but oil is the great support of the
place. Two-thirds of all olive plantations are exported to France and the north
of Italy; the remainder is sent to Naples, and other Italian ports. In 1766,
oil was exported to the value of one million of ducats.

The olive tree is, here, attended with the greatest care. The fruit is not
gathered, but kept till it falls. The common method, of making oil, is to crush
the olives to a paste, with a perpendicular millstone, running round a trough.
This paste is put into flat, round, rush baskets, piled one upon another, and
then put under a press. After the first pressing, scalding water is poured into
each basket, its contents stirred up, and they are again pressed; and so
repeatedly, till no more oil can be skimmed from the surface.

Tarento is the next city we shall mention, and shall dwell rather longer upon
this, as affording more entertainment to our readers. It is nearly in the same
latitude with Brindisi, only on the Western coast of the peninsula, about
thirty miles from Brindisi. It is a seaport, at the upper end of the gulf of
Tarento; and admits of reflections on the general vicissitudes of the fate of
empires. Tarento, where now scarce a single fishing boat disturbs the bosom of
its waters, is that where the trading vessels of half the world once
rendezvoused; where the mighty navy of Carthage once displayed its flag. Of all
the temples, gymnasia, theaters, and other monuments of glory and opulence, not
so much as a single column rises on the hill where Tarentum once stood; which
is on the left in the plate of the present town; the paltry buildings, of some
mean convents, mark its ancient site; whilst the modern city, crowded into a
narrow island, holds the place of the old citadel, and still resembles a
fortress, more than an emporium of trade; but, in spite of all this change,
Tarento is still replete with wonderful beauties.

The present city stands upon a neck of land, divided from the opposite country
by the sea of Piccolo, which runs from the gulf of Tarento by a narrow
straight, six miles up into the country, forming a large oval lake, three miles
wide, divided into two bays by a narrow promontory. Tarento is joined to the
opposite land by a bridge of seven arches. Through these the tide flows with
great impetuosity, and nothing now but small boats can be admitted, which,
before the building of the bridge, was the entrance of the harbor. On this
bridge is carried the aqueduct, that supplies the city with water from the
opposite shore. This bay, and the city, is a delightful scene. Olive woods
clothe the fine ground on both sides, and the opposite hills are rich in
cornfieldsd and orchards. Over the city, and beyond the bridge, ships appear at
anchor in the gulf, or outer port, and the blue mountains of Basilcata on the
right, complete the prospect. (See the plate.)

VIEW of TARENTO from the SEA of PICCOLO.
view of Tarento

The city of Tarento has not much to boast of. The streets are remarkably
dirty, and narrow; particularly the Marina, which runs along the Mare Piccolo;
and is, without dispute, the most disgustful habitation of human beings in
Europe; except, perhaps, the Jesuits Ghetto at Rome. The only tolerable street
is a terrace, above the steep rocks that hang over the gulf, or great sea, and
prevent all access on that quarter. The cathedral has but little merit. The
square, near the bridge, is the only opening of any extent, and the general
resort of the citizens in summer, when they sit round the fountain, to enjoy
the soft evening breeze, and refresh themselves with the fanning of the balmy
air. In the hot summer months, the air is not very wholesome; but, the
archbishop is studying every means to improve the place by cultivation, and
other means. Swinburne was well entertained here. At the priory, he had, for
supper, fifteen different sorts of shellfish, all fat and savory; particularly
a small muscle, tinged both within and without with the richest violet color,
and the shell covered with shag. This muscle is dragged for in the great sea,
and then scattered on heaps of stones, sunk by the fishermen, at every
head-land of the Mare Piccolo.

Brundusium was the great supply of oysters for the Roman tables. From that
port, the spawn was carried to stock their public reservoirs at the Lucrine
lake, near Baia; and no mention is made, by the ancients, of any Tarentine
shellfish, except the scallop; but they have now ninety-three different sorts,
all eatable; and oysters among the rest. Very fine branching coral is also
found, along the East coast of this city; the places are kept a secret. The
quantity may be judged of by a boat's crew, once drawing up, in one day, as
much as sold for ninety-three pounds fifteen shillings English, that is five
hundred ducats, each ducat three shillings and nine-pence sterling.

The seas of Tarento are as copiously stocked with the scaly and finny tribes,
as with the crustaceous and testaceous. The people depend on their fishery for
subsistence, and pay very heavy duties to the crown, and rents to private
persons. The King receives 1700l. a year for rent.

Never was a place more completely swept off the face of the earth than
Tarentum, not a single ruin left; scarce a mark, that such a city ever existed
on the spot; and yet we are well assured by historians, that a rival of Rome,
once raised her proud towers, and arrayed her numerous armies along these now
lonesome hills. Near the Alcantarine convent is a small hillock, wholly formed
of the shells of fish, employed by the ancients in the composition of their
celebrated purple dye; and, not far from it, are the remains of some reservoirs
and conduits belonging to their work. Below the ruins of these reservoirs, the
shore is thickly strewed with fragments of Etruscan vases; and a little nearer
the city is the Argentaria, where the gold and silversmiths had their shops. It
still deserves the name, from a number of medals, rings, chains, and other
trinkets, constantly dug out of it.

The cotton manufacture employs these poor Tarentines, who are not able to be
fishermen. The pay of a husbandman is a carline (fourpence halfpenny) a day.
Cultivation goes on well; in some places the crops are divided between the
landlord and the farmer: but the quantity of waste lands is incredible; and
whatever pains they bestow on corn-lands, no one has an idea of improving
either pasture or meadow. Not a seed is sown, not a weed destroyed, not a bush
grubbed up.

I must not omit to mention the greatest curiosity, in this part of the world;
which is a well, mentioned by Pliny in his second book. Juxta oppidum Manduriam
lacus ad margines plenus, neque exhaustis aquis minuitur, neque enfusis
augetur. "Near the town of Manduria, is a lake full to the brim, whose waters
never diminish, nor increase by addition." This well Swinburne examined: it
excites the admiration of the people as much now, as it did in ancient days.
The water, in this circular cavern, lighted from above by a spacious aperture,
never rises or falls beyond a certain mark. If as much rubbish be thrown in, as
will fill it halfway up, it never rises the water above the mark; if the
rubbish rises above the mark, the water disappears. Clear away the mud to the
bottom, and you find a hard smooth floor, without any signs of a chasm for the
water to run off. The water is good and supplies the town; of course, all
experiments on it are forbidden.

Every baron in this country keeps a certain number of trusty, determined
fellows, to protect his vassals, convey his rents, and prevent depredations on
his game and forests. They howl by the side of his coach, to defend his person
and baggage. The radknights, or radmen, kept by ancient barons, were of the
same kind.

END OF VOL. XV.
DIRECTIONS for PLACING the PLATES OF VOL. X. XI. XII. XIII. XIV. and XV.
VOL. VII.
PLAN of Quebec, to face the Title.
VOL. VIII.
Death of Kouli Khan, to face the Title.
VOL. X.
Map of the circle of Bavaria, to face PAGE 3 Plan of Munich PAGE 7 Map of the
circle of Suabia PAGE 59 Battle of the Storks PAGE 77 Map of the circle of
Westphalia PAGE 121 Map of the circle of Burgundy PAGE 171 Genevieve of Brabant
PAGE 173 Flemings, or the Water Doctor PAGE 234 Map of Holland PAGE 245 A Dutch
Market PAGE 259 Plan of Amsterdam PAGE 263 Plan of Rotterdam PAGE 285 Escape of
Grotius PAGE 291 Dutch Liberty PAGE 325
VOL. XI.
Map of Europe PAGE 1 North Hollanders PAGE 71 A Dutch Trechschyt PAGE 72 Death
of the Prince of Orange PAGE 97 Map of Turkey in Europe PAGE 140 Environs of
Constantinople PAGE 151 Plan of Constantinople PAGE 160 Mrs. Montague's visit
to Fatima PAGE 287 Turks in conversation. The square cap is the dress of a
Janissary PAGE 321 Turkish ladies bathing PAGE 330
VOL. XII.
Map of Asia, to face the Title. A Turkish cemetery PAGE 49 Tamerlane's triumph
over Bajazet PAGE ^^3 Charles XII. of Sweden, and the Grand Vizier PAGE 187 Map
of the Crimea PAGE 232 Map of Greece PAGE 347 Ariadne's dance, and temple of
Minerva at Athens PAGE 362
VOL. XIII.
Map of the Archipelago PAGE 63 People of Mycone, and a Greek boat PAGE 67
Grecian Islanders of Naxus, Mitylene, and Scios PAGE 97 Cypriots, or people of
Cyprus PAGE 232 A Greek lady and her suite PAGE 263 The Pyrrhic dance PAGE 295
VOL. XIV.
Map of Turkey in Asia, to face the Title Map of Asia-Minor PAGE 7 Map of the
Holy Land PAGE 56 Dresses and people of Asia PAGE 164 The Holy Sepulcher PAGE
175 A view of Joppa and a Turkish boat PAGE 191 Ruins of Balbec PAGE 202
Mahomet's vision PAGE 206 Interview between Prince Mourad and his father PAGE
328 Almai, or dancing girls of Egypt; with a view of the pyramids PAGE 347
VOL. XV.
Plundering a Caravan PAGE 24 Inside of a pyramid PAGE 64 Temple of Memnon PAGE
75 Arabs of distinction PAGE 108 Map of Italy PAGE 175 Map of the kingdom of
Naples PAGE 182 Plan of the city of Naples PAGE 203 Death of Conradine PAGE 206
Insurrection of Massaniello PAGE 207 Duke of Matalone maltreated PAGE 208 Monks
feeding the poor PAGE 250 View of the bay of Naples PAGE 253 Neapolitan
peasants PAGE 254 The death of Pliny, and Mount Vesuvius PAGE 337 View of
Brindisi, anciently Brundusium PAGE 367 View of Tarento, from the sea of
Piccolo PAGE 376

