A Map of the RUSSIAN DOMINIONS from the last Survey of Dr. PALLAS.
map of Russia

THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author* No. 62. Wardour-Street,
Soho.

1788.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including all
the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And,
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. II.

LONDON. Printed for the AUTHOR, at the Literary-Press, No. 14,
RED-LION-STREET, CLERKENWELL; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC LXXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Number of the subscribers to this work having signified a wish that PALLAS'S
Tour should be inserted in the manner in which it was originally printed, we
trust the remainder of them will be equally pleased at our doing it; for,
though it deviates from that uniform, systematical arrangement we began with,
yet, as this tour is novel and curious, will be printed so as to be distinct
from the rest of the work, and as, when the tour is completed, we shall resume
our former method, and treat of Russia as we have done of Norway, etc. those
who wish to preserve that uniformity, may separate this part of the work from
the rest, and not bind it up with it.

These travels were printed at Petersburg, in the German language, and consist
of five quarto volumes, but as the chief part of these volumes is rather an
enquiry into the natural history of the country, and as such would be tedious
to the general reader, particularly so to an English one, we have omitted what
is dry and uninteresting; though at the same time we have followed our author
throughout his tour, and laid his journal before our reader, as he himself has
done in the original. Such parts indeed of his natural history, as we thought
might he entertaining and useful to the many, we have preserved, omitting none,
but those physical enquiries into the nature of the country he traveled
through, and which he was sent out to explore, in order to discover what parts
of Tartary and Siberia were worthy colonization. Where Dr. PALLAS has passed
over descriptions of people, their manners and customs, such having been given
to the world, by other Russian travelers, as they may not have fallen in the
way of our readers, we have endeavored to supply the deficiency from those
authors; but have pointed the passages with turned commas, that Pallas's
account may stand unmixed and not mistaken for the accounts of others.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE FIRST PART OF HIS TOUR.
THE commands of her Imperial Majesty to the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Petersburg, issued some few years back, for the benefit of science, and the
preparations made in consequence, are too well-known to the world, to be here
repeated. I had the honor of being numbered among those, who were to carry
those commands into execution. By the plan first designed, the natural
curiosity of the public would not have been gratified, it being proposed not to
publish any part of this tour till the return of the gentlemen engaged in it:
but, that love of science, which is one of the great ornaments of Count Orlow,
director of the academy, induced him to gratify the literary world, by
forwarding the publication of these travels.

This first part of my journal contains an accurate, but unstudied account of
the most important observations, in the first two years of my tour. Without
laboring to enhance the value of these sheets, by dwelling on the pains I have
taken, I shall only say, that I paid the greatest attention to every thing I
met with, and I hope my work, though destitute of the embellishments of
language, will not be classed among the number of trifling and superfluous
accounts. Descriptions of unknown countries, like the greatest part of those I
have traveled through, must be entertaining to the enlightened reader, let the
style be as indifferent as it may. The characteristic of a book of travels is
the fidelity of the narrative. What fell under my own observation, I have been
particularly exact in, and in those accounts I received from others, I have
endeavored to keep close to truth. Had I had more leisure, I might have been
more ample in my remarks; but, as the business of my journey, did not allow me
more than two months, to review my papers and arrange them for the public eye,
I trust, they will meet with indulgence.

I must not omit saying, that I have not entered into a very descriptive detail
of places situated near capital cities, as I would not dwell on things well
known already; for this reason, in my description of some parts of the
government of Orenburg, I have profited by the topography of that place,
written by Mr. Rytschloff.

I must further add, that I was directed to measure my journey by the Russian
Werst or Verst, which is equal to 500 fathoms, each fathom seven feet English;
of course, a Verst is about three-quarters of an English mile; and, with
respect to weight, I have used the Russian Pud of forty pounds, which is equal
to thirty-six pounds English.

Usa. April 28, 1770.
TRAVELS INTO Siberia and Tartary, PROVINCES OF THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE.
By S. PALLAS, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY, etc.
Taken by order of the Empress of Russia, under the direction of the Imperial
Academy of Sciences at Petersburg, in 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772, 1773, and
1774, and now first translated into English.
PART I.
JUNE 21, 1768. Certain business and the necessary preparations for our journey
delayed us till toward the end of June. However, at last, being properly
equipped, Messrs. Lepechin and Guldensteat, gentlemen, who were appointed to
accompany me throughout my tour, set out, one rather before the other, and I
followed with my attendants on the 21st of June. The inspection of certain
places on this side of Moscow, was allotted to these gentlemen, and I was
oreered to Astrachan; my shortest road therefore was to pursue my way to
Moscow, and to make all the possible speed which my heavy baggage and a change
of horses only every 50, 60, or 70 versts would allow, in order to reach the
distant parts I was going to, in a favorable season.

My journey was chiefly that of a botanist and a mineralogist, of course, my
attention was mostly taken up with examining the soil and the plants of the
countries through which I passed, but as a description of these would be
tiresome to the general reader, I shall omit noticing them here, and speak only
of the face of the country, the towns and the people, in the places where I
went.

July 2. On the 2d of July I found myself at Twer, about 388 English miles from
Petersburg, from whence we first sat out. This was a few years back, a
miserable wretched village, consisting only of a few poor huts, but is now,
under the patronage of the Empress, raised to an elegant stately city. It
stands on the banks of the river Wolga, in which a great deal of fish is caught
and conveyed in well-boats to Moscow and Petersburg, by the river Oka. The
fields here are well cultivated, and the place seemingly every where in a
flourishing condition.

It Were,' says Mr. Cox, who traveled with Lord Herbert, in 1778, is divided
into the old and new town. The former is on one side of the Volga, and consists
almost of wooden cottages; the latter, about fifteen years ago, was little
better; but being, in 1763, fortunately destroyed by fire, it has risen with
luster from it is ashes. The Empress, no sooner informed of this calamity than
she, ordered a regular and beautiful plan of a new town to be sketched by an
eminent architect, and enjoined that all the houses should be re-constructed in
conformity to this model. She erected at her own expense, the governor's house,
the bishop's palace, the courts of justice, the new exchange, the prison, and
several other public edifices, and offered to every person who would engage to
build a house with brick, a loan of L300. English, for twelve years, without
interest. The money advanced on this occasion was L60,000, and she has since
remitted one-third of the sum. The streets, which are broad and long, issue in
a straight line from an octagon in the center. The houses of this octagon, and
of the principal streets are of brick, stuccoed white, and form a very
magnificent appearance. This town is not yet finished, but when completed, will
consist of two octagons, with several streets leading to them, and intersecting
each other at right angles.

Here is an ecclesiastical seminary under the inspection of the bishop, and
admits 600 students, a school of 200 burgher's children, and an academy for the
education of the young nobility, admitting 120 scholars. The city is a place of
considerable commerce, and the river is covered with boats. It owes it is
principal trade to it is advantageous situation, being near the conflux of two
rivers, along which are conveyed all the goods and merchandise sent by water
from Siberia and the southern provinces, to Petersburg.

The Volga, which is the largest river in Europe, rises about eighty miles from
Twer, and begins to be navigable a few miles above the town. It is there, about
the breadth of the Thames at Henley, but exceedingly shallow; when it joins the
Twerze it is broader, deeper and more rapid. The rising spirit of commerce,
within these few years, has increased the people much; they are about 10,000 in
number. The city lies in the middle of a large plain, and the country, round,
produces in great abundance, wheat, rye, barley, oats, buck-wheat, hemp, flax,
and all kinds of vegetables. It Is forests yield oak, birch, alder, poplar,
mountain-ash, pines, firs, junipers, etc.

Plan of the CITY of MOSCOW

References
1 Kremlin 2 Bielgorod 3 Khitaigorod 4 Semlamigorod 5 The Suburbs 6 Yausa R. 7
Neglina R. 8 The Ancient Tzar's Palace 9 Church of the Assumption of the Virgin
Mary 10 St. Michael's Church 11 Church of the Holy Trinity 12 Tschudof Convent
13 Church of St. Maximus 14 Exchange 15 Printing Office 16 Devitz Nunnery 17
Site of the New Palace and Gardens Churches and Chapels




Moscow, July 14. From Twer, we went to Moscow, about the distance of 125
miles, where I was detained till the 14th of July. The river Moscow, on which
the city stands, is remarkable for the quantity of petrified sea-substances,
every where found in the environs of this place, some inches deep in the banks.
Here are also some physic-gardens, and pains have been taken to cultivate the
genuine rhubarb. A large field has been sown with it, and there is little
doubt, as it seems to thrive in this climate, but, that with proper attention,
they will bring it to such perfection, as to exceed that of the Chinese.
Experiments have been made of it in Scotland. Choroschowa, a village not far
from Moscow, belongs to the crown, and is renowned for it is breed of horses.

'The city of Moscow," says Mr. Cox, lies in the form of a crescent, stretched
to a prodigious extent, and innumerable churches, towers, gilded spires and
domes, white, red and green buildings glittering in the sun, form a most
splendid appearance, and yet these are strangely contrasted by an intermixture
of numberless wooden hovels. We crossed the river Moscow on a floating raft,
fastened to each bank, which the Russians call a living bridge, from it is
bending under the carriage. This city is certainly the largest in Europe, it is
circumference, within the rampart which encloses the suburbs, being exactly
thirty-nine versts, or twenty-six miles, (nearly equal to that of Pekin in
China, which including it is suburbs, measures twenty-six miles and
three-quarters,) but it is built in so straggling and disjointed a manner, that
it is population in no degree corresponds with it is extent; it is calculated to
have 277,535 inhabitants. The streets are in general exceedingly long and
broad, some paved, others, particularly in the suburbs, are formed with trunks
of trees, or are boarded with planks like the floor of a room; wretched hovels
are blended with large palaces, and cottages of one story stand next to the
most superb and stately mansions; many brick structures are covered with wooden
tops; some of the wooden houses are painted, others have iron doors and roofs.
The churches are built in a peculiar style of architecture, some have domes of
copper, others of tin, gilt or painted green, and many roofed with wood. In a
word, some parts of this vast city have the appearance of a sequestered desert,
other quarters, of a populous town, some of a contemptible village, others of a
great capital.

The river Moscow, from which the city takes it is name, flows through it in a
winding channel, but excepting in spring, is only navigable for rafts. We
hired, says Mr. Cox, a carriage, during our stay at Moscow, it was a chariot
and four horses of different colors, we could get no other; the coachman and
postillion were dressed like the peasants, with high cylindrical hats, the
former, with a long beard and sheep-skin robe, sat upon the box, the latter, in
a coarse, drugget garb, rode upon the off-horse, and behind the carriage, was
an enormous sack of hay. This is the customary vehicle of the city. They don't
put up their horses here from morning to night, but about dinnertime, turn
them loose into the courtyards of the houses where the master dines, and leave
them to feed on the hay they carry with them.

The palace at Moscow, is a vast assemblage of numerous buildidgs, distributed
into many streets and resembling a town, and all the timber used in these and
other buildings, are wholly fashioned with an axe, carpenters here never using
a saw, a chisel, or a plane. The palace gardens are of considerable extent, and
contain some good gravel walks; in some parts, the grounds are laid out in a
pleasing and natural manner, but in general, the old style of gardening
prevailed, and continually presented us with rows of chipped yew-trees, long
straight canals, and a profusion of preposterous statues.

We soon ceased to be surprised that our carriage had four horses, nothing
being more common than to meet the nobility with complete sets driving about
the streets. The hackney-coaches are stationed in the streets as with us, are
without tops, have mostly four wheels, and are provided either with a long
bench, or one, two, or three separate seats, like armed chairs, placed
sideways, and their fares are so reasonable, that servants often take a coach,
when they have any distance to go. The coachamn generally drives a full trot,
at the rate of eight or nine miles an hour.

Nothing can exceed the hospitality of the Russians; we could never pay a
morning visit to any nobleman without being detained to dinner: the principal
persons of distinction keep open tables, and have music during dinner. They
have also a great number of retainers and dependants mixed with their servants,
who stand occasionally round their lord's chair, and seem highly pleased, if
distinguished by a nod or a smile. At an entertainment given us by a Russian
nobleman, we were particularly struck with the quantity and quality of the
fruit which was brought in, after dinner, pines, peaches, apricots, grapes,
pears, cherries, none of which can be there obtained but in hot-houses, and yet
served up in the greatest profusion. There was a delicious species of small
melon, sent by land-carriage from Astracan, though at the distance of 1,000
miles. These melons sometimes cost five pounds each, and at other times are
sold for half-a-crown. One instance of elegance which distinguished the desert,
and which had the prettiest effect imaginable, must not be omitted. At the
upper and lower end of the table were placed two china vases, containing
cherry-trees in full leaf and fruit hanging on the boughs, which was gathered
by the company; we observed, also a curious species of apple, not uncommon
here, it is something larger than a golden pippin, has the color and
transparency of pale amber, and has an exquisite flavor. The tree thrives here
in the open air, without any particular attention to it is culture, but
degenerates in other countries. The Russian nobles display a great degree of
grandeur and magnificence in their houses, domestics, and way of living. Their
palaces, at and near Moscow, are stupendous piles of buildings, and in the
country they live like independent princes; as the feudal barons in early
times, they have their separate courts of justice, and govern their vassals
with an almost unlimited sway.

At the furthest extremity of the suburbs, in a sequestered spot, is a kind of
Vauxhall, the proprietor of which is an Englishman, by name Mattocks, to whom
the Empress has given an exclusive patent for all plays and public masquerades
for ten years. Here is a fine rotunda, the place was well illuminated, and the
entrance money four shillings.

The places of divine worship at Moscow are exceedingly numerous; including
chapels, there are above 1,000. There are 484 public churches, 199 of these are
built with brick, the rest are of wood. The former are stuccoed or
white-washed, the latter are painted red.

There are two convents in this city, one a nunnery, and the other a monastery
for men. In the principal chapel of the nunnery, lie buried several Czarinas
and princesses of the imperial family, in stone coffins, ranged on the floor in
rows; each coffin is covered with a crimson or black velvet pall, edged with
gold or silver lace, and embroidered on the middle with a cross, over which, on
festival days, are laid other coverings of gold or silver tissue, richly
studded with pearl or precious stones. Having seen the chapel, etc. as we
entered the antichamber, the abbess struck the floor with a cane, when
instantaneously a chorus of about twenty nuns received us with hymns, and
continued singing as long as we staid.

The churches of Moscow are divided into three parts, the vestibule, the body,
and the sanctuary, resembling our chancel. In the body are generally four
pillars supporting the dome, and these pillars are decorated with paintings of
the Virgin Mary and Saints. The most magnificent church in Moscow, has an
enormous chandelier of massive silver hanging in the center of the dome, and
weighing 2,940 pounds, it was made in England, and a present from the
prime-minister of Russia. The skreen that divides the sanctuary from the body
of the church is in many parts covered with plates of solid silver and gold,
richly worked. Among the many paintings which cover the inner-walls, is the
head of the Virgin, supposed to have been painted by St. Luke, and greatly
celebrated in this country, for it is power of working miracles. It Is face is
almost black, it is head ornamented with a glory of precious stones, and it is
hands and body are gilt.

Moscow is the center of the inland commerce of Russia, and connects the trade
between Europe and Siberia. The only navigation to this city is formed by the
Moscow river, communicating by the Wolga or Volga, but as the Moscow is only
navigable in spring, on the melting of the snows, the principal merchandise is
conveyed to and from this place in winter, upon sledges. The whole retail
commerce is carried on in the Khitaigorod or center of the city, where,
according to Russian custom, all the shops, without houses, are collected in
one spot. The place is like a fair or market, consisting of many rows of brick
buildings, with alleys between them. The tradesman comes to his shop in the
morning, remains there all day, and returns home to his family in the
afternoon. Every trade has it is separate department, and they who sell the same
goods have booths adjoining to each other. Furs and skins form the most
considerable article of commerce in Moscow, and the shops which vend them
occupy several streets.

Among the curiosities of Moscow, I must not omit the market for the sale of
houses. It is held in a large open, space in one of the suburbs, and exhibits a
great variety of ready-made houses, thickly scattered upon the ground. The man
who wants a dwelling repairs to this spot, mentions the number of rooms he
requires, examines the different timbers, which are regularly numbered, and
bargains for that which suits him best. The house is sometimes paid for on the
spot, and taken away by the purchaser, or sometimes the seller contracts to
remove it and erect it where it is to stand; and, a dwelling may be purchased,
removed, raised and inhabited, in the space of a week. These ready-made houses
are generally collections of trunks of trees, tenanted and mortaised at each
end, into one another, and nothing more is required, than the labor of
transporting and erecting them. Wooden structures of very large dimensions and
handsome appearance, are occasionally formed in Russia, with an expedition
almost inconceivable to the inhabitants of other countries: a remarkable
instance of this dispatch was displayed the last time the Empress came to
Moscow. Her Majesty proposed to reside in the mansion of Prince Galatzin, which
is esteemed the completest edifice in the city, but as it was not sufficiently
spacious for her reception, a temporary addition of wood, larger than the whole
house, and containing a magnificent suite of apartments, was begun and finished
within the space of six weeks. This meteor-like fabric was so handsome and
commodious, that the materials, which were taken down at her Majesty's
departure, were ordered to be re-constructed as a kind of imperial villa, upon
an eminence near the city.

At the entrance of each street in Moscow, is a chevaux-de-frize gate, one end
of which turns upon a pivot, and the other rolls upon a wheel; near it is a
centry-box, in which a man is occasionally stationed; and, in times of riot or
a fire, the sentinel shuts the gate, all passage is immediately stopped, and
any mob or concourse of people prevented.

Among the public institutions of this city, the most remarkable is, the
Foundling Hospital, endowed in 1764, by the present Empress, and supported by
voluntary contributions. It is an immense pile of building, of a quadrangular
form, and capable of receiving 8,000 children. Every child, that is brought, is
admitted, the rooms are large and lofty, each infant has a separate bed, the
bedsteads are iron, the sheets are changed weekly, and the linen three times a
week. No cradles are allowed, no swaddling, but the children are all loosely
dressed. The director of this hospital is so beloved and caressed by the
children, that, whenever he enters a room, they crowd round him, and are as
emulous of showing their fondness, as if he was their parent. They are divided
into classes, according to their ages; after remaining two years in the
nursery, they are admitted, boys and girls together, into the lowest class,
where they continue five years. The boys are taught to knit, card hemp, flax
and wool, and work in different manufactures. The girls learn to knit, net, and
do all kinds of needle work, spin and weave lace, and are employed in cookery,
baking, and housework of all sorts. Both boys and girls learn to read, write,
and cast accounts.

At fourteen, they may choose any branch of trade they like best, and for this
purpose, there are different species of manufactures established in the
hospital, of which the chief is embroidery, silk stockings, ribbonds, lace,
gloves, buttons, and cabinet-work. A separate room is appropriated to each
trade. Some boys are instructed in French and German, and a few in the Latin
tongue. Others learn music, drawing and dancing. About the age of twenty, the
foundlings receive a sum of money, with several other advantages, which enables
them to follow their trade in any part of the empire, a very considerable
privilege in Russia, where the peasants are slaves and cannot leave their
village, without the permission of their master.

In the hospital there is a theater, of which all the decorations are the work
of the foundlings; they constructed the stage, painted the scenes, and made the
dresses, and they perform plays in the Russian language. I was surprised, says
Mr. Cox, at the ease with which they trod the stage, and was pleased with the
gracefulness of their action. There were some agreeable voices in the opera.
The orchestra was filled with a band by no means contemptible, which consisted
entirely of foundlings, except the first violin, who was their music-master.
They perform also ballets, and dance with great taste and elegance. The Empress
countenances this seminary of theatrical representation, from a desire of
diffusing among her subjects that species of entertainment, which she considers
as a means of civilization, and of enriching the Russian theaters with a
constant supply of performers.

Kapawna. From Moscow I pursued my way to Wolodimir, through Kapawna, a village
about 23 English miles from Moscow. This is a place much celebrated for it is
nanufactures, and here are several gunpowder mills, belonging to private
persons. The country is covered with pine-trees, and the soil is every where
full of flints, bearing evident traces of petrifactions.

Wolodimir is a city situated on some highlands along the northern banks of the
river Kljaschma, and though not very populous or well built, yet on account of
it is delightful and advantageous situation, it is having 24 parishes, being
partly built with freestone, and partly with wood, and the houses encompassed
with gardens, it makes a good appearance and affords a noble view. Near this
city are still to be seen the ruins of the ancient town, which extended itself
near seven miles from the present boundaries. Whilst we were here it was
fruit-season, and we had no rest day or night, owing to those who watch the
cherry-orchards. In the middle of each, they erect a scaffold, from which they
strain lines to every corner of the orchard. On each of these lines is fastened
a rattling hammer, which if the line is in the least moved, gives a strong
alarm. During the ripening of the fruit, men are appointed to watch these
orchards, who frighten the birds by striking these rattles, and keep off
interlopers, by flinging at them. They have in general but two kinds of cherry,
except in the bishop's garden, where are grafted some others and which seem to
thrive. A large quantity of this fruit, vegetables, and cucumbers for pickling,
are conveyed to Moscow, about 84 miles distant. In the country round Wolodimir,
are many noble mansions, the seats of the nobility, though the lands consist in
general of dry, sandy heaths. In this neighborhood are some hills of
limestone, which they dig and carry to Twer and Moscow to be burnt. The
countryman fancies, that if he covers his cart-load of burnt lime but thinly
with asp-leaves, that the hardest and most violent rain cannot injure it.

July 28, Mugina. From Wolodimir, on July 28, we made the best of our way to
Kasimof; through Mugina, Wjoschki, and Constantinowo. Beyond Mugina the country
is woody, with a marshy soil, so woody, that there is scarce any open land to
be seen, and the villagers are obliged to clear it away near their habitations,
in order to procure ground for necessary tillage, which they do, by firing
these woods, regardless of the consequence, whether it burns to the distance of
half a mile square, or ten miles. So that we see standing a number of burnt
trunks of trees, which they are too indolent to grub up. There are however many
noblemen's seats in this vicinage, but they bear the appearance of a lazy and
forest economy. The timber in these forests is chiefly fir and birch, some
pines, and underwood of various kinds. The highways, on account of their
marshiness are, all along, laid with the bodies of young firs, which make the
roads very rough, and disagreeable. Not far from Wjoschki are two glass-houses,
which are at no loss for fire.

Constantinowo. The inhabitants of Constantinowo are mostly potters, and carry
their wares to all the adjacent towns; for the land, round the villages in this
neighborhood, is chiefly potter's earth.

Kasimof, about 130 miles from Moscow. Kasimof is a mean-built town, and the
lands annexed to it belong to the regency of Woronesh. Notwithstanding an
excellent freestone is found here, fit for building, the inhabitants make no
use of it, for the whole town is built, in the Russian mode, with timber; and
what is most ridiculous, they lay their streets and highways with boards and
timber also, and the few churches and large buildings which are erected with
stone, are built with such mortar as came first to hand.

In former times, when Kasimof belonged to Tartarian princes, they were not so
inattentive to the nature of their stone, for we still see some handsome
remains of their buildings worth preserving for the admiration of posterity. In
this Tartarian colony, (for the descendants of the ancient, Tartar inhabitants
are still resident in this town and it is neighborhood, who are, for the most
part, affluent fur-merchants,) we see on an elevated spot, a high strong
round-built tower or Misgir, of a ruined temple, which they are now rebuilding
by the Empress's order. This ancient place of worship is composed of bricks, 13
inches long, and it is tower of smooth-hewn freestone, seemingly taken out of a
quarry at eight miles distance. The other Tartarian remains are situated in an
enclosure and some gardens just by the tower, and are composed of the same kind
of freestone. This place seems formerly to have been the residence of the Khan
or Tartarian DIFFERENT TRIBES OF TARTARS AT THE MAUSOLEUM AT KASIMOF
prince, and there stood till lately some great buildings and a triumphal arch,
with Gothic ornaments and Arabian inscriptions, also an oblong, square-built
mansion, and a mausoleum not far from the common burial ground. This triumphal
arch was for some unknown reasons demolished by the present proprietor, and
converted into a lime-kiln, so that I could see only it is rubbish, and some few
of it is ornaments. The prince's palace has also been pulled down, and nothing
remains of it, but it is base or foundation, five feet in height, which is
converted into a wooden dwelling house. This mansion or palace was from North
to South, about 75 English feet in length, and about 22 feet wide. Under this
building is a cave strong vaulted, running under the whole.

South-east of this mansion stands the mausoleum of the Khans, which the
proprietor, though in his garden, has spared from destruction. It has not the
least gothic appearance, but is a strong, oblong, square-sided building,
composed of smooth-hewn freestone. It has, round it is top, a plain cornice.
The plate represents a south view of it. The western end contains a small vault
or closet, designed as I apprehend, for private prayer, according to the
Mahommedan custom. On the west side is a small entrance, paved with rough
unhewn stones, and on the north side a small window to let in the air. The
other part of the mausoleum has a vault, in which are tomb-stones. These vaults
are covered with earth within the walls, on which grow some elder-trees. The
length of the whole building from east to west is above 47 English feet, the
breadth from north to south about 26 feet, and it is height about 16 feet.

The little vault on the inside is not much above thirteen feet broad, from
east to west. The entrance to the great vault is on the southern side, almost
in the middle of the building, close to the partition between the two vaults.
It is a small door, not quite three feet and a half wide on the outside,
increasing to near four feet and a half within, but without any appearance of
hinges. On this door is a table or slab of marble, with the following
inscription in Arabic.

TO THE SOLE GREAT GOD!

THE PRINCE OF THIS PLACE, SCHAGALI-KAN, SON OF SULTAN SCHICH AULEAR.

The 21st day of the Month Ramasan, in the Year 962.

Viz. Of the Hegyra, this is, if I mistake not, according to our calculation,
in the year 1520. The great vault is about twenty-one feet wide, about
seventeen broad, and twelve feet high. The northern wall has two windows or
openings, and the eastern wall but one, which are like the door, narrower
toward the outside, and were formerly crossed with iron-bars, which some one
has thought proper to remove. On the ground, within the walls, are eight
distinguishable grave-hills, about seven feet long, covered with stones. One of
these is almost square, whereby it appears, that two bodies have been there
interred. Indeed within the vaults over which these tumuli or hillocks are
raised, there are nine skulls to be seen. At the head or west end of each
grave-hill was erected a tombstone five or six feet high, the top of these
stones shaped off in an obtuse angle. There is now but two of these stones
standing, the others are broken to pieces and scattered about. These stones on
one side were ornamented with flowers and stars, on the other was an Arabian
inscription, neatly finished and divided into spaces. Underneath these vaults
is a subterranean sepulchral cave, of the same length with the vaults, but not
so wide, the entrance into which is a narrow opening, formerly stuffed up with
earth and stones. In this low sepulchral cave dead bodies have been laid on a
wooden scaffold, but modern curiosity having troubled their rest, nothing now
is there to be seen, but scattered skulls, rib-bones, hair, and some yellow,
green, and brown striped taffaty, which has preserved it is texture and color,
tolerably well.

In the neighborhood of this town they gather the Birthwort, a plant renowned
as a family-medicine among the Russian peasants. It is reported, that this
plant boiled is an infallible cure for all pains in the limbs, and that it is
fruit, which resembles a fig, if eaten raw, cures all relapses of fevers.

August 3. I left this place for Murom the 3d of August, and traveled all
along the banks of the Oka, where are a number of luxuriant meadows. The
Russian countrywomen here, wear a particular head-dress which I saw not in any
other place. This is a flat, stiff cap, the top of which forms a pair of horns,
and round which, according to their fashion, they wind a piece of cloth which
hangs down behind.

August 4, 5. On the 4th and 5th we passed many lordships, for the nearer we
approached Murom, the more villages we saw on both sides. Just before we enter
Murom, is a chapel, built with wood, and dedicated to St. Elias, near which is
a small house of prayer, and an enclosed well, which this holy man is said to
have dug himself, and which the superstitious people believe is of great
benefit to the head and eyes, if they wash themselves with it is water devoutly.

Murom, about 54 miles from Kasimof. Murom, like the town of Kasimof, is built
close to the river Oka, and suffers much by the rapidity of it is waters, which
wash away the bank on which the town stands, and occasions many of the
buildings to fall in. The old inhabitants remember that the houses stood
formerly as far out as the middle of the river, and that a church, among other
buildings was once carried away by the stream. It even now undermines some
house or other annually; and, some at present stand so near upon the brink of
the shore, that it is rashness to inhabit them. Here are also some public
buildings, two churches, and a convent, which seem hourly to wait their fall,
and would have been in the water, e're now, had they not been supported with
large stones placed beneath them. Were willow-trees planted against the bank,
the earth would stand firm against the waters, and these disasters might be
prevented.

The inhabitants of this town are more industrious in the cultivation of their
gardens, than the people generally are in little Russian towns; for, they not
only raise culinary herbs of most kinds, but also melons and fruits. Some
houses have good apple-orchards annexed.

It may not be disagreeable to some readers to know, that in this vicinage
grows the Spurge, called by Linnaeus, Euphorbia palustris, which the people use
as an emetic, and if the leaves want efficacy, they take an extract of it is
root, made with hot-water. This excites but little vomiting, and that at one
cast, nor does it gripe. They assured me it was a good remedy in obstinate
relapses of fevers and internal durities. The dose, five Russian Solotniks in
weight.

The river Oka running here through limy, loamy and sandy shores, will not be
supposed to carry any precious metals; but, the fact is, that there are people
in Murom, that employ themselves during the summer, in washing the sand near
the town, and are richly repaid in what they find. This is small grains of
gold, silver and copper, and some pretty small stones. I have often seen them
at work; they dig the sand with a spade, and wash it in troughs. Such grains as
they find, they put into a quill, stop it up and hang it round their necks. In
these washings I have met with small topazes, cornelians, and agates. These
certainly must have been washed down the river from the demolition of old
tombs, or other accidental circumstances. Perhaps those grains of gold and
silver which they find, have the same origin.

Motmoss. Not far from this river, at a village called Motmoss, about
twenty-two miles from Murom, we met for the first time in Russia, people
afflicted with wens, and though the village is small, there are many,
particularly children and young folks, laboring in the highest degree under
this disorder. They say this evil is not less common in other neighboring
villages, and as the brook-waters used here, are of a martial or ^halybeate
nature, and carry many marly particles, the hitherto-unknown origin of this
malady might perhaps be found out, if those waters, where the disorder is
common, could be discovered of a similar quality.

Here is a great deal of iron-stone dug in this neighborhood, one hundred
weight of which will yield 30lb. of neat iron. The method of preparing it for
the melting-house is, to burn it first, which they do on stacks of pine-trunks.
There are iron-mills not far off, where they cast and forge iron.

August 15. On the 15th of August, we left Murom, in our way to Arsamas, and in
a village about twenty-four miles from it, I took notice of the use the country
people made of the Siberian Centaury. Having picked only the broadest leaves,
they dry them, beat them to powder in a fine woolen cloth, and use that powder
as a stiptic to stop the bleeding of wounds. It soon closes the wound and heals
it.

Forest of Muran. In the forest of Muran, great plenty of mushrooms are found,
which the country-folks gather for food, and lay up for the winter. These, with
bread, is the chief support of the poor. Such as they lay up for the winter,
they salt and dry. Every kind of mushroom is here eaten, except the fly
mushroom, and that which grows in dung. They either eat them raw with salt,
boil them in oil, or roast them; but, the most remarkable mushroom, is that
which they call Osinowik, which implies, growing in ash-wood. As soon as it is
gathered and laid in the air, or as soon as it is stem begins to ripen, the part
underneath the head takes on a greasy and blue color; if broken in the middle,
it is body seems quite white, but after a few seconds turns bluish in the air,
and in the end changes into a most beautiful ultramarine. Break it as often as
you will, the broken parts will have the same appearance, and if it is watery
juice is pressed out, it is drops, in falling, have a bluish cast, but
momentaneously change, in an open vessel, into the abovementioned beautiful
color, which will dye linen the same. It is a pity however, that at the moment
of it is highest perfection, it should grow gradually pale. Linen dyed with it,
and even the juice will go through every shade into a color, called Saxon
green, and in the space of twenty-four hours, will change into a bluish green;
which grows paler still, and cannot be preserved by any of the usual means. If
dipped in water, it grows pale sooner, and almost loses it is whole color when
dying.

Aug. 19. Arsamas, about 90 miles from Murom. On the 19th, we reached Arsamas,
about ninety miles from Murom. This town stands on an eminence, has some trade,
and it is inhabitants live more by commerce than by husbandry, except in the
article of onions, of which they transport a great quantity into the eastern
parts of the empire.

However filthy and ill-built the town of Arsamas is, on account of the various
trades and business carried on in it, it is more than ordinary plentiful,
populous and wealthy, which shows how far a little trade and a few manufactures
will enrich a state. The whole town, a few public offices and shopkeepers
excepted, consists of soap-boilers, tanners, blue-dyers, and shoemakers. The
latter work out, and transport a great deal of leather, here prepared.

Little but the common sort of leather is tanned in Arsamas, except indeed a
few Russia hides, which are not in the greatest estimation. They tan with the
bark of Salix Arenaria, a species of willow, and render the skins smooth, with
the purest and thinnest birch-oil, which they convey here by the river Kama.
They have no mills to grind their tan, but reduce it to powder by beating it
with heavy sharp-edged hammers, as they generally do throughout all Russia.

The soap here made is white, and but of one sort. They make their lie of
common wood-ashes only. The soap is boiled in iron furnaces so large, as to
contain from four tons weight English of grease to seven tons, and they put ten
pounds of salt to 100 lbs. of grease. The grease is then boiled often upon the
lie, which they frequently change, for ten or twelve days, till the surface
shows that the soap is completed. The furnace then is suffered to cool for
twelve days more, and the soap is dug out with iron spades. Of a quantity of
grease, they generally draw four-fifths of it in soap. Of the scum-soap, they
make a sud, and if the grease be good, it yields pound for pound.

The dyers in this town dye only that blue linen so fashionable among the
Russian women, except a little narrow cotton, which is here made. Their method
of dying is merely boiling the linen in water, in which they put very little
indigo and woad, with some wood-ashes, smoothing the cloth afterward by
pressing it, then watering it, and stretching it abroad till it is dry. Before
they dye the linen, they beat it, that it may not take too much color. Some
women dye their cloths red themselves, with a wild red they gather in the
fields and also green, in a dye formed from birch-twigs and alum. The yellow
chamomile, (Anthemis tinctoria,) yields an excellent yellow color, either for
dying or painting.

As the streets of this town are narrow and very muddy, and all these nasty
trades are there carried on, the reader may naturally judge of the impurity of
it is air. And though the inhabitants have no wells, nor any water to drink but
what they take from a small brook that runs through the town, they throw into
this brook without hesitation all the filth they make.

Besides these manufactures, they were establishing one for potashes, upon a
new plan.

In all the low lands about Arsamas, grows the Hellebore (Veratrum Album,) well
known to the peasants throughout Russia, on account of it is noxious quality,
for which reason they pick it out from the grass when cut. But as this is the
time of it is seeds ripening, the plant should be rooted out, or the seeds
burnt, to prevent the evil increasing. Young and unexperienced lambs will
frequently eat it in spring, and occasion their death; and, some hungry horses,
if it be left in the hay, will also eat it; when it occasions griping and
foaming at the mouth. Should it chance to fall into a yard where poultry is
kept, it is sure to kill them. Notwithstanding the plant has this deadly
quality, the peasants use it for a salutary purpose. They dry the root, powder
it, and spread this powder over those biles, which certain maggots, in this
country called Oestri, cause in the skin. Nay, they sometimes take the root
fresh internally, to expel worms.

Lopatina, about 16 miles from Arsamas. Upon an eminence opposite Lopatina,
about 16 miles from Arsamas, are some vestiges of an old intrenchment, which
appear to have been thrown up in the early wars carried on in this country,
against the Mordvines.

Kawara. In the village Kawara, lying east of Lopatina, is an abyss to be seen,
which swallowed up a farm and it is inhabitants, owing to some subterraneous
waters, which in their course undermined the ground. There was lately also a
similar sinking of the earth, which is now the channel of a flowing water. And
there are probably here some subterranean waters, as it is well known of a lake
in this neighborhood crowded with fish, than when they are aware of the net,
they retire to an abyss, the depth of which has not yet been fathomed.

These Mordvines inhabit the right shore of Pjana, dwell in some scattered and
sequestered cottages, and have preserved but few of their ancient customs,
owing to their being, for the most part, converted to christianity. They speak
however a language of their own, and have some peculiarities of dress, among
the women. In other respects, they are like the Russians.

The Mordvines are of Finnish origin, were of two tribes," says Mr. Took, 'and
were a long time in subjection to the Tartars, but even then had their peculiar
Khans. They compose a very considerable nation, and at every numeration of
them, they have been found to increase in the same proportion as the Russian
peasants. Formerly, they had a nobility among them, but those familes have been
a long while extinct. Before the introduction of christianity, a Mordvine was
not permitted to marry out of his own tribe, but at present this is not
regarded, and they settle in this or that tribe as they please, preserving
always some principal characteristic, several particularities of dress, and
many distinctive customs.

These people resemble more the Russian peasants, than either the Tscheremisses
or the Tschouwasches, (of whom we shall speak by-and-by,) 'and conform more to
their way of living. The Mordvines have commonly brown harsh hair, a thin
beard, and lean face; it is very rare to find a pretty woman among them. They
are honest, laborious and hospitable, but slow, and imitate the Russians and
Tartars in several things. There are not many unbaptized among them, but these
eat pork without any scruple, whilst all the heathen Tschouwasches, and all the
people of Asiatic Russia abhor and abstain from it, as the flesh of the
impurest of animals.

Since their submission to Russia, they pursue a life of agriculture, and are
not fond of towns, but always form themselves into little villages, and that in
and about forests. Their villages, houses, farms, agriculture and their little
flocks, their goods, their food, and their whole economy, differ in nothing
from the Tschouwasches and Tscheremisses. In like manner the Mordvines have a
little enclosure near their houses, wherein they plant roots and herbs for the
kitchen. They are not so fond of hunting as their neighbors. The Mordvine
women are employed in the same works as the Tscheremissian, and have neither
less dexterity nor application; the state of their families, their riches and
their taxes, are also the same.

The dress of the men is that of a Russian peasant, except their shirts, which
they pink and embroider about the neck and openings.

The dress of the married Mordvine women consists, of a high-stuffed cap, sewed
with various colored thread, with a slap hanging down behind, to which are
tied several little chains and jingling toys; linen shifts and petticoats,
which they ornament with red and blue dyed needlework, according to their taste
and fancy. They wear also a girdle, from which hangs down behind a kind of
apron, embroidered with worsted of various colors, and bordered with fringe,
tassels, corals and other rattling and jingling stuff. Round about the girdle,
besides the above, they wear several other party-colored fringed pieces. Those
who have such ornamented girdles, have their shifts more elegantly stitched,
and wear a wide, linen, upper-gown, with short sleeves, half-an-ell wide. These
upper-gowns are sometimes died yellow. Their upper-shift, (for they generally
wear two,) is fastened round the throat, with a small pin, and upon their bosom
with a large one, from which hangs such heavy collections of corals,
copper-buttons, small little chains, medals, coins, little bells, and other
jingling things of the like kind, that the Mordvine dress is not less heavy
than a horse's harness. Earrings belong to the every days dress, but, on
particular occasions, they wear bracelets, wound thrice round the wrist, and
exactly similar to those worn in India.

The girls' dress has less of these jingles, but in other respects it is the
same, except that they wear no cap, but braid their hair into a tail, agreeable
to the Russian fashion, to which are tied some knots of fringes and ribbands.
The old fashion was to braid the hair in eight or nine small tresses, those
behind each ear rather larger than the rest, having in both a square buckle, to
which hang medals and other clattering toys. But all the tresses were
lengthened underneath with woollen strings, and passed through the girdle. I
afterward took notice, that even the married Mordvine women, near the Wolga,
had their hair in a similar way, braided into a large tail with black sheep's
wool, so as to reach down to the knees.

Although the Mordvine women, especially those of Ersanian origin The
difference between this tribe and the Mordvines, will be explained hereafter.
, whose dress I have here described, are almost the filthiest of all nations
throughout the whole Russian empire; yet, the men deserve the praise of being
industrious farmers, and surpass their countrymen in this particular. They
breed as many bees as they can, "and will have" says Took, from 100 to 200
hives. Those that live about the woods are hardy and expert huntsmen, and turn
every thing in their way to advantage.

Some of their customs according to Mr. Took, are as follow. Their marriages
are transacted by negotiation, and they bargain for their wives as do the
Tscheremisses. The Kalym or price of the bride is commonly between eight and
ten rubles, each ruble about four shillings sterling; a proof that this nation
is not over rich. The time for the celebration of the nuptials being come, the
father of the young man goes to fetch the bride, whose father conducts her by
the hand, and delivers her to the former. Her mother on this occasion, presents
a little bread and salt to the father-in-law of her daughter; and then the maid
takes leave of her parents, which is always accompanied with tears; her
father-in-law leading her away covered with a veil. On her arrival at the
bridegroom's, they all sit down to table; the young man pulls his cap over his
eyes, and places himself by her side. A cake of three feet in length is placed
on the table, which the father of the bridegroom takes, and presents the
pointed extremity of it under the bride's veil, saying, Open thine eyes to the
light; be thou happy in thy children, and never destitute of bread! Immediately
after this, the bridegroom sees his beloved for the first time, whom his father
had bought for him, without consulting him. This done, they begin to eat and
divert themselves by dances, songs and sports, to the sound of a pipe, but
always with the mug in their hands. When the young couple prepare for bed, the
bride makes a great deal of resistance, insomuch that the assistants, force her
to sit down on a mat, and then taking up the corners, carry her upon it into
the bedchamber. Parents very frequently promise their children, while yet in
their infancy, and as a sign of the engagement, interchange the pointed ends of
horns, which serve them for snuff-boxes. The young woman, however, is not bound
by this compact, but if the lad is inclined to marry elsewhere, he is obliged
to pay a certain number of rubles by way of fine. It is lawful among them, to
have several wives at once, but they seldom use this privilege.

A widower always chooses to marry his sister-in law when he can. If the
parents will not consent to this, he tries to slide into her hand under the
table, a little loaf, without being perceived, pronouncing at the same time, My
sister-in-law shall be kept for me. On saying this, he must run out of the
house as fast as he can, for if he is caught, he is immediately regaled with a
shower of blows, as hard and as thick as they can be laid on him; but, if he
has address enough to escape them, the fair-one belongs to him.

Among the christian Mordvines, the brides likewise cover themselves with a
veil during the marriage ceremony. Great care is taken that they do not meet a
man in their way to church, it being looked upon as an unhappy omen.

The dead are interred in their best cloths; the company eat cakes and drink
beer about the grave, and place a portion of each upon it.

The greatest part of the Mordvines are now christians, but those who are
Pagans, call their supreme being by the name of Pas, the Mokscanes call him
Sky, which signifys the sky. They have a mother of the gods and a son of god
whom they call Inilschi Pas. Their Master Pas, is a subterranean divinity, not
very beneficent. The Nikolai Pas is the St. Nicolas of the Russians, whom they
hold in great veneration. The Mordvines attribute to him the prosperity of the
Russian empire, for which reason they light up candles to him in the Russian
churches, and in their houses hold his image in great respect. They have no
image, and their adorations, sacrifices and festivals in general, are the same
with the religious ceremonies of the Tscheremisses and the Tschouwasches.
Though the Pagan Mordvines have no knowledge of the religion of the Russians,
they suppose them to have peculiar divinities, and to obtain their favor, they
sacrifice game, and make oblations of cakes and liquors every Christmas and
Easter Day. Whenever they hear thunder they exclaim, Paschangui Pourguini Pas,
that is, Have mercy on us O God Pourguini! But they make no offering of any
kind to this deity. Their prayers are the same with those of the people we have
so oftened mentioned. The countenance they put on when they pray, the manner of
lying with their faces on the earth, and several of their other customs seem
borrowed from the Tartars.

August 28. On the 28th of August, I left the Pjana and pursued my way to
Saransk. This district is remarkable for that rich black soil so common to the
Sura, Wolga, and other rivers, which flow from the east into the Wolga. In all
these parts, the happy husbandman has no occasion to manure his grounds, and
commonly fallows his land but every third crop. Here are spots where the soil
never fails, but, where, if it diminishes in richness, there is plenty of
ground in the less inhabited parts, plenty of lay land, which if turned up,
produces the finest arable imaginable. Was this rich ground to be manured, the
corn would be too luxuriant and fall. With all these advantages, it is to be
lamented, that they sow neither hemp, flax, or corn, more than they have
occasion for their use; but, only provide for themselves and the next market.
The people here are also very reprehensible for heaping up their dung as they
do, on hills, the produce of their numerous herds, as such enormous dung-hills
beget monstrous swarms of flies, which are very troublesome.

Arath, about 35 miles from Arsamas. In the town of Arath reside many potters.
These burn their vessels in a large pot full of holes, resembling a tub, set in
the ground, which the Russians use by way of oven, and when the vessel is
red-hot, quench it in boiling water in which some flour has been thrown. They
are of opinion this gives the pots a greater solidity and hardness.

Tolskoi Maidan, about 11 miles from Arath. As we traveled further on, we
passed villages, particularly about Tolskoi, where their cattle were dying with
a plague or contagious distemper. It is evident, that the chief cause of this
disorder is their moist pasture and the little care that is taken to keep the
cattle dry and clean.

Potshinki, about 20 miles from Tolskoi. At Potshinki are some fine meadows,
where there is a breed of horses, for the Imperial life-guards, to which this
stud belongs. The stallions are mostly of Danish race, in order to get large
horses. The number generally kept is 30, and about 720 mares. Potshinki is a
pretty place, a borough town, has a garrison, three churches, and some thousand
houses.

Saransk, about 46 miles from Tolskoi, Sept. 1. On the 1st day of September, we
arrived at Saransk, and though the farmers were here busy with their harvest,
we had a strong frost. Saransk is a small place, in the province of Pensa and
regency of Casan, and inhabited by husbandmen, a few tradesmen and merchants
excepted. In Saransk, as in all other little towns, in the innermost part of
the empire, many of the female inhabitants are employed in dying woollen yarn,
with the juice of some herbs growing in this country; and, as I wish to
communicate any useful intelligence I could meet with; that some of my readers
may profit by my enquiries, I was very inquisitive into the nature of this dye.
The principal ingredient is a kind of moss, which grows very copiously in all
the fenny woods of Russia, and is universally known by the name of Seleniza, in
Latin, Lycopodium complanatum. The country people gather it by handfuls, tie it
in bunches, and carry it to market, where it is sold very cheap. This moss is
first reduced to powder, and then made into the consistency of pap, and very
sour with flour. The yarn to be dyed, remains one or more nights in this
mixture, which gives it a yellowish cast, it is then washed and dried, and is
fit to receive any other color. The common people, who know not the use of
alum, have recourse to this preparation, in almost all dies; but, the
Mordvines, the people of Tschuwa, and the Tartars, use either the common yellow
pheasant's-eye (Adonis verna,) or the common wormwood, with a small quantity of
single-seeded broom mixed, the Genista tinctoria, but sometimes, they use only
the thistle, (Carduus heterophyllus,) with it is pretty, yellow-colouring
leaves, called by the Ersane race of Mordvines, Pishelaoma-tiksched, (the green
herb,) with which they boil the wool that has been dyed blue, with indigo or
woad, and give it a beautiful green.

The herbs commonly made use of here for dying, are the following.

For a light yellow, the yellow chamomile, (Anthemis tinctoria,) the
single-seeded broom, the dyer's thistle, or melilot, (Serratula,) weeds growing
generally throughout Russia.

For a fine yellow, the water-hemp agrimony, (Bidens tripartita.)

For a deep red, the roots of lady's bed-straw, (Gallium molugo,) or the
wood-ruffe, (aperula tinctoria,) which they call in Russ, Marjona.

To attempt scarlet, they use the common marjoram, (Origanum.)

For green, they dye blue wool, with the abovenamed yellow-dying herbs, or
birch leaves. There are also some who possess the art of making a high green,
by an addition of alum, the unblown ears of the reed (Arundo calamogrostis,)
and a yellow green, from the berries of their foul-tree, (in Russ, Kruschina.)
The country women know where to gather all these, in their proper seasons.

For blue, they have no other coloring than the wild woad, which grows in
little Russia, but they occasionally purchase indigo, or logwood from the
merchants, which they use in their own way.

In order to die yellow, with the single-seeded broom, it is powder is mixed
with that pap-like preparation I have mentioned; but, the wool receives first a
yellowish tinge, by laying a week in that preparation, before the broom is
mixed with it. To brighten the color, after the wool has been soaked and
dried, they wash it at different times in lie. The melilot is boiled in water,
with the addition of a little alum, and the yarn, after having undergone the
first preparation, is washed in this dye or liquor. They dye silk, and
sometimes wool, with the flower of the yellow chamomile, and the African
marigold (tagetes,) but with these ingredients, the alum is particularly
necessary. The water-hemp agrimony, affords a pretty high yellow, if boiled
with some alum, and this grows still more flaming, by the addition of the root
of lady's bed-straw and wood-ruffe; and, the oftener the article is dipped in
this dye, the brighter the color. This wild red, (for so I call the root of
lady's bed-straw and wood-ruffe,) is like most plants used here for dying,
bruised in wooden mortars, and ground to powder with hand-mills. This is made
into a pap-like consistency with water, and placed in a warm oven for one
night. Next day they add more water, and boil it, and to give brightness to the
color, boil some oak or birch-bark with it. Sometimes they add ashes to it.
And when the dye is deep enough, and lukewarm, they dip their wool two or
three times in it, and once more, when the dye is boiling hot. If the color
pleases them, they next wash the yarn in the river, and dry it. But the color
is commonly brightest, when the dye consists of a mixture of water-hemp
agrimony, the melilot, the single-seeded broom, and the thistle Carduus
heterophyllus, and the best tincture is made by that deep black-red powder,
which, when the roots are gently beaten, comes off at first, this being,
properly speaking, the genuine dying bark.

The use of the marjoram (Origanum,) is different, and was thus described to
me. The flowers and crowns of this plant were gathered whilst in bloom, dried
in an oven, and reduced to powder. In the same manner they powder the young
spring-leaves of the apple tree. An equal quantity of each of these is taken,
(though some will take two-fourths of melilot, one of apple-leaves, and one of
boiled malt,) and well mixed with leaven, to make it ferment. As soon as it is
sour, it is squeezed out with the hands, and set for a whole night in a warm
oven, where it is frequently stirred. Here it is dried; this done, it is boiled
in clean water, and the dye is complete. Some go to work more simply, by taking
equal parts of the herbs and apple-leaves, and boil them with alum. But, with
this process, the red will not be beautiful. The color thus prepared, is very
bright, and will not fade by washing.

Issa, 27 miles from Saransk, Sept. 5. On the 4th of September we quitted
Saransk, and reached Issa, a village belonging to Count Woronzo, at the
distance of about twenty-seven miles, pretty late in the evening. This place is
also remarkable for it is breed of horses, and of course, little grain is here
sowed, but oats. Here is also a carpet manufactory, and another in an adjacent
manor. The carpets here fabricated, are renowned for their beauty, and deserve
encouragement, was it only because the wool, of which they are made, is taken
from the backs of the sheep here bred; the works being carried on by children,
over whom a skilful country lass presides, and the wool being dyed, from plants
growing in the neighborhood. The only foreign color they make use of, are the
brasil-wood, which dies crimson, if prepared with lie, the indigo for dying
blue, and the log-wood for dying violet; but, these colors are not so lasting,
as those from the herbs I have mentioned.

Insara, about 24 miles from Issa. About twenty-four miles from Issa, in the
high road to Pensa, we found ourselves at the city of Insara. This is an abject
place, built by the people of Streliza, during the late reign of Peter the
Great, whose inhabitants, were neither active nor industrious. The town is
situated on the banks of the river Insara, which falls into the Issa. At the
upper end of the city, the residing Sawodshik Nikonof, has established an iron
manufactory, built a good house for himself, and erected a church with stone,
which are the best buildings in this place. The public offices and cathedral,
are in the wooden fortress, and in poor condition, as is another church built
with wood. The iron utensils made in this manufactory, are pots, boilers, and a
kind of large seething vessels, which is the chief furniture of a Tartar or
Kalmuck's house, and which produce a good price. They manufacture annually,
about twenty ton-weight of these articles, which they carry up the Wolga, to
the markets in little Russia.

The iron-stone that supplys this manufactory, is about eight miles distance.
There is also in this neighborhood a manufactory for making pot-ash.

Sept. 6. Schadin, 18 miles from Insa. On the 6th of September we left Insar
for Pensa, and at night reached the Mordvine village Schadin, a distance of
eighteen miles. The inhabitants of this place, are of a different origin from
those who are settled near the Pjana, in the regency of Nischegorod. They are
careful to distinguish themselves from the latter, and call themselves
Mokschanes, which expresses in their language, the whole race of Mordvines, and
give the others, the name of Ersanes. In these districts inhabited by the
Mokschanes, are very few villages of the other tribe, but both are occasionally
met with in the same villages, and with little difference between them, all
along the rivers Wolga, Sok and Tscheremsham, and other neighboring districts
belonging to the regencies of Casan and Orenburg, where they were sent with
other people to form new colonies. The Mokschanes still say, that before they
were dispersed, they inhabited the countries about all the rivers near the
Mokscha, or Moscow, (to which they gave their name,) as far as the river Oka,
and have been governed by their own little princes. These are the same people
of Mokscha, of whom Stralenberg speaks. They resemble the Ersanes in many
respects, particularly in their language, and yet differ in many points of
female dress, and the pronunciation of their words, some of which are peculiar
to this race.

This difference is easily discoverable, by comparing the female dress of the
Ersanes, with the annexed representation of the holiday dress of the
Mokschanian women. The latter have in general more elegance and taste; their
cap is not stuffed so high, nor do they hang any rattling toys to it, but it is
only plainly worked with the needle, and the cap tied behind the neck with a
string. Many wear only one band of linen round the head, the ends of which are
decorated with open needle work, and being tied behind, hang down more or less
upon their backs. This dress is very much in vogue about the river Wolga. In
the dress of the women of Mokscha, the several latchets or strings, which are
fastened to the cap, and hang down on each side of the bosom, are ornamented
with an old Russian silver coin, and on the bosom are joined, across at their
ends, by little chains and jingling toys. On the breast-pin, is fastened a kind
of shield, and which is rendered heavier, by the quantity of coral, and other
clattering ornaments hung to it, than that of the Ersanes. About their neck
they wear a collar formed of network, composed of many variegated glass-beads.
From their girdle hangs down before a large needle-worked apron, divided into
four parts from top to bottom, each of which is pinned to the other, and
ornamented at bottom, with long tassels, glass-beads, and a certain species of
snail-shells, chiefly brought from India, the Cyprea nodosa. Behind, instead of
an apron, hangs down several black woollen tassels, fastened on strings of
various lengths. They used to stick shells and medals with pins upon the bosom
and neck of their shifts, to increase the noise. But the most peculiar part of
the dress of the women of Mokscha, are some large flying tufts of hair, formed
by a short stick within the lock, and leaving the hair loose at the end; many
of these short tails are made and hang between other parts of the hair, which
are braided into little tresses. These tufts are now out of fashion, and only
to be seen on old women, who are in fact ashamed to show them, and often will
not wear them, if not induced to it by much flattery and persuasion. Neither do
the women of Mokscha, when dressed, bind up their feet with linen bands, but
with leather latchets or thongs.

The people of Mokscha, as I observed before, being now all converted to
christianity, remember and retain but few of their former customs and opinions.
They are said to have differed little from the Ersanes. They have uniformly
assured me, that they neither had idols nor subordinate deities, but always
offered up their sacrifices to an invisible Supreme Being, whom they did not
call Paas, as do the Ersanes, but Schkai, or heaven itself, and to which they
prayed, turning their faces to the east. They had altars at distant places
within the wood, in which they sacrificed horses, oxen, and small cattle. At
the burial of a deceased person, the parents were to perform a sacrifice, and
the mourners were women. They married their children, before they were
grown-up, and frequently gave young women to boys, under a notion of
encouraging female industry, and making the wife by her labor, maintain her
husband. Men were accustomed to give a portion to their daughters in marriage,
which was returned them afterward, in imitation of all other eastern nations.
When the marriage ceremony took place, the bride, in the presence of her own
parents, and those of her husband, was set upon a mat and carried into the
bridegrooms bedchamber with these words, Wot tet Wergass Utscha, that is,
Here, wolf, take the lamb, during which ceremony, she was to show no
disinclination or shame-facedness. At present, after the rites are performed in
the Russian church, and the bride is returned, she is expected to lament her
former situation exceedingly, and some indeed do it so sincerely, as to tear
their hair, and scratch their faces most inhumanly. She also wears a linen veil
of needle work over her face. The day after the nuptials, the elder of the
parents goes in a solemn manner, with a loaf of bread, on which some little
ornament, to wear upon the bosom, is fastened, to give the bride as a present,
and this is done by setting it thrice upon her head, uttering these words,
Zatei, mesei, pawei, in what order he pleases, but the word which he pronounces
last, the bride is to be called by: and, they give their children an accidental
and commonly an adjectival name. This is all I could learn from this simple
people. They appeared to me to be industrious farmers, and to breed a great
many bees. Some of them are owners of 200 hives, and they are much cleaner in
their person, than their Ersanean brethren. Reddish and light colored hair is
less frequent among them, than among the Ersanes, whose hair is mostly brown.
Their women, like those of the Ersanes, are in general not pretty, but they are
active, diligent, and laborious. Their knowledge of herbs, for the use of
physic and dying, is not small. Round the porches of their houses, you will
constantly see some herb or other hanging up to dry, with a number of cole-wort
leaves, which the Mordvines lay under the dough of their bread, to be baked
with it, as they leaven it uncommonly strong, and it is apt to run. On this
account, they dry a winter's provision of these leaves, wetting them a little
when they use them. Among the the medicinal herbs I saw them make use of, were
the St. John's-wort, (Hypericum, perforatum,) which they bind over the face in
paralytic cases; the English marjoram (Origanum,) which they dry, reduce to
powder, and strew over wounds and excoriations of children. The Virgaurea,
whose ashes they strew over inflammations of the skin, called Erysipelas. The
bogbean, (menyanthes,) and the aconite, (aconitum,) which they use as a
poultice for external inflammations, and give internally as a remedy for watery
swellings; the leaves of the rasberry-bush, (Rubus Saxatilis.) The clover,
(Trisolium Spadiceum,) and the common thyme, with water, in inflammations of
the eyes, which they are often afflicted with, owing to their smoking
cottages; the marsh cinque-foil, (comarum palustre,) in cases of difficult
birth. Betonies, to bathe weak children in; the blue-bottle, (Centaurea lacea,)
for a bath against the palsy in children; the star-thistle, (Stellaria
dichotoma,) the yellow holly, against the looseness of belly in children; and,
the pheasant's-eye, (adonis verna,) in hysterical disorders, and several others.

The Mordvines do not make their butter in ovens as do the Russians, but like
the Finlanders and Tartars, by beating. Like the Russians however they pot
their fresh cheese, and pour butter on it, to keep it soft. They build their
houses either in the Russian or Tartarean method, and lay on large, and
pallet-beds, according as they live in the vicinage of either of these people.
The old Mordvine houses have their doors to the east, as Stralenburg justly
noticed, and their ovens stand on the south-west corner; in other respects they
are very narrow and inconvenient, and are for the most part, without chimneys.

The face of this country, is open, hilly, and sandy, with occasionally thick
forests; but the lands round the villages are in pretty good cultivation.

Wjasera. In our way to Pensa, we passed through Wjasera, about 16 miles short
of it. This town has three churches, one of which they have began to build with
stone. Among the horses that drew our coach, I took notice of a mare, whose
hair was finer than common, and on enquiry, found there was a stallion in this
neighborhood, whose progeny was all like this mare. In winter, these horses
are said to become woolly like sheep.

Sept. 9. Pensa, about 70 miles from Insara. On the 9th of September, at break
of day, we reached Pensa, about seventy miles distant from Insara. This town,
notwithstanding it is buildings are but moderate, yields on account of it is
situation, standing on a height near the river Sura, and it is churches, a
beautiful prospect. Trade seems to be the principal turn of the inhabitants,
and the shops are as well stored here, as in any town on this side Moscow. This
has been effected by the establishment of a colony, and it being a place where
all travelers stop. The river Sura flows close by the town, and receives the
little river Pensa, which runs through one part of it, and supplies the market
with great plenty of fish. They have all the smaller kind, and the shad and
salmon are caught only in the spring.

In the province of Pensa, are several distilleries of spirits from corn,
belonging to the nobility, which show the richness of this district. Some
noblemen have here considerable studs. An attempt was made to establish a
vitriol manufactory, though I do not know, whether the project has succeeded;
but, the enormous quantity of pebbles found in this neighborhood, which yield
vitriol, deserves some attention, as they might be worked for the benefit of
the state.

But what is most worthy notice in the district of Pensa, is the cultivation of
woad, which was begun about ten years since by one Tawlejef, a merchant, who
has established woad-manufacturies in the villages of Korschiman and
Staroi-matschim. Having been told that the color here prepared was not good
for much in dying, as it lost it is beauty and liveliness in less than a year's
time; I was induced to enquire into the reason of it. I went therefore to the
nearest, which was upwards of forty miles from Pensa. The weather since the
25th of August had been very agreeable, but on the 9th of September, we had a
great deal of thunder, accompanied with stormy and heavy rains. During this
weather, I went to Korschiman on the 12th of September, little suspecting the
next day to be the first day of winter, and we arrived there late at night.

Sept. 12. Korschiman. Korschiman is inhabited by Mordvines, of the Ersane
race. As the workmen had not done the least work for the last nine months,
owing, perhaps, to the absence of the proprietor, I could only inspect the
place and the implements, and enquire into the manner in which they made it;
and it appeared to me, that the business was not well managed, there not being
one intelligent and expert man among all the persons employed in it, and that
it is failure was not owing to the materials. As large quantities of indigo and
woad are used throughout Russia, and it is a profitable article of Asiatic
commerce, it were to be wished, that instead of purchasing it of strangers,
they would take some pains to bring these manufactures to perfection. It would
be a great acquisition to the wealth of the empire. Though the works were here
suspended, I did not understand that the proprietor meant to abandon his
design, but to endeavor to carry it on again on better principles.

On our way back, the weather was not only rainy, but, toward night, winter
began to salute us with a heavy snow: the ground was covered to the height of
some inches, and the young wood, being still covered with leaves, bent under
it is weight. Young trees, if once bent down with snow, seldom rise again; of
course, an early, premature snow may do a great deal of damage. The thermometer
stood from the 150th to the 155th degrees. on the 14th of Sept. the cold diminished
some degrees, but at night it froze again, and the frost was so considerable,
that the mercury during the 15th, at night, pointed at 162 degrees. and this part
diminished but little during the whole winter.

Sept. 15. This weather induced me to hasten my distant journey, and I left
Pensa on the 15th, which was as soon as I could procure horses.

Seliska, 14 miles from Pensa. Beyond Pensa we traveled through the extensive
forest of Sura, which reached to Seliska, near 14 miles, where we were
benighted. The Mordvines of this country keep a great many beehives, which they
leave exposed abroad and very little sheltered from the rigours of the winter.
They keep also a great deal of cattle, but their sheep are not of the better
sort, their wool being seemingly interwoven with goat-hair. There being plenty
of trees here which yield rosin, most of the country people are employed in
making tar. It froze so much this night, that all the rivers were swollen with
ice.

About sixteen miles further on, at a place called Julok-Gorodistche, is the
remains of an ancient Tartarian fortification. It stood upon a plain, erected
in form of an irregular semicircle, of about 350 fathoms, having a strong
breast-work and a ditch. In the center is a round pit, now sunk, probably
contrived to hold water for the cattle.

We could not reach Simbursky before the 22d, it being almost impossible to
travel by night, for the badness of the roads, even with additional horses. The
country however abounds with villages, mostly inhabited by the people of
Mokscha. The face of the country is a great deal of high-land, covered with
forests of pine, in which are many Linden-trees, very advantageous to bees.
This tree is the most useful of any tree in Russia. It Is timber is good for a
variety of purposes, as is also it is bark, and it is bast, of which they make
mats and ropes. The leaves and tender slips of the Linden, when dried, is also
a good winter-provision for sheep in these places, where they keep so many. The
people were here surprised by the winter, and a great deal of hemp, and corn
that was not cut, was buried and lost beneath the snow. Those fields also,
which were sown with winter-seeds, yielded but a dismal prospect for the
ensuing year, for they were devoured by a kind of catterpillar, (Phaloena
frumentalis,) which in the provinces of Casan, have for some years past been a
universal land-plague; for they devoured the young plants as they rose, to the
very root, as if they had been fed by cattle. However, the wet weather and
frost had killed many of them; for, during the day, they hide themselves in the
surface of the earth. There is hardly a better expedient to get rid of these
unwelcome devourers, than to strew those fields well, where they are seen, as
soon as the seed rises, with ashes of buck-wheat or peas-haulm.

About three miles short of the city of Simbursky, is the line of partition,
erected from the Sura to the Wolga, in the reign of the Czar Alexei
Michailowitsch, which is a great bulwark and a deep ditch, more considerable
than that which is thrown up from the western part of the Sura. This line is
still in good condition, though all the places built near it have lost their
wooden fortifications.

Sept. 22. Simbursky, about 170 miles from Sariska. We had just reached
Simbursky on the 22d, when a most violent storm arose at night, from the
north-west, which lasted till the 24th; we had then a few days fine weather,
and I took the opportunity to see the environs of this city. This place stands
on very high ground, between the rivers Wolga and Swijaga, and they are so near
to each other, as barely to leave room for the city; though the latter runs a
course of about 70 miles, before it empties itself into the Wolga. The hill on
which Simbursky stands, is a gray clay, mixed with pyrites, and full of
petrifactions. The hill gradually falls away on the Swijaga side, but on the
Wolga the land is washed away, and leaves a very steep bank. In the river and
it is banks are found, a variety of petrifactions, and some very transparent
crystals. And all the country, between these two rivers, is so full of
vitriolic and sulphurous substances, that if manufactories of vitriol,
brimstone and alum were established near Casan, they might be plentifully
supplied with, materials.

Sept. 30. We crossed the river Tscheremschan, at the distance of about 70
miles beyond Simbursky, on a floating bridge of rafts, common in Russia, on
account of the strong swelling rivers in that country. In this neighborhood
stands a village, called Bilgar, in which name, the memory of the ancient
Bulgarian nation, seems to be preserved.

The whole district of Tscheremschan consists of an excellent black soil, with
a sufficiency of birch-wood, for firing; of course, it is well inhabited and
cultivated. The inhabitants here consist of Tartars and Mordvines, but chiefly
of the people of Tshuwa, now converted to christianity. However, I met with
some villages, where the inhabitants still adhere to their ancient religion and
customs.

As the language of this people resembles much the Tartarian, so does the dress
of their women. They wear coarse, linen clothes, worked with the needle, in
worsted, in a variety of colors, but mostly blue, red and black, very much
like those of the Mordvines. They have also ornaments like theirs, large pins,
and breast-shields, girdles and pendant tassels; but the cap which they
constantly wear, even in the house, is like that of the Tartarian women,
thickly beset with old, silver coins or tin spangles, with necklaces of coral
beads, tied behind with a large, needleworked band, that hangs down the back;
to which is fixed, a number of medals, coins, and pieces of tin and fringe,
which band is tucked into the girdle; besides these, they wear also two smaller
lappets, fringed at bottom, hanging from the head to the middle of the back,
one on each side, and joined together by strings of coral beads. This cap is
not like that of the Tartarian women, coming down upon the forehead, or sitting
close to the head, but widely extended; so, that both ends of that veil, which
these women call Tastar, and put round their neck, is crossed under the chin,
wound round the head under this cap, and passed through a hole in the top of
it, where it resembles a tuft; but they have also caps without holes at top;
these are worn by girls. When they are full-dressed, the veils they wear are of
fine linen, embellished with glass-beads, and pendant corals. The girls' dress
is less ornamental, not wearing the abovementioned veil; nor has their cap any
flap or train behind, but is commonly composed of various colors. These braid
their hair, into two or three tresses, and conceal it under their upper shift,
In winter, both women and girls wear a kind of man's great coat, made of fur,
over their dress. The mans' dress is not very different from that of the
Russian peasant, except, that his shirt, about the neck, is worked with worsted.

The features of the people of Tschuwa, betray a strong mixture of Tartarian
blood. Their hair is neither light-brown nor reddish, but commonly black, like
that of the Tartars. The features of the women are pretty enough, and they are
much more cleanly than the Mordvines. I may say the same of their habitations,
which, in many respects, resemble those of the Tartars. Their villages are not
generally surrounded with pales, but consist of dispersed dwellings and some
small huts, on eminences, where they store their provisions. According to the
old custom, the door is on the east side of the building, which is covered with
a large roof, under which, they sleep in summertime. Within the room is a
large bench to sleep on, and an oven standing on the right hand near the door,
frequently without a chimney. In imitation of the Tartars, the better kind of
people sleep on good featherbeds, but the poor are contented with rush-mats.

'The Tschouvasches, or people of Tschuwa,' says Took, make regular meals,
placing themselves round a table, for that purpose. Before they eat, they say
Thore bar. Youra! that is, O God give us bread! and after meals, Thora Syrlak!
O Lord cast me not away! They cram their guests as much as possible, present
pieces of meat to them on spoons, solicit them to eat, till they can eat no
longer, and consider this as a mark of politeness. Like the Tartars, they sleep
on broad benches, but the better kind of people sleep on feather-beds.

When a young among them is inclined to marry, he commissions a friend to
bargain with a girl, who always gets her as cheap as he can. The price
generally paid on these occasions, is from twenty to fifty rubles, each ruble
about 4s. English; but a good chapman will get one for eight, ten, and
sometimes for five rubles. The rich will go as far as eighty, and this
purchase-money is called Golon oski. The brides' portion is paid in cattle,
furniture and clothes, and is in proportion to the money paid for her.

After these preliminaries, follows a ceremony, called Kosthenas kayas, that
is, the carrying of the presents. The bridegroom and his parents visit the
betrothed bride, pay the purchase-money, and make her friends several sorts of
presents, as shirts, clothes, linen, etc. The girls father on this occasion,
makes an offering to the sun, of a loaf of wheaten bread and some honey,
accompanied with a prayer for a happy marriage, and prosperity to the young
couple; after this, they sit down, eat and drink, and appoint the wedding day.

The nuptials are thus celebrated. The bride, covered with a veil, hides
herself behind a screen; from which, after some time, she goes and walks round
the eating-room, with an air of solemnity. Some young girls then bring her
beer, bread and honey, and when she has walked round the room three times, the
bridegroom enters, snatches off her veil, kisses her, and changes rings with
her. From this time she is called Schourasnegher, or betrothed maiden, and
entertains her company with food. She then returns behind the screen, and the
married women put on her head the matron cap, which is more adorned than any
she wore before.

In the evening, when the bride and bridegroom are to undress, the lady pulls
off her husband's boots; and the next morning, the friends search for the
Mosaical proofs of her virginity, which if not found, a boy who serves, as a
sort of a paranymph, presents a mug of beer to one of the principal assistants.
In the bottom of this mug is a hole, which the lad stops with his finger, but
takes it away, when the person has the mug at his mouth, and the beer thus runs
down his beard and bosom. This makes the company laugh, and the bride blush.
After this, no further notice is taken of her misconduct. The next day, the
bride regales her friends, and they divert themselves with dancing. Even those
who have embraced the christian faith, omit not this ceremony. The wedding is
often held at the house of the bridegroom's father, and is a sort of
club-dinner, each guest bringing some eatable with him. Before the meal, a loaf
is handed about with a hole in it, into which, such of the company as find
themselves so inclined, put in a little small money, as a present.

At the birth of a child, the friends of the parents come to congratulate them,
and the first comers name the infant, and give it presents, by slipping small
pieces of coin into the mug they drink out of. This ceremony is called
Piatschir ghivas, or cradling the child.

Among the Tschouwasches, the husband is master of the house, orders every
thing, and his wife implicitly obeys him; of course, domestic quarrels are
seldom heard of.

At their funerals, as soon as the grave is filled up, they place lighted
torches near it, a cake, and a piece of roasted hen, saying to the dead,
Amenscha palder, or, That is for thee. The persons present devour the rest, and
conceive they have eaten with the dead; then, having cast the old clothes of
the deceased upon his grave, they go and bathe themselves, and return to the
house of their departed friend and feast.

Such of the people of Tschuwa, as are not yet converted to the christian
faith, keep the Friday holy, as do the Mahometans, which they call Aernekon,
but don't pay the least regard to the Sunday. This, and also the abhorrence of
swine's flesh, (which some few indeed will now eat,) is a custom they derive
from the Tartars, though they adhere to no other part of their religion. In
these villages, where they live agreeable to their ancient customs, the Sotnik
A kind of governor, presiding over lOO people chosen by the village. An officer
common in Russia, but these are under the authority of the Starost or judge.
goes about on Thursday evening, to announce the festivity of the following
day. On which, no one presumes to work, every one spends the day in prayer and
amusements; after which, each family, but especially the female part of it, who
are not admitted to be present at solemn sacrifices, have said their prayers
before a certain sanctuary, which they call Yerig. This Yerig, is nothing but a
bundle of fifteen rods of the wild rose-tree, about four feet long, tied
together in the middle with bast, from which hangs a bit of tin. Each house has
such a sanctuary, which is kept in a clean closet, built in the best part of
the house. No one is to touch it till the fall of the leaf, when they devoutly
throw it into some flowing water.

On the Thursday in Passion week, every father of a family, says Took, places
certain eatables in the yard of his house, with a lighted torch near them, to
the memory of each person who died in his house, and the dogs, as proxies for
the dead, feast on this provision. Even those who are converts to christianity
conceive, that the dead cannot rest in their graves without this ceremony.

The priests of Tschuwa, are called Youma, and serve in the triple capacity of
priests, fortune tellers and magicians. They call their supreme being Thor, and
give him a wife, whom they call Thor Amysch, or mother of the gods. They have
also a subordinate divinity. Schaitan, is the chief of their malevolent gods,
and has his residence in the water, and in their prayers, they never omit to
beseech Thor, that he will vanquish Schaitan.

Their notion of future existence extends to a blissful and miserable
immortality. Good people they say, are transplanted, after death, to a blessed
abode, called Tschemherda, or the land of perfect satisfaction, where they meet
their families, and enjoy their property much more than before. The wicked,
they think, will be condemned to wander, after death, as skeletons, deprived of
flesh, in cold and barren deserts, shivering, wretched, and forlorn.

At seed-time, they have a feast for petitioning the gods to give them a
fruitful harvest, and after harvest they have another thanksgiving, at both of
which they sacrifice victims, and make oblations of cakes and milk. Their
prayers are always the same, and to this effect. O God have mercy upon me! O
God forsake me not; give me many sons and daughters. O God, give me a great
quantity of sheaves of corn, and fill my barns with provision! O God, give me
bread and honey and drink and victuals and health, with tranquillity and rest! O
God, fill my yard with horses, horned cattle, sheep and goats! O God, bless my
house, that I may lodge and entertain and warm the traveller! O God, give thy
blessing to the mistress of the earth! For so they call the Empress, and at the
end of every period of this prayer, all the assembly say, Amin!

In the neighborhood of their villages, generally upon some common near a
river, they have a sacred place, called Keremet. This Keremet is a square piece
of ground, surrounded with a hedge about six feet high, and has three
entrances; one in the middle of the eastern side, another on the north, and the
third on the west. The situation of the place is so contrived, that the
northern side leads to the spring or river, as through this gate all the water
used in the sacrifice is fetched. The people enter by the western gate, and
near the eastern is raised a roof or shed, under which the sacrificial flesh is
dressed. Before this shed, is a large table fixed, by fastening boards upon
stakes, on which the meat, etc. is laid. Near the northern gate, is another
large table, whereon they skin and clean the victims.

Large villages have a great Keremet for public sacrifices, and a smaller one
for private families, who sometimes have a Keremet within their houses.

The people of Tschuwa, those in the district of the river Alatyr, erect in the
middle of the Keremet a little, wooden house, whose door is toward the east,
in which they eat the sacrifice standing; for this purpose, they have long
tables, covered with cloths. In the center of this house is erected a high,
wooden pole, which passes through the roof, and has on it is top, an iron ring,
flat at bottom and sharp at top. But to this pole is no honor paid, nor do
they have one in open Keremets.

In the month of September, when their harvest is housed, and they are ready to
sow the winter-seed, the public sacrifices take place again. At these times
they offer up a horse, an ox, and a sheep. I never was fortunate enough to be
present at one of these great festivals, but I have been told, that they lead
the victims through the eastern gate, and tie them, one after the other, to
three stakes near the place where the flesh is to be dressed, until they have
said their prayers. This act of devotion is performed toward the east, with
great bowing of all the men. Their common form of prayer is Thor sirlaga, Thor
biter, Bojant schin bull, that is, "God, have mercy; God, give us food and
preserve us." But they invoke subordinate deities, for whom they have
particular prayers. The simple folks of Tschuwa, could not give me any idea of
their mythology, but the following are some of the names of their inferior
deities, which I learned. Keremet is the first, after their supreme being.
Besides these, they have Astyr, Ksnir, Pulchs, Surodon, Sir, Sjulsuren-Irsene,
Chilsir, Kebe, and perhaps many more, of which probably it would be tiresome to
enumerate the particulars, or their propriety. It is remarkable, that they give
many of their gods a wife and a son, and call upon each of them three times; as
for example, Thor or Keremet-ash, (the father,) Kermet-amyche, the mother,) and
Keremet-Uewli, (the son,) and so on. I heard this from a simple peasant of
Tschuwa, who was unable to give me any further account. When prayers are over,
the victims are immolated by one of the elders, chosen, by the voice of the
people, to this office. They carefully preserve the blood, and proceed as is
related, in the Collections of Russian History.

The skins of the horse and ox, are hung upon two high poles, in the northern
corner of the Keremet; but, the sheep's skin is hung over a rail, fixed on
stakes, stuck in the ground. After hanging two days, they are sold among them,
but the price is to defray the expenses of the sacrificial vessels, or else
laid out in honey and flour to be made use of, at future festivals. The care of
this, and to keep the sacred place clean, is entrusted to a man of their own
choosing, who considers the office as an honorable employment, and is called
Keremet Pchagann. Such sacrifices are also performed, when there is a prospect
of a bad harvest, before the corn is cut.

Private family sacrifices are performed on many occasions, as in cases of
sickness, domestic distress, childbirth, and in memory of the deceased. The
father of the family, or the eldest of the relations, having said prayers,
kills the victim, which is chiefly some small animal, but generally a sheep.
Before it is slain, they throw over it a vessel full of cold water, as they do
indeed at public sacrifices. If the animal shakes it off, they proceed; if not,
the ceremony is postponed to some other time. After they have eaten the flesh,
and whatever is eatable of the victim, they burn the bones, and commit the
remainder carefully to the bosom of the earth, that no sacrificial relick may
be profaned.

The people of Tschuwa, bury their dead full-dressed, but in a shabby coffin,
with the head turned toward the west. They are also said to put into the
grave, if the deceased is a man, several small tools, a form whereon they work,
their shoes made of twisted bast, (Lapti,) the instrument with which they are
made, a knife, some bast, and a steel to strike fire, as they do in Lapland.
The common burial-ground lies at an equal distance from the village, the
Keremet and the high-road, is called Masar; and the funeral obsequies are
performed at three different times, by the relations and friends of the
deceased; on the three following days, viz. the Wednesday in Passion-week, the
Thursday before Whitsuntide, on which day, the Russians have a similar
ceremony, and on the 8th day of November. On this latter day, they not only
perform a sacrifice on the grave, but erect a wooden pillar at the head of the
grave. Having dug a hole for this pillar, before they fix it in the ground,
each person present throws a bit of meat and some of the drink prepared for the
funeral, into it; they then eat the sacrifice, drink, entertain, and amuse
themselves in a variety of ways.

The collections of Russian history mentioned above, give a full account of the
marriages of the people of Tschuwa. The marriage portion paid with the bride,
is to the amount of from 50 to 100 rubles, (each ruble 4 s. 6 d. English.) The
bride is not suffered to walk on the day of marriage, but is to ride, or be
carried. Divorces sometimes take place, and the custom is, for the husband of
the woman he leaves, to rent her veil in two pieces, one of which he keeps to
himself, and gives the other to his wife.

As they apply themselves much to breeding of bees, they make a great deal of
mead; and, they also have strong beer, with hops, for their feasts, but drink
no whey, which the Tartars are so fond of. Their dances are like those of the
Mordvines, similar to those of the Tartars, and consist of several motions of
the arms and body, turning round with short steps, their feet close together,
beating and keeping very good time. The musical instruments used on these
occasions are a bag pipe, a kind of little fiddle with three strings, and a
dulcimer, in form of a crescent, with about sixteen or eighteen strings.

Their manner of taking an oath deserves also our notice, and is as follows. He
who is to swear, is brought to the Keremet, and there, in the manner of eating
the Corsned, described in English history, eats a cake of flour boiled in water
and butter, imprecating curses on his head, and that what he eats may choke
him, if he utters any thing but the truth. Hence the expression, "May this
Morsel be my last!"
To try a man suspected of having taken a false oath, they give him salt water
to drink, and if he coughs, he is declared guilty. I will only mention one
thing more, which is, that the people of Tschuwa, who inhabit the heaths and
mountainous part of the country, on the left shore of the Wolga, take the
by-name of Werejal, but call themselves Chirdijal.

Betkulowa, about 100 miles from Simbursky. The highest mountains of this
country, are near the Tartarian village Betkulowa, about 100 miles distant from
Simbursky, and along the banks of the little river Scheschma. These mountains
consist of a gray and white sand-stone, in which, is, here and there, some
copper ore of small allay. We rode 17 miles across these mountains, and reached
on the 3d of October, through an unbeaten way, in a wet and wild forest, the
Tartarian village Kurmuschli. Sconce-Kitschuiskoi was a fort formerly belonging
to the line of Sokam, which almost extended itself to the river Ik, but is now,
like all other sorts in this district, become an open spot. Here is a
post-stage on the great road, from Orenburg to Casan. Here is also a copper
manufactory, but, for want of hands to procure a sufficient quantity of ore and
coals, is not always worked. The ore is dug in this neighborhood, and out of
100lb. is produced 2lb. of pure copper.

We had just left this copper-manufactory, when it began to rain violently,
which continued the whole day. This was followed by so great a storm, so much
snow, and so dark a night, that it was with difficulty we could reach the
Tartarian village Scharepkina, a distance only of eight miles. It froze hard
the next day, and enabled us to get faster on, so that we reached
Buhulminskaja, about thirty-seven miles the same night.

Buhulminskaja. This town is tolerably well built, has about 500 houses, and
two wooden churches, with a public office and courthouse, belonging to the
regency of Orenburg. On the 5th, we reached Selospaskoje, the usual residence
of the counselor of state Rytschkof, a gentleman celebrated for his writings,
and respected for his personal merits, where after a most kind reception, and
amid the most social and instructive conversation, I imperceptibly delayed my
journey, until the 14th.

This village is prettily situated upon an eminence, surrounded with woody
heights above. The little rivers that flow between the mountains, abound with
trout and a delicate kind of small salmon. (Salmo lacustris,) not uncommon in
the Uralian rivers, and is called Kutema. As these mountain-waters, on account
of their rapidity, seldom freeze, their banks are crowded with a kind of
water-bird, rarely to be met with in any other country, than Russia and
Siberia; it is a sort of starling, (Sturnus Cinclus.) What I am going to relate
is a fact, and I was an eyewitness of the truth. These birds, called in Russia
water-starlings, dip or dive to the bottom of the water, in search of insects
and worms, without wetting their plumage. If they are shot on the icy banks of
rivers and not killed outright, they will plunge themselves into the water, and
don't rise again till they are dead. The bird, however, cannot be said to swim,
not having the requisite organs for that purpose; but, properly speaking, it
flies beneath the water, and clings to the ground, till it has got it is prey.
The superstitious countryman fancies, that if any part of the body is anointed
with the fat of this bird, it will be for ever free from any injury from frost.
Some ascribe this virtue also to it is blood. There are also in the woods, where
the water does not freeze in winter, a kind of otter, Mustela lutreola,) very
little known, except in Russia, called in the Russian fur-trade Norka. It likes
to feed upon frogs and little crabs; but, in other respects, does not differ
much in his way of living from the common fish-otter.

On the borders of the river Sok, which I reached on the 12th of October, the
country is delightfully pleasant, the lands fertile and rich. This is the
western part of Russia, where a number of roebucks are, about the close of
winter, caught in snares, by the people of Tartary and Tschuwa, who are fond of
hunting in snow-shoes, and can easily overtake them, as the deer are hampered
in the snow, and cannot well get on. They are a peculiar kind of animal, very
different from all the species of European stags, except as to color and
horns, on which there are many warts. They are of the size of the fallow-deer,
and what is most remarkable, have no tail, instead of which, the hinder part of
their breech is covered with a little skinny wart. Their quarters behind are
white, and I am therefore led to suppose it to be the Pygargus of the ancients.
The Russians call it simply Dikaja Kosa, the wild she-goat, and the Tartars
give it the name of Saiga. In these vast uncultivated wastes are also a number
of elks and foxes; and some of the latter, are ten of a blackish color.

This district, as are all the mountainous heaths along the rivers Sok and
Kinel, is some of the best sheep pasture in all Russia; for the common Russian
sheep are larger here, than usual.

The Tartarian village Usmanowa, or Nadyr-aul, as it has been called from some
principal person who died a few years since, and who intended, under a special
order and direction from the superior office of mines, in the province of
Orenburg, dated at Ufa, in 1756, to gather the Asphaltos found here, in order
to draw an oil from it. For this purpose, he had begun to erect a manufactory
at the source of the brook Kamuschli, to which was to be added another, upon
the river Surgut. But all these preparations were interrupted and subverted, by
the unexpected death of this Tartar.

A mile or two south-east of Semenowo, situated not far from the source of the
river Sok, is an Asphaltos spring, on the steep declivity of a mountain,
overgrown with birch-trees, whose soil is a fat and black earth. This spring
has been cleaned, and forms on the mountain, a reservoir, about three feet
wide, and three feet deep, which is not only constantly full of water without
any agitation, but flows over and forms a brook. The water in this reservoir
never freezes, even in the most rigorous winter; and, though sometimes covered
with snow, the bituminous vapors, which may be smelt from far, will soon make
an opening through it, though the water possesses no extraordinary degree of
warmth. It was morning, when I was there, and the thermometer, when in the
water, was 138 degrees. when in the air, it stood at 160 degrees. In this well, the
surface of the water is covered with a black and very tough asphaltos, which
has the color and consistency of thick tar, and as often as it is taken off,
will gather again in a few days. It had been scummed clean about a fortnight
back, and yet, I took from the surface, more than six pounds in weight, and a
great deal adhered to the sides: it lay on the water half an inch thick. When
the asphaltos is removed, a fine and strong oil remains, which might be fired,
and would burn as it lies. Even the water itself has some inflamable parts in
it, and makes a solution of litmus read. The people in the neighborhood, use
this bituminous water to gargle their throats, and drink, in the apthae and
other infectious and ulcerous complaints of the mouth and throat. They gather
the asphaltos, and use it as a family-medicine. As a salve, it will cure recent
wounds immediately; by the addition of butter, as an ointment, it heals all
sorts of tumors and ulcers; but, their internal use of it is most
extraordinary. They take a middling spoonful boiled in milk, which renders it
thick, drinking it warm in violent cholics, inward strains, and hidden
maladies. It makes the patient almost giddy, throws him into a sweat, and is a
powerful diuretic, the urine smelling strongly of it. It is said also, that the
peasants use it as coomb to grease their cart-wheels; but, the chief use, is a
medicinal one. Another property which the asphaltos has, tough as it is, it is
of so very penetrating a power, that though I kept it in a cold place, it made
it is way through a wooden box, and in a few weeks, eat into a plank some inches
thick. It might be used to preserve wood from corruption, to pay the bottoms of
ships, and to keep them from the worms.

Along the stream of the Sok, the mountains consist of a milk-white limestone.

Nikuschkina, about 40 miles from Semenowo. In the neighborhood of
Nikuschkina, about 40 miles from Semenowo, are some springs, which depose a
sulphurous matter. The people of Tschuwa, and the rest of the inhabitants, use
these sulphurous waters as a hot-bath against the itch, and other distempers of
the skin. It is certain, that the external and internal use of them would be
extremely efficacious, in all cutaneous disorders, and taken internally, might
cure many chronical ones.

About ten miles from this, is a remarkable sulphur lake, the most considerable
in all this district. I rode to it by break of day, and found it situated deep
between two high mountains. It is an oblong basin, overgrown with birches,
about 140 yards in length and 113 in breadth. It Is aspect is frightful and it is
stench, which may be compared to the smell of addled eggs and brimstone, is to
be smelt at the distance of three miles; of course, it must be very
disagreeable to be near it. It has no perceptible motion and never freezes, and
though the weather was cold when I was there, I found it 30 degrees. warmer than
the air. Hence it is, that a visible thick vapor rises from it. The water is
so transparent, that one might discern it is depth, for it is not many feet to
the bottom, was it not for the black and greasy ground about it; as it is, it
looks like a dreadful gulf. At the time when the sulphur-manufacturers were
here, attempts were made to discover the origin of the sulphur in this lake,
but in vain; so that it must be hidden in the bowels of this chalk mountain.

From the top of this mountain, issues a sulphur spring, which runs down into
this lake, and deposes a sediment, resembling a pure white and thick pulp, and
looks as it runs, like thin curds.

It is the continuation of this stream from the lake, that forms the remarkable
river called the White-water river, which emptys itself into the Surgut. This
river, as it proceeds from the lake, is about six feet deep, and it is breadth
between 14 and 28 feet. In this channel the water has the appearance of thin
curds, but in places where it flows flower, than near the lake, the surface has
a fine scum, like that seen upon limy waters, and further distant from, the
lake, it is banks, when I was there, were icy; the ice, however, was not solid,
but consisted of a number of flakes upon one-another, like the ice that is
found in fresh milk.

All the matter which the water deposes, is but a sulphur mixed with limy
particles. The whole stream was formerly banked with planks, for the use of the
sulphur manufactory, erected upon the river Sok, that they might collect the
sulphur with more ease; but there is now no traces of such bank left. The
manufactories are removed to the Wolga, and this White-water river is neglected.

Where the earth has been dug out to bank up the river Surgat, a thick, black
layer of saltpeter earth is seen, and a kind of dust, similar to cinders;
among which, lie many lime-stones full of holes, burnt out. This appearance
leads me to start a conjecture, which I will leave to the judgment of my
readers, whether there may not have been, formerly, some vulcanic fires in
these mountains; perhaps, some bituminous and sulphurous layers which ran
through them are burnt out, and has sublimated the sulphurous parts into the
cliffs of the opposite lime-mountains, now proportionably washed out by the
penetration of springs. But this is all conjecture.

The cattle seem occasionally to have recourse to these springs, as conducive
to their health; but, as they taint the water of the adjoining rivers, no fish
will live in them.

Stawropal. It was now the 16th of October, and as the winter approached fast,
and the weather grew bad, I thought it best to return to Simbursky, and
continue there till the spring. I went back therefore, by the way of Stawropal,
where I arrived on the 17th. The snow was very deep, it having snowed for two
or three days. We met here with those Kalmucks which are become christians, and
inhabit the greatest part of the province of Stawropal, wandering with their
flocks of sheep to those winter quarters allotted them, where in summer is made
or procured, a winter's provision of hay, and where they live in their strange
way, equally in winter as in summer, in cots made of felts. They are said to
have begun cultivating a great deal of land, but I persuade myself, that
cultivation is only to supply their necessary wants; for it is not natural to
suppose, that a nation, accustomed to the freedom and indolence of a
shepherd-life, would change the sweets of such a state, for the troublesome and
painful condition of a toilsome one. In Stawropal, reside their chiefs, who
compose their council of war, and many officers; these go by particular names,
expressive of their military rank, as Chorunsha, Jessaul, etc. that is, cornet,
adjutant, and so on, and are all well paid; they have here a Protopop, or
chief-priest, subordinate to whom are many Pops or priests, chosen by the
villages, and also a physician. Persons of the first rank among them reside in
the town; but the Kalmucks, who are furmerchants and shepherds, live either in
town or country as it suits them, or even in their felt-huts; though few
endeavor to acquire more the advantages of a polite life than those vagrants,
in the step or waste of Wolga. The number of converted Kalmucks is said now to
be increased to 14,000; among which, there are a thousand tents of Sjungors,
who professed christianity immediately on the arrival of Sjungordan Uluss, the
missionary from the eastern step. The sheep which they breed, and wherein
consist their chief riches, are mostly of the broad-tailed sort; but, they
produce no good wool; even the Russian sheep that are mixed with them,
degenerate, and have a hairy wool like the Kalmuck; nay, the first lambs got by
Kalmuck rams, have their tails either half, or wholly bolstered up with fat.
Now, as this nation will hardly ever apply themselves to agriculture, the best
way, in my opinion, to make them useful to the state, would be, instead of
their present flocks, which are fit for nothing but slaughter, to give them
sheep of a better breed, and teach this shepherd-people the method of shearing,
especially in those places, where there is the best sheep feed.

The city of Stawropal, is agreeably situated on the high, eastern bank of one
of the arms of the Wolga, which they call Kunei-Woloschka. On the land side, it
is surrounded with delightful hills, overgrown with pines and birch-trees. On
the opposite side of the Wolga, we see at a distance the lofty lime-mountains,
called Shigulefski, from the village Shigulicha, that lies between them. The
middle part of the town represents a fort, consisting of some pallisadoes,
towers, and a battery. It contains two churches, one built with wood, but the
mother church is handsomely erected with stone. Besides the mansions of the
Woiwod or governor, there is a courthouse or chancery belonging to the regency
of Orenburg, the dwellings of the chiefs of the Kalmucks, and other military
persons; some provision, and salt magazines, a number of shops, and a school.
Above the sort are several streets, wherein live the soldiers of the garrison,
and the cossacks, in which place there is a chapel. The number of houses amount
to about 450.

October 19. On the 19th of October, I left Stawropal, in order to reach
Simbursky, before the rapid ice-flood came on, which the river Wolga seemed to
threaten us with. The first village we passed in our way there, was
Santschalewoi, at the distance of about thirteen miles. This place is inhabited
by diverse sorts of people, comprehended under the general denomination of
Kysilbashes, and some of the people of Mokscha. It appears, that since the
building of the Mordvine villages, the descendants of the people of Ersania,
and those of Mokscha are mixed, and that their language is reduced into one.
For example, the Mordvines who inhabit the environs of the Wolga, don't call
their supreme being Paas, as do the Ersanes, nor Skai, like the people of
Mokscha, but use the compound word Skipas. Besides this, they have adopted a
great many of the Tschuwasch, and are the cleanliest of all the Mordvines. They
clean their tables, forms and walls, with a kind of brush, which they call Ili,
but the Tartars, who use the same instrument, give it the name of Schlan. Their
women wear nothing but a piece of linen tied round their heads, both ends of
which are elegantly stitched, and hang down on the neck behind. I saw some,
whose hair, by the addition of black sheep-wool, was braided into a flat tail
of two hands in breadth, or in tresses, which reached down to the middle of
their legs, and seems to have been the old Ersane ornament. Some, instead of
the usual apron worn behind, wear a great many black strings, hanging down from
the girdle.

Almost all the villages on this road, are inhabited by Russians. Near
Nikolskoe, south of the river Tscheremschan, are the remains of a strong,
Tartarian breast-work; and, a little behind Nikolskoe, we cross an old Russian
line or barrier, which must be older than that of Sakamia, because it is within
the latter. This line begins at Beloi-jar, upon the Wolga, and goes to the
borough of Eryklinsk, which formerly was fortified, and lies at nine miles
distance; from whence it is said to extend itself over Tynsk and Biljar, to the
river Ik, like the Sakamian line. The ditch of this line, is in some places
twenty-seven feet wide. Even in the village Nikolskoe, are several heaps of
rubbish, probably the remains of some redoubts.

I made the best of my way to Simbursky, (sending my baggage-waggon on before,)
as the heavy frost and the badness of the roads would admit, and reached the
slobode or suburbs, opposite that city, on the 20th of October, but owing to a
north-west wind, and the abundance of ice collected on the shore, I could not
cross the river till the next day, when by the help of a boat, and walking on
the ice, I was able to do it. The frost here had been so severe, that the
Wolga, near a mile broad, was almost frozen over. This river is most commonly
shut up with ice in the first week of December, and often much earlier.

This winter I found, was one of the most constant and uninterrupted frosts,
the people had ever remembered. The snow fell but little, and a very remarkable
northern-light, which was observed on the 24th of November, was the beginning
of a violent frost, which raised the mercury in the thermometer, about the
middle of December, to 190 degrees. The most common and violent winds which
blow always in the winter on the river Wolga, seem to come from the south-west.
As these very winds are the most mischievous to the vines and fruits of these
parts, was the culture of vines to be extended and even to flourish here, it
must be on such spots and hills only, as are sheltered.

About fourteen miles above Simbursky, on the right shore of the Wolga, are the
remains of a fortress, supported by a ditch. It is said to have been erected by
the celebrated old depredator Jerasim. In this neighborhood coals are found,
of so bituminous a quality, that they will kindle with the flame of a candle.
In burning, they have an agreeable smell, similar to gum-anime in it is smoke,
and consume to a gray irony ash. These coals are not dug out of the earth, but
are a kind of bituminous layer, that floats upon the river Wolga; though it is
probable, if shafts were dug deep enough, the same kind of coal would be found
in the earth; and I am of opinion, it would answer the expense, as the
conveyance by the Wolga would be trifling, and it might be conveyed to the
remotest parts of the empire.

It would have been unpardonable, had I omitted to visit the celebrated remains
of the Bulgarian capital Brjachimof, now called Bolgari, lying about eighty
miles distant from Simbursky up the Wolga, and upon it is left and low shore; no
description having been given of the old, remarkable buildings, still standing
there.

December 14. On the 14th of December, I went to this place, the celebrity of
which seems to have been increased, by it is having been honored with a visit
from Peter the Great, and the present Empress: but, not being able to go the
nearest way, on account of the ice, with which the Wolga threatened my passage,
I was obliged to go over the mountainous parts, which are covered with wood,
and abound with small game.

We crossed the river Wolga at Tetjuschi, a little market town, lying upon the
high-road, about seventy-two miles from Simbursky. The river here not being so
wide, the ice was crossed in wagons. From this passage to the village Bolgari,
which is built upon the ruins of the ancient city, and lies toward the
north-east, they reckon fourteen miles. The road leads partly over some
low-lands, which the Wolga occasionally overflows, and partly through a
high-standing wood of pines, with which the village is surrounded on all sides.

It Is situation is tolerably high, but the land round it is marshy, and bushy.
It is wonderful, that so considerable and populous a city as Bolgari seems
formerly to have been, should be so badly situated in respect to it is water,
which cannot be procured, but by wells. The Wolga runs here in a straight line,
for the distance of three miles, and though the village inclines to the river,
it does not appear, that it ever had it is course near this city.

The village now consists of above 100 farms, and has been taken possession of
by the crown. It lies at the distance of about sixty miles from Casan. In
front, toward the south, it has a plain, prettily scattered with resin-trees
and birch-trees. It is now chiefly under tillage, and has been the spot on
which the city stood. This whole plain is encompassed with a bank and a ditch,
which, though decaying, is in some places, twenty-one feet wide. The
fortification has the shape of an irregular semioval, four miles in circuit,
and adjoins the declivity on which the present village stands. We can plainly
see, that a deep and dry ditch crossed this fortress, from south-west to
north-east, close by the eastern-side of the village, and seems to be formed by
nature. Most of the ancient buildings are within the bank. I will give the
reader such a description of the most remarkable KIRGTISIANS AT THE RUINS OF
BULGARI.
ones, as the piercing cold and falling snow, would allow me.

On the eastern side of the village is the site of a cloister, with some
wooden-buildings, and a fine stone-built church. Within the district of this
cloister, which is encompassed with a hedge, and goes by the name of Uspenskoi,
are many pieces of antiquity. The most remarkable is, a misgir or tower, built
with smooth-hewn freestone, rather more than eighty-four feet high, in pretty
good preservation. It has a winding staircase to the top, consisting of
seventy-two steps, each step twelve inches and three-quarters high. These
stairs have been repaired, and the tower has been covered with a wooden-roof,
and an Arabian inscription within, new written. The entrance is on the south,
and has a strong iron-hinge remaining, on which hung the door. In sundry places
there are openings, to let in the light; and, adjoining this misgir, was an
irregular, square building strongly erected, part of the walls of which is now
standing, and seems to have been formerly a house of prayer; the tower stands
on one corner of it. This wall is built with stones, unequal in size, clumsily
joined, and badly hewn; among which one my discern flints, lime, sand, and
several kinds of stucco, all apparently brought from the mountainous part of
the Wolga. East of this, stand the remains of a little, Tartarian house of
prayer, solidly built with stones of different sizes, with a vaulted roof. The
lower part is square, but the roof is octangular. Each side is thirty-five feet
long. It has been repaired, and converted into a Popish chapel, dedicated to
one of their saints, called Nikolao, the miraculous. The entrance to this is in
the west front, and the windows or opening, to let in the light, on the
southern side. On other spots of this enclosure, are the remains of some old
building, now converted into a cellar.

There are four other ancient buildings within the ditch, in good preservation,
with a great quantity of decayed wall-rubbish, and vestiges of habitations. On
the west, are the ruins of a considerable building, called by the peasants, the
Greek-house, but for what reason, I know not.

Among the great number of erections is a tower, standing in a field, 350 feet
distant south-west from the cloister, built with the same material, as the one
I have named, only thicker, and about sixty-three feet in height. Not far from
this, toward the cloister, are the foundations of some spacious buildings,
among which, the house of prayer, which belonged to the tower, probably stood.

Five hundred and sixty feet further to the south-west, stands yet a little
square building, made of strong and solid freestone, the vaulted-roof of which
is fallen in on one side. It Is entrance is on the west, and it has a small
window on the south. In the western front, on each side, is a false window. It
has two similar ones, on each of the northern and southern fronts, with this
difference, that those on the last two, are farther distant from each other,
than those on the western. If supposition may be admitted, this seems to have
been nothing but a house of prayer.

The building of which, the principal foundation is now to be seen, standing on
the southern side of the village, and the very center of the city's district,
is much more extensive and considerable, and deserves our attention; but, it is
scarce to be conjectured, for what purpose it was erected. The country people
call it the courthouse, and I have no good reason to call it otherwise. The
square division of rooms of which the foundations may be seen, appear to have
been entrances from without, but not to have had any communication with the
apartments in the middle; and, also not to have been higher than the second
story. There are three small rooms in the eastern front, two larger ones in the
southern, and an oblong one in the western. In it is northern corner, is an
oblong, square foundation, which touches it only at it is angle, and the
northern front of the principal building, where the entrance is, shows no signs
of side rooms.

As Dr. PALLAS has given us no regular view of the site of this place, I have
not given all the buildings together, but have thrown two of the principal ones
into one plate, and have given my readers the third, by itself, an account of
which is as follows.

The PROFILE.


At about 700 feet distance on the south, in a straight line from this
building, is another ancient and strong-built one, of considerable magnitude.
It Is architecture is still more remarkable, and the internal division so
peculiar, that in order to make it well conceived, I have given the reader the
ground-plot. It Is northern GROUND-PLOT.
or smaller part, is built on a foundation of limestone, with large, Tartarian
bricks. It Is entrance is on the east, and in the side-walls are several
openings, to let in the light. By a cross-wall, it is divided into a square
antichamber, and an oblong saloon. We pass from the latter into the principal
part of the building, which has no second entrance. This part is built, except
it is top, which is of brick, with hewn freestone, in pieces fourteen inches
broad, and about 6 inches in thickness. It Is greatest space is divided into
four closets, by walls from the bottom to the top; between which, is a broad
passage, in form of a cross. This cross passage receives it is light from an
octagonal sky-light in the roof, besides a small window, on each side. About
the large pinnacle or swelling roof, are four smaller ones, over each corner
closet, which throw the light into these closets only, through an octagonal
opening also in the center. The insides of all these vaulted roofs are concave,
and ornamented with stucco. The corner closets are exactly square, and have
their doors in the angle, leading into the cross-passage. At the southern end
of this building, is an addition of three rooms, the eastern or smallest of
which, has no entrance or opening, except a breach into the south-eastern
corner closet of the center building; but, the western, which projects from the
center-building about seven feet, has no communication with that building or
the middle room, but it is entrance is from the outside, like that of the
private closet for prayer, which has been described in the burial-place of the
Khans, at Kasimof. Under the principal part of this building is a vault, in
which there is a subterraneous passage from the southern wall, as into the
sepulchral cave at Kasimof; but, this vault being broken in, underneath the
southern corner closet, rendered my descent impracticable. From some pieces of
decayed wood laying on it, I conceive it to have been a burial-place. If I am
not mistaken, these buildings may have been partly used for a school, and
partly for a sepulcher, like those ancient ones still to be seen in the city of
Taschkent.

Near Bolgari have been found a great many ancient tomb-stones, chiefly with
Arabian, but some with Armenian epitaphs, with part of which the foundation of
the new church of Usprenski are built, and the remainder lies scattered about,
upon the ground. These tomb-stones are of various sizes, their figure like
those I described at Kasimof, and some of them are of the same bigness. By
order of the Emperor, who showed his love of arts and sciences upon every
occasion, they were not only exactly copied, but a translation was made of all
that were legible. Forty-nine have been translated, twenty-two of which are
dated in the year of the Hegyra, 623. Of course, it is natural to suppose,
there must have been some epidemic sickness in the city that year; the rest are
variously dated. The Arabian ones include only a space of 123 years, that is,
from the year of the Hegyra 619, to that of 742; during which time, Baty-Khan,
previovs to his invading the west, is said to have reigned here. There are
three in the Armenian language, one dated 557; and two, 984 and 986, which is
in the middle of the sixteenth century, comprehending a space of 429 years.
These epitaphs contain nothing but a Mohammedan sentence, (not found in the
Armenian inscriptions,) with the name, birth, and dignity of the deceased. They
are chiefly eminent Bulgarians and Tartars of both sexes, some priests, some
laymen, and perhaps merchants. Of some, it is said, they were born in the
Persian province Schamachie, and one in Skirvan, whence it appears that this
town, on account of it is trade and commerce, must have drawn some of it is
inhabitants from very distant parts. A better conception may be formed of it is
trade, from the little silver and copper-coins, found by the children in the
fields. Among the silver ones, are many stamped with a pretty Arabian or
Kufischian inscription. They consist of fine silver, are very thick, but seldom
exceed the size of an English groat. There are also found some of an inferior
silver, and badly stamped, having, on one side, stars or other little
ornaments, F, on the others, some elevated points, a circle, or some whimsical
mark, of the same kind with those used by the Baschkirians, (who are ignorant
of the art of writing,) when they sign their names. I have given a drawing of
them, but these marks are more general on the copper coin, particularly within
the treble triangle G.



Besides these coins, neat toys wrought in fine gold and silver, have also been
found; though these riches are now almost wholly exhausted. They brought me an
abundance of jingling things made of brass and iron, besides several pointed
hatchets, fastened to handles with wooden pins, instead of nails. I saw also
some weapons, that are seldom met with, and which Strahlenberg gives a
description of; and, a variety of corals, that have been turned with a lathe
and afterward burnt, having the form of large buttons, full of little holes,
which perhaps may have been used, as the beads of a Rosary. Most of them were
brick-coloured, some whitish, and others blackish; and, also some smaller ones
of varied colored glass, besides pieces of earthen pots, beautifully colored.
A person who could stay here in summer, might, giving himself the trouble, and
gaining the confidence of the inhabitants, find out some valuable pieces of
antiquity; but, it was impossible for me to do this in winter. And though I
took all possible means to ingratiate myself with the people, I am persuaded
that what I procured, was not the most rare and valuable. What a variety of
these antiquities must have fallen then into bad hands! The Tartars, who come
this way in winter, purchase the clothes and coins here collected with great
avidity and care, and I was but just in time to procure some few articles. On
account of the severity of the frost, and the deep and heavy snow, it was
impossible for me to give that description of this place and it is environs
which it deserves, and which I wished to do.

Simbursky. The rest of the winter I spent at Simbursky, examining into the
animals and fisheries of this district; for the brass and iron manufactories in
the neighborhood, are scarce worth notice.

In the mountainous districts about the Wolga, the Russian marmotes are often
met with, in whole troops or families, great numbers of badgers, and very fine
ermine, and ferrets innumerable. But the common weasel, which throughout Russia
and Siberia, becomes in winter, white as snow, is not to be found here. Mr.
Linnaeus was unacquainted with the European weasel, only in it is winter fur,
which changes white at that time of the year in all northern countries, like
the ermine and the hare. (See Lapland and Norway.) It Is fur in summertime, is
of a black-brown color, but the fur of those which are bred in the southern
parts of Europe, are of a beautiful yellow-red. I have seen the ermine from the
Molucca Islands, which like the weasel, in the southern climes, never changes
it is fur. Buffon justly asserts, that the ermine is an animal peculiar to
northern countries alone.

The most common animal of all here, is the step-mouse, (Mus Citillus,) which
in all the open deserts and heaths, between the Wolga and the Don, to the 53d
degree of latitude, has a most beautiful, spotted fur, and as it is easy to be
caught, I wonder it is not. But in all the southern countries, situated from
the eastern part of the Wolga to Siberia, this animal not only increases in
size, but it is fur is gray and speckled, and it has a bushy tail, and resembles
the marmot, both in appearance and manner. These districts swarm with
pernicious field-mice, two kinds of which are but little known, the Mus
agrarius, and the Mus minutus. They are generally found in the open fields,
under heaps of corn set up there, in the Russian way.

The musk-rat, common in all the lakes about the Wolga, is also remarkable for
it is fur, which is very cheap, and used only to border, common fur clothes.
Notwithstanding this, it is wool is soft and fine, equal to that of the beaver
in softness and brightness, and though shorter, perhaps might be equally good
for the manufacture of hats.

Of the common sorts of wild fowls, there are plenty of the bustard kind,
(Tetrix,) and partridges. Both are caught during the winter, in snares and
nets. Woodcocks are scarce to be found, only in the pine-woods about the Wolga,
and a species of grouse, (T. Bonasia) is sometimes met with, but as seldom. Of
rare birds, I met here with the wood-pecker, (picus tridactylus.) The smallest
falcon, (Falco minutus,) which is not much larger than a thrush; a kind of gray
hawk, (Falco rusticolus,) called here Lunn, and a remarkably beautiful kind of
blue tit-mouse Parus indicus Aldrovandi. Raj. Syn. av. p. 74. n, 7.
, common from the Wolga to Siberia; and, the water-starling, (Sturnus cinclus,)
may be seen, throughout the whole winter, in several adjacent rivers, which do
not freeze, as the Uren, Kamajur, etc.

I don't believe there is a river in Europe so full of fish as the Wolga,
including all it is arms or branches. It not only serves all the neighboring
districts, but this river, and the Jaik, supplies the whole empire. Though the
fisheries will be properly described in the lower parts of this river, I will
mention what I saw here.

Those fishes, which are caught in the Wolga only, (not in it is branches,) are
the sturgeon, the horn-back, the huso or isinglass fish, and the salmon. The
more common kinds are the barble, the shad, the gold-eye, and another called
Tschechon.

The Bjeluga sturgeon is often caught in this river, from thirteen to sixteen
feet long, and from 1200 to 1800 pounds in weight; but, the smallest kind of
this fish, which is most frequent, is five or six feet shorter than the former.
The horn-back, (Ossetr,) is caught from three feet in length to near six, and
weighs from twenty pounds to eighty. The little huso, (accipenser Ruthenus,)
which is peculiar to the Caspian sea, and has no other name, is not longer,
when full-grown, than about twenty-eight inches, and weighs about twelve pounds.

They have also here another kind of sturgeon, not much bigger than the huso,
but shaped like a sturgeon, and is very rough and thorny. They call it Kostera;
but having compared many of these fishes of a different age, I am confident,
that they are only young sturgeons, and that the older they grow, the more they
improve in smoothness and fat.

The red-salmon which they have here, is only seen in the two last months of
the year, and is even then very rare in the Wolga; but, the white-salmon comes
up this river, from the beginning of January to June. They are from twenty-one
inches, to three feet in length, and do not exceed 30lb. in weight. The barbel
is somewhat heavier, and about four feet in length. But the general size is
three feet. The shad, (Some,) has been seen here six feet long, and 120 pounds
in weight. It is caught commonly in spring and autumn, and is thoroughly a
fish, well known for his waving motion, in order to avoid the net, or tear it
to rescue other fishes.

The gold-eye, (clupea alosa,) which, on account of it is color, is called
Sheleniza or iron-fish, or from a whimsical opinion, that eating it will turn
persons mad, Beschenaja Ryba, or mad-fish, comes up the Wolga in prodigious
shoals, from the beginning of May to the end of summer, and frequently load the
nets, to the displeasure of the fishermen. The Russians throw this fish away,
or sell it at a cheap rate to the Mordvines, and the people of Tschuwa, who eat
them fresh, or dry them for winter provision. It is a fish that would eat very
well smoked, and supply the lower class of people, if they could get rid of
that foolish prejudice, that such as eat it, will go mad.

The Tschechon, (Cyprinus cultratus,) is caught in spring, in vast quantities,
with the gold-eye, and is much of the same size, but on account of it is dry
nature but little esteemed; of course, it is only eaten by the poor, sometimes
fresh, and sometimes salted.

Besides these fishes, the Wolga and all it is branches are full of others
generally known, perch, bream, trout, etc. But the eel is never met with,
neither in the Wolga, nor any of the rivers or brooks that flow into it, nor in
the neighboring lakes, nor is it seen in all Siberia. But instead of the eel,
they catch the quab plentifully, by hooks baited with pieces of fish, and laid
in the wintertime underneath the ice. The Wolga is also crowded with crabs of
an extraordinary size, but of a bad taste. The common people cannot endure the
sight of them, of course, they are only eaten by the better class, and the
inhabitants of great towns, who are free from these vulgar prejudices. They are
caught plentifully in winter, by making holes in the ice, and letting down a
round flat piece of basket-work, in the middle of which they tie a piece of
fish, and when they crawl on it to get at their prey, are drawn up.

There is scarce a place in the world, where they make use of so many whimsical
and ingenious machines or instruments for fishing, as on the river Wolga. Not
to mention their common cast and drag-nets, their baskets, and bow-nets, they
use another method, which is a kind of snare, and deserves to be described.
Choosing such places in the river for this snare, where the bed of it is flat,
to about the middle of the channel; at the bottom of such places, they drive in
stakes, about half a yard asunder, across that part of the river, either in a
straight line, or an obtuse angle, which opens downwards with the stream, the
top of the stakes standing above the water. Against these stakes they place
hurdles of basket-work, as high, as will reach from the bottom of the river to
it is surface. These hurdles are sunk between the current and the stakes, and
kept in their places by stones and the stream, driving against them. This is
designed to obstruct the passage and make the fish turn aside, to seek another
way. Now, in some part of this basket-work, an opening or entrance, sixteen or
eighteen feet is left, into a square place made in the same manner, and closed
on three sides with hurdles, wherein the fishes swim; the third side of this
square place being open, leads to other enclosures, in a kind of labyrinth, and
all in the course of the stream, and inclining to the shore. Over these snares
or enclosures, the ice is constantly broke, and over the holes a thatched shed
is erected, to shelter the fishermen who wait here, and who have a fire
occasionally, to warm them. The shed is large enough to admit the men to walk
round the enclosures.

Now it is easy to conceive, that a fish, swimming along the hurdles to find a
passage, must necessarily go into these enclosures; but, to know the arrival of
such fish and seize it, the following method is made use of.

A piece of netting stretched on a frame, or a piece of basket-work, the exact
size of the bottom of the enclosure is let down in each, with strong ropes
fixed to each corner, to draw it up, when they have occasion. Over the entrance
into these enclosures, is a small floating piece of wood, with a number of
strings, that go down to the bottom, and are there fixed in a frame COSSACKS
FISHING
below, so that every large fish that enters, must necessarily touch some one
of these strings, which moves the float above, and gives the fishermen notice.
Over the opening in each enclosure, is a net, perpendicularly erected on a
frame, which they can slide down by means of two perpendicular poles, at
pleasure; and, as soon, as they know of a fish being in the enclosure, they
slide down the net and draw up the frame and this net, at the same time, thus
hemming in the fish, which they take with hooks. This done, they let down the
frame again. Three men are employed in this business.

But not to be constrained to sit up the whole night watching, they have
contrived a method, that the fish shall ensnare himself, and give notice to the
fishermen. This is by hanging some stones to the bottom of the sliding net or
grate that shuts up the entrance, and making it drop of itself, and this is
effected in the manner of the door of the common rat-trap, by a small piece of
wood fixed at the entrance into the enclosure, which gives way on being touched
by a fish in it is passage, and communicating with a piece of mechanism above,
lets the net or fall-gate down, and at the same time rings an alarm-bell, which
wakes the sleeping fishermen, and gives them notice of the event.

This ingenious piece of mechanism is fixed in the river in summertime, in
proportion to the height of the water, and remains there till the ice drives,
in order to catch Wolga sturgeons and other great fishes, which swim up the
stream. When the ice begins to drive, it is removed till January, and then made
use of, till the breaking of the ice in spring, this being the season of
salmon-fishing.

'Every spring and autumn,' says Took, these hurdle enclosures undergo a
thorough repair, and in deep waters, a number of diverse are employed, to
examine all the lower parts and amend them.

It is impossible for the most lively imagination to represent the extreme
fatigue and the different hardships these diverse undergo. Just before they go
into the water, they drink a dram of brandy, and then get upon an oven made
extremely hot, near the end of this hurdle fence. Here they continue half an
hour, then wrapping their sheep-skin shube about them, they get into the boat,
throw off their cloths, when they come to the place to be examined, make the
sign of the cross three times on their forehead and breast, and are let down by
degrees to the bottom of the river. In this suspended state, they are
alternately drawn up and let down again, that they may examine the whole
apparatus. Want of breath obliges them to be drawn up now and then, above the
surface. This they repeat, till shivering with cold all over, they find their
limbs begin to stiffen, and refuse to perform their office. They then take
another dram, repair to the oven to re-heat themselves, and begin their work
afresh; and they repeat these alternatives of heat and cold, till the blood
gushes out at their nose and ears, and they are cast half dead into the boat,
which is constantly near them. The strongest of these diverse cannot remain more
than seven minutes under water, nor support these sudden transits from heat to
cold more than five times a day; and, as it generally requires seven days to
repair the works thoroughly, the diver is condemned, during that period, to
experience all the consequences of being stunned in this most violent and
extraordinary manner. Their health, as the reader will naturally conclude, is
much impaired by this tormenting practice, and none of them ever reach the
ordinary term of human life, but die whilst in their youth. No man can follow
this dreadful trade longer than ten years, and numbers are forced to relinquish
it, in the third or fourth year.

Among the various kinds of fishes caught in the Wolga, the several species of
sturgeon, and the white-salmon, are the most excellent and profitable, as to
price. The latter, as long as the frost continues, are transported fresh into
the northern parts of Russia, but afterward salted and smoked like the
red-salmon; the art of smoking fish, however, they know but little of; if they
knew better how to cure it, both kinds of salmon would be excellent food.

The various kinds of sturgeon caught in this river in summer and autumn, are
put by hundreds into the large ponds, near the Wolga, which the floods leave in
hollow places, in the low grounds, and are left there all the winter. They are
dragged to these lakes or ponds, by ropes, passed through the mouth and out at
the gills. As soon as the winter grows milder, they are taken out with a net,
from underneath the ice, in these lakes, and transported in a frozen state.

The roe of this fish, which is the celebrated Caviar as they call it, is
considered as the greatest delicacy, and the nicest part of the whole sturgeon,
and is conveyed to great distances in this country, in wintertime, without
being salted. The largest Wolga sturgeons will produce sometimes 200lb. of roe,
and as five eggs of this roe weigh but one grain, it may easily be calculated,
how many millions of eggs the roe of such a fish must contain, not less than
near eight millions; but what is still more remarkable is, that though few
fishes come up the river to spawn, no young sturgeons are ever caught or seen.
The roes of other sturgeons do not weigh more than thirty pounds. In summer,
they salt and export, in barrels, large quantities of this roe or cavear. The
method of salting it is this. After the roe is cleaned of it is skin and
vessels, and well salted, they put it into boxes that have holes in the bottom,
and press it with heavy weights, so that the moisture drains from it. This
done, they wring it in linen rags, press it into barrels, and pour fish-fat
over it, to prevent it is corrupting. In other places, they preserve the roes of
salmon and pike; scalding the latter in boiling water before they salt it, in
order to remove it is viscidity: but, the plentiful roe of the barbel and bream,
are considered as unwholesome, and given as food, to geese and poultry.

Of the other species of sturgeon, they throw no part away. It Is intestines are
partly eaten when fresh. A strong tendon which this fish has upon it is back, is
taken out before it is salted, and when dried, sold as a great dainty, by the
name of Wesiga. Of the air-bladders they make isinglass; for, this purpose,
they choose those of sturgeons in preference, as having the strongest
viscidity. These bladders are soaked in water, and after the external skin is
taken off, the internal part, which is the isinglass, is rolled up and dried.
The best sort is rolled up, the second best laid together in leaves like a
book, and the worst sort is merely dried, and sold at a low rate. Farther down
the river Wolga, the make a fine glue, by boiling the fresh bladders, and cast
it in moulds of various forms. Upon the river Oka, where they have only the
little huso, they beat the bladder out thin, in the state it is taken from the
fish, and dry it. On the Wolga, they use shad-bladders for this purpose, but
these they bruise and pass through a sieve. The strongest of this sort of glue
is used by the joiners. They have begun now in some places, to make fish-glue
from the barbel.

The shad, amongst their large fishes, is the least esteemed, yet the skin of
this fish, being thin and smooth, like that of an eel, when the skins of other
fishes are thrown away, is spread and dried, and sold to the country people,
especially those among the Tartars, to form their windows of, (see Lapland,)
being as transparent as horn. They use also for this purpose, the peritonaeum
of animals, cleaned and dried. I found the shad-bladder excellent for covering
of bottles, in which animal preparations are preserved, as it keeps out
moisture, better than other bladders.

Tschirikowo. By an excursion to the village Tschirikowo, at the distance of
twenty miles from Simbursky, I met with some other curiosities. This village is
situated upon the brook Birutsh, which flows into the Swijaga, and which is not
only remarkable for its trout and mother-of-pearl which is found in it, in
common with other adjacent waters, but for there having been elephant's bones
discovered there about the shores. I have myself seen some work made of an
elephant's tooth, found 200 years ago in this place, which had taken a light
yellow color. Many other bones, particularly a skull of an elephant, have at
sundry times been found in the banks of this river. I have also seen some
workmanship of ivory, made of a tooth found here, equal to the soundest ivory,
only that the point of the tooth was a little decayed. So, that it may be
matter of wonder, that a bone could remain after a length of years past memory,
without decay. In several spots, human bones they say are also found in great
quantity. If this be the case, it will be no small matter of triumph to some
writers who, ascribe all the elephant bones found in the northern districts, to
former wars. But there are more probable arguments to ascribe these relics to,
which are dispersed as far as the icy ocean; to some higher and more important
catastrophes of the earth.

1769. March 10. I left Simbursky on the 10th of March. A winter journey leaves
but little opportunity for useful observation, and the road back to Stawropal
is now sufficiently known, to need any more to be said of it. The winter-road
was over so many heaths, and the snow lay so deep, that we were obliged to walk
the whole night on the 10th, and reached Stawropal, the next evening.

March 16. Some little matters I had to adjust, detained me at Stawropal till
the 16th. The chain of lime-mountains, which compose the shore of the Wolga,
and are upwards of 700 feet high, are but barren walls of rocks and torn
cliffs, but they please the eye by their variety, and strike it with wonder.
The great quantities of birds of prey, that inhabit these rocky shores,
building their nests here in summer, are beyond description. The whitish eagle,
(Vultur albicilla,) is frequently met with on these mountains, even in winter;
and, many beautiful hawks build also their nests in the cavities. Here is
plenty also in summer, of a curious kind of wild-ducks, (Anas rutila,) whose
feathers resemble the color of the red-fox. There are a few reddish or black
bears, and also some lynxs, in the thick forests of these mountains, not many
martens, but a fine sort of large squirrels, inclining to white. The fur of
this animal, is the second best in Russia.

About forty miles from Stawropal, near the mouth of the river Sok, is a
high-hill, called Zarew Kurgan, with a round base. From every appearance, and
every rational conjecture, this mountain seems to have been torn from the
lime-mountains on the opposite side of the river, and to owe it is roundness to
accidental inundations; but, according to common report, it is said to have the
following, incredible origin. The story is differently told, but, the tenor is
to this purpose: that in very early days, an enormous army, passing this
district, the commander, in order to erect a monument to his power, is said to
have ordered each soldier to carry a cap-full of earth upon this spot, and that
thus the hill rose; but, what is much against the story is, the hill's
consisting of large pieces of rock, which could neither be put within the small
space of a cap, nor be carried by any one man. Some increase this mavelous
account, by adding, that the same army went back the same way, and having
unfortunately lost a great number of men, each soldier was commanded to take
away a cap-full of earth from it, and notwithstanding this, this large hill is
still left.

In the neighborhood of this hill, near the village Podgory, a manor,
belonging to Count Orlof, stands the village Sernoi-Gorodok, to which the
sulphur manufactory was removed in the beginning of this century, from the
river Sok. It is built along the steep shore of the Wolga, at the bottom of
that very mountain, where the famous massy sulphur is dug, and contains about
forty dwelling-houses, and some buildings belonging to the manufactory.

The very day of my arrival at the town of Samara, it thawed, and the weather
was so exceedingly mild, during the latter days of March, that soon after the
heights of Samara were exposed to the beams of the meridian sun, they lost
their hoary heads, and though it snowed violently on the last day of March and
the first day of April, it so quickly disappeared the ensuing days, that on the
12th day of April, the meadows began to look green, and as the ice upon the
Wolga daily decreased, I made a visit to some of the adjacent parts, before all
the snow was melted.

By the middle of April, every appearance of winter was gone. Spring took it is
place; the palm and the hazel began to bloom, and all the heights were
delightfully enamelled with the star of Bethlehem, the silver-weed,
pheasant-eye, violets, and a kind of wind-flower, the anemone patens. The
birches and service-trees put forth their leaves, and were followed on the 20th
by every other bush. Before the end of the month, the wild apple tree, which in
this district is considered as the most common bush, began to blow, and all
nature looked gay.

The aquatic birds were still earlier seen. On the 19th and 20th of March, we
saw wild swans and wild geese, and on the 25th, the open waters were crowded
with ducks. The lapwing's plaintive notes were heard on the 20th, and followed,
before the end of this month, by every other waterfowl, I took notice that
these birds came from the west and north-west, as they do in other parts of
Europe; but, the birgander, (Onocrotalus,) the stork, (of which they have here
a white kind,) and other land-fowls, came from the south. Among the land-birds,
the first that made it is appearance in the middle of March, was the crow, and
at the end of March, the wild-pidgeon, the starling, the plover, and a kind of
lark, (Alauda Alpestris,) which latter was as abundantly to be met with, during
the whole spring, as the sparrow. In the mean time, the mouse, Citillus, which
has already been mentioned, crept out on all those spots where the snow was
melted, and coupled. The insects were not visible, but with the flowers; those
I first saw, were some butterflies and glowworms, but neither these nor the
warmth of the days, induced a visit from the swallow, till the 16th of April,
on which day I saw several, with the bee-eater, (Merops,) which convinces me
they are birds of passage, or they would have appeared as soon as others. It
has been said, that swallows, in winter, retire to the water, but the Russians
know nothing of this fabulous account, or they would contradict it; for, there
is no country that fishes so much, and sweeps the waters, frozen or not frozen,
with all kinds of nets. The usual autumnal and heavy frosts drive all swallows
from these districts early; but, in the milder parts of Europe, it may easily
be conceived, that some of these birds, after having tarried too long, and
become too feeble and disabled, from the rigor of the season, to take a long
journey, may creep into the water, or some hollow ground.

Samara. Before I proceed farther, I will give the reader some short account of
the town of Samara. This place is situated on the angle which the northern
mouth of the river Samara forms with the Wolga, but stands chiefly on the Wolga
bank. It was formerly a garrison, and had a wooden fort, but was burnt down in
1703. In 1704, they erected a new one, with defiles, on a hill, on the eastern
side, between the Wolga and Samara, which is to be seen. The chief support of
this town, which continues to flourish, is breeding of cattle, and their great
commerce is in fresh and salt fish, and roe, (Cavear.) To carry on this trade,
when the weather is open and the roads passable, they travel over the steps in
caravans to the river Jaik, to fell their provisions to buyers or merchants,
who come there from all the northern and western districts. On account of this
commerce, they throw a temporary bridge over the Samara to a road, that leads
straight to the capital of the Cassanians, who live near the river Jaik. On
this road, there are many way-houses at certain distances, for the
accommodation of travelers.

The inhabitants of Samara, have some fisheries on the Wolga, at a distance
from the town, but in certain reaches of the river, which they consider as
belonging to them. Besides their own cattle, they traffic with the Kalmucks
for sheepskins, and tallow. They have no manufactories, except a few
tanneries, without the town, and some very inconsiderable ones of hides and
silks. The citizens or burghers of Samara, belong to a court dependant on the
regency of Casan; but, the people of Casan, that live in and about Samara, are
numbered among those of the district of Orenburg, and formerly, the whole town
belonged to it.

In winter, Samara is full of trading Tartars from Kasimof, who come here with
lamb-skins, which they barter for with the Kirgians and Kalmucks, and which
they bring here to get tanned and sewed together by the christian Kalmucks who
reside in this town, before they carry them to Moscow, and other places. Most
of the fine lamb-skins sold in Russia, are brought from this place, as also the
skins taken from the legs of lambs and fewed together by the Kalmuck women, and
which are sold as furs. The thread used for this purpose, in common, is drawn
from Russian linen, in lengths about an ell long; but, what they use for
themselves, is made from the divided sinews of animals; a kind of fine cat-gut.

The ice no sooner leaves the Wolga, but a great many ships and barges are
seen, passing and re-passing to and from Astrachan, into the internal parts of
the Russian Empire, and some, frequently, at anchor here. Those that sail down
the river carry timber, and wood of all kinds, wooden and earthen vessels,
iron, foreign goods, and all sorts of corn; those that go up the stream from
parts below, are laden with Astrachan goods, hides, tallow, and salt.

The environs of Samara consist chiefly of waste-ground and heath, rising
gradually into high hills. In the snow-drains that run into the Samara, are
found many beautiful pebbles and flame-coloured agates, impressed with figures,
as if frozen. Many of these have been long collected and polished, at
Catherineburg.

The hills that lie up the river from Samara, and form it is mountainous shore,
are so happily situated, and have so fit a soil, that there is no place in the
whole Russian empire better adapted for trying the cultivation of vines: and
such trials, if made by experienced vine-dressers, with such vines as love a
loamy soil, must surely meet with success. Here might also be cultivated other
things, which require a warm climate, and thrive in the southern parts of
Europe. But not the least attempt has been hitherto made to introduce any thing
of the kind, except pimento, and the common water-melon. The water-melon
gardens are upon the heath, on both sides the river, and are open to the waste.
They plow the ground, sow the seeds, and take no farther care of them, than
occasionally to water them in dry weather, and when the fruit is ripe, leave it
to be gathered by children. As they raise a great quantity of this fruit, they
salt and pickle it as we do cucumbers, but I don't remember ever tasting any
thing so nauseous. Some stew them, and it is said, they are then very sweet.

The pimento, of which great quantities are raised at Astrachan, is sold by the
name of cod-pepper, or red-mustard. It is sown in the same way they sow
cauliflowers, viz. in flat boxes, raised from the ground. In the month of July,
they remove the seedling plants to beds in a garden prepared for this purpose,
in rows, at some distance from each other; and water them till they seem to
have taken good root, and are pretty strong. It seldom happens, that an early
frost prevents the ripening of this fruit. The ripe pods after being dried in
an oven, are reduced to powder, sold at the rate of nine shillings or less, for
thirty-six pounds weight, and are used by the common people as a spice. Many of
these pimento and water-melon plantations, are made only about the end of June,
in those hollows, where the water stood all the winter, and at this season is
dry, and yet their fruit ripens. They have begun here to plant apple trees,
which flourish very much about Simbursky, generally called Simbirsk and Syfran;
but, the increase of caterpillars and other destructive insects, is much
against this useful branch of gardening.

Yet there are many wild fruits, apple trees, almonds, very tall and bushy
cherry-trees, (Cerasus pumila,) and of a very spicy flavor. The juice which
they squeeze from them, is sold very cheap, will keep two years, and makes a
regaling summer-drink; they have made a successful attempt to transport it to
Moscow, as soon as the river is open. If this juice is suffered to ferment, it
makes an excellent, spicy vinegar, and if good, is as nice as the best cherry
liquor. These cherry trees or shrubs, and almond bushes, are handsome garden
hedges, on account of their early bloom; and for a living fence, no better tree
can be made choice of than the wild-apple, which is, properly speaking, formed
so by nature. Besides, here are some remarkable and beautiful shrubs, to
ornament a northern garden, as the maple, (acer Tartaricum;) the false acacia,
(Robinia frutescens;) the diosma, (Spirea crenata,) the broom, and the upright
honey-suckle, (Lonicera Tartarica.)

Besides the abovementioned, vernal plants, the heights about Samara produce
some remarkable and curious ones, that bloom in May and June, to some of which
there are no English names, but I have given such as most resemble them. The
Onosma echioides and simplicissima; the clove July-flower, (Dianthus prolifer;)
the virgin's bower; (Clematis recta;) the spurge, (Euphorbia segetalis;) the
sage, (Salvia nemerosa and nutans;) the sage-tree, (Phlomis tuberosa and Herba
venti;) the dragon's-head, (Dracocephalum Thymiflorum and Sibiricum;) the
cat-mint, (Nepeta violacea;) the French honey-suckle, (Hedysarum Onobrychis;)
the milk-vetch, (Astragalus pilosus;) The Grandiflorus, Contortuplicatus; the
Moscow and Siberian centaury, the thistle, (Carduus cyanoides,) and the
elicampane, (Inula hirta and odorata.) Among these plants, none is more known
than the Onosma echioides, which has a long root, seemingly dyed on the
outside, with a beautiful red. Young maidens gather this root and paint their
cheeks with it, on which account it is called by the Russians, Rumaniza; by the
Tartars, Krschab.

Here grows also spontaneously a wild asparagus, but seldom so large as the
little finger. Though it is good to eat, the inhabitants are either ignorant or
careless of this gift of nature.

Among the remarkable animals of the district of Samara, the squirrel, (Sciurus
glis,) which they fatten in Italy for the table, deserves to be noticed. I have
found this animal in the rocky cliffs of the eastern mountains, and tried to
make this and other animals which sleep all winter, as the Urchin and Mus
citillus, sleep, by shutting them up in an icy cave in summertime, and
succeeded, for on looking at them a few days afterward, I found them quite
insensible.

Of all the little animals found in these steps or wastes, the most beautiful
and remarkable is the dwarf kind of hare, not larger than a rat, almost the
color, and having all the form of common hares, except the ears, which are
round and shorter. This little creature leads a solitary life in spots,
overshadowed with bushes, where it digs holes like a rabbit, with several
passages leading to them, and hides itself all the day. At twilight it steals
abroad in search of food, chirps like a quail, and may be heard at night, and
before dawn, at half a mile distance. The country people listen to the noise,
but are at a loss to know from whence it comes, being wholly unacquainted with
the animal. It brings forth toward the end of May, from four to six young
ones, which like young rats, are blind and naked. In wintertime, it makes
trenches in the turf, and seeks it is food beneath the snow.

The musk-rat, (Sorex moschatus,) is another uncommon animal, seen frequently
on the river Samara, and the lakes. It is generally caught in those
basket-tools fixed in the river for catching of fish, and is commonly found
suffocated, though it is internal parts are formed for living on the water. This
animal makes it is nest in holes, under water, in the banks of the lakes, but as
they work the hole upwards, the further end is above the level of the water,
and of course, lies dry. In winter, it has no air but what it receives below
the ice. As soon as this begins to melt, it is often seen playing on the
surface, and basking in the sun. It has a very sensible and flexible snout,
which it can turn into it is mouth, and with which it digs up worms and leeches
in marshy grounds, on which it feeds, muddling in water, like a duck. It Is eyes
are smaller than the mole's; if provoked, it squeaks like a mouse, and bites
dangerously. It Is entrails when fresh, have a strong, sulphurous smell, but
the musky scent which proceeds from it is glands, beneath the scaly skin of it is
tail, is more powerful, than that of musk itself. Linnoeus has classed this
animal in the genus of beavers; but, according to it is marks, it is a true
sorex.

It must easily be conceived, that so warm a district as Samara is, in the
summer, must swarm with insects. The common gray and green lizards are here in
such quantities, that strike a bush, and you will drive out numbers; they bury
in the ground under high grass, and their holes have two entrances to each.

Among the insects, I took notice of an uncommon large tarantula, with which
the environs of Samara swarm. These insects will make holes two feet
perpendicularly in the solid ground, where they lie all day, and never quit
them till night, when they seek their prey. Though this insect very much
resembles the Apulian tarantula, I never heard of any ill-effects from it is
bite, and yet the peasant's children, frequently digging them from their holes,
to draw a kind of thread out of their skin, are frequently bitten. I was once
bit myself, and a Casanian whom I employed to look for some, was bit till he
bled, the wound swelled, and was painful for two or three days, but this was
all.

Spanish flies are here caught in quantities during the month of May, and
supply all the apothecaries shops in this country. Indeed, this district is
very rich in curious insects, and I never saw any, where so many of the
lice-kind called, acarus reduvius, and ricinus; the bushes about Samara are
full of them, and one cannot go into the fields, without having one's clothes
covered with them.

Among the remarkable things in the district of Samara, I must notice the bones
of elephants and buffalos, that are often fished out of the river, or found
upon it is banks. I met with a buffalo horn, which, independent of the broken
point and lower part, weighed upwards of six pounds, and it is greatest diameter
was four Paris inches.

May 1. Schelechmet. The spring being now very favorable, I pursued my way at
the end of April, to Sysran, about sixty miles distant. In my way there, I
passed through the Mordvine village Schelechmet, where I was present at a
nuptial ceremony, the most remarkable parts of which were as follow. As soon as
the bride returned from the church where she was married, and from which she
was brought back in a wagon, (with the bridemaid by her side;) and, over which
a large, white linen sheet was spread; she was taken by two friends of the
bridegroom, and conducted howling, to the door of the bridegroom's house, where
she was greeted by all the neighboring females. Afterward came her mother,
with a round-bottomed pan full of dried hops, which, setting fire to with a
match, she placed at her daughter's right foot, and which the bride was
immediately to kick away. This is done three times. Each time the pan was
filled with fresh hops and fired. When she kicks the pan from her, they attend
particularly to the manner in which the pan is overturned, as, if it tumbles
one way, it is considered as portentive of dire disasters to the young couple,
if it falls another, as ominous of future happiness. It reeled about and
settled with the hollow side upwards. This is a token of good-luck, and gave
joy to the whole company, who were pretty well intoxicated, and called loudly
for more beer, which was brought them in a cup, into which the bride threw some
neat rings, (many of which she had upon her fingers,) and before she was
suffered to enter the house. This delayed much the succeeding ceremonies, which
I did not think worth while to wait for. But I was told, that prior to this, a
spoonful of thick stir-about, made of oatmeal, was to be distributed to each
inhabitant of the village, given them either in their hats, or on a corner of
their coats, as most agreeable to the receiver.

Walofka, 15 miles from Samara. At a village called Walofka, about fifteen
miles from Samara, is an extensive, Tartarian fortress, near half a mile in
circumference, with a treble ditch and bank; but, there are no buildings on it,
nor any vestiges of buildings, but in ploughing the fields adjoining, Tartarian
bricks are often found; perhaps, the remains of some hidden graves.

The great road to Syfran, is over some high and open hills, but under a
species of cultivation. Their method of husbandry, may appear odd to a
stranger; but what I relate, I saw. The countryman sows his oats, millet and
rye, on a spot of wild, lay land, which he conceives not to want manure, as if
he destined it to be eaten by birds. He then plows it, and another horse
following with a harrow, but without a driver, compleats the work. Thus, one
field after the other, is sowed, ploughed, and harrowed, by a single man, and
two horses. In sowing wheat and barley they take a little more pains, this
being their festival food, (for they brew their beer with malt, as we do,) and
indeed it would not thrive by such a mode of husbandry. If the field is very
distant from the village, the husbandman takes his provisions with him, and
continues day and night upon the ground, till his land is all sown, or he is
called home, by the solemnity of his sabbath. On these hills is seen a kind of
mouse, (Mus talpinus,) that lives on certain roots, which it seeks, by throwing
up the ground that covers them.

May 5. On the fifth of May, I went to see the wonderful, rocky shore of the
Wolga, in the neighborhood of Kostytschi. This village, consisting of obout
300 houses, and a wooden church, is erected on the steep and rocky banks of
this river, between fifty and sixty feet higher than the water. The wall of the
river is near a mile in length, and is formed of a yellowish limestone, in
which are a number of cavities and natural grottos, from twenty to thirty feet
deep, producing a very beautiful effect. These excavations can be ascribed only
to the dashing waves of the Wolga, which wash away the earthy layers, and
excavate the stone itself. Higher up, this rock strikes the beholder with the
idea of a dreadful ruin. The cliffs are inhabited by ring-doves, crows, and
little birds of prey, which do not quit their situation even in winter. I found
here a beautiful kind of water-wag-tail, (Motacilla Leucomela,) no where to be
met with but in this rock, building it is nest in the cliffs. In the
water-drains near this village, is found a great deal of saltpeter.

The stone of this rock is penetrated very generally with something like a
pitchy substance, which is certainly brought here by the water in a fluid
state, and settled; it is black and shining, and taken out in pieces that weigh
many pounds. It is very brittle and crumbling, but of an inflammable nature,
and will burn in the candle like sealing-wax. Indeed, by an addition which
takes away the roughness, a beautiful sealing-wax is made, and I was informed,
that a merchant who formerly lived there, obtained an Imperial grant to
manufacture sealing-wax from it. I was told also at Samara, that this jet, with
some other dug at Tetjuschi, was formerly conveyed to the sulphur manufactory
at Sernoi Gorodok, where they pressed from it an oil, used in the artillery. At
present, this mineral is applied to no other use, than for smiths to blacken or
lacquer their iron wares.

Sysran, May 5. I reached Sysran on the fifth of May at night. The greatest
part of this town is delightfully situated on a height, which occupies the
northern angle, between the rivers Krymsa and Sysranka, into which latter the
former flows. A small part of the town, together with a well built cloister,
lies on the southern bank of the Sysranka; the rest, which is meanly built,
lies on a flat, along the Krymsa. Here is a decayed wooden fortress, a
stone-built church, and a courthouse; but, as the place is not well supplied,
few of the inhabitants are rich. They apply themselves a good deal to
gardening, and have many orchards of apples. They breed a good deal of poultry,
and with these the Astracan swan-goose. This bird intermixes with the common
goose, and it is progeny will couple with themselves; of course, the breed is
mixed. The pure bastards partake of the nature of both the swan-goose, and
common goose, as to size, shape, and color, and mixing further with common
geese, the young ones are of a blackish hue. All their bills are red, and bent,
and have sometimes a little prominence at the upper end.

Kaschpur, 7 miles from Sysran. The borough-town of Kaschpur, through which I
passed, is situated on a high hill, upon an arm of the Wolga. This hill forms
part of the Wolga's left shore. It is one of the most ancient Russian
habitations of this district, and as far as is known, was built before Sysran.
It has three churches, and belongs to the chancery of Sysranka. At the south
end of this town are still remaining, four decayed towers of the old fortress,
and at some little distance there is a watchtower. In the middle of this town,
which lies open and scattered, rises a very high chalk hill, in form of a sugar
loaf, which can be seen at a great distance. About this hill are some old
dunghills, mouldered into a rich, black soil, which by the addition of chalk,
produces a great deal of saltpeter. I found whole tracts so wholly
chrystalised with it, that it looked on the ground like snow, and I could have
gathered it in handfuls. Indeed, all the land round this place is so full of
saltpeter, that the cattle eat the very earth. Coal is also dug in this
neighborhood.

May 10. I intended to leave Sysran on the 9th, but not being able to get
horses, on account of a festival on that day, kept in commemoration of St.
Nicolas, I delayed my departure till the next day at noon. The heat was
insupportable, but the flying clouds seemed to promise us some refreshing
showers. The air was like a furnace, and the heat so intense, that the mercury
in the thermometer stood in the most airy and shady place at 105; on the 12th
of May, it fell to 93 degrees, and often in the sun to 85 degrees, a heat so
great, that it was impossible to continue a minute in the sunshine. All nature
was languid and panting, the soil on the black heath cracked above an ell deep,
and the apertures were some inches wide. I left Sysran about five in the
evening, for it was too sultry to travel in the day; and, the great swarms of
ox-flies, (Tabanus bovinus and tropicus,) were very troublesome and tormenting
to the horses, while the sun was near the meridian. But, in this scorching
weather, I took notice, that among the bushes on the wilds, bloomed the common
piony, the fragrant and white dittany, and some others.

I was detained at the next village by a melancholy circumstance; a gun that
had been loaded to shoot wild-geese, accidentally went off, and shot my German
servant in the hip, shattering it very much; humanity therefore required, as he
was mortally wounded, that I should convey him to a place, where he could have
some assistance, and as Stawropal was not a great way off, I sent him there by
water upon the Ussa, and continued my route without him.

At Ussolie, at the bottom of a mountain, is a considerable salt-well, which
makes this district interesting. The spot where the well stands, is now
overflown with water, by an adjoining river, but there is still to be seen some
remains of the old works, by which the salt water was conveyed into pits. The
principal people of this town, in whose jurisdiction this well is, ordered it
to be filled up with rubbish, but the water has puzzled it is way out again, in
several, little veins betwixt the stones, and deposes a whitish, sulphurous
sediment. This water has a nitrous appearance, and a strong, sulphurous smell.
There are one or two more of these wells, at a little distance from the first,
and certainly issuing from the same mountain.

In the course of our journey onward, we passed some bare hills, where a great
number of marmots were every where seen sitting, at the entrance of their
habitations or holes, hissing, as if they meant to insult the passengers as
they rode by. When we came to the village Scwrjukowa, which takes it is name,
(as is often customary among the Tartars, and people of Tschuwa,) from him who
erected for himself the first dwelling there, and is now inhabited by the
unconverted people of Tschuwa; the peasants were preparing a great sacrifice
for the next day, to solicit heaven in their way, for a fertile rain. On
account of our arrival it was postponed, and however desirous I was to be
present at such a solemnity, I did not find myself disposed to urge them to a
compliance, contrary to their inclinations.

May 23d. On the 23d of May, I returned to Samara, and Professor Falk with me.
His design was to have taken another route, but not finding himself well, he
thought stopping at Samara for a few days might recover him. I must not omit
mentioning here, the Gypsophila panicula, which was now in bloom. This plant
grows upon the heaths, and toward autumn, when it begins to fade, forms itself
into a round ball, which is often broke from the stem by a gust of wind, and
rolling over the waste, often frightens the horses of travelers.

In the neighborhood of Samara is a place, to which the sulphur works have
been removed from the district of Sergiesk, and consisted of the manufactory, a
wooden compting-house, and about forty dwelling-houses, spread out in form of a
street, along the high shore of the Wolga, in which dwelt the workmen; but, as
these works have been discontinued, and the workmen are removed, only twelve
huts are remaining. This sulphur manufactory was subject to the Woiwods or
magistrates at Samara, till the year 1720, when it was granted to major Iwan
Molostof, who was the proprietor to 1757, when the whole was granted to one
Iwan Martof, a merchant of Petersburgh, whose son ceased working them for five
years, and then deserted them. In this manufactory, twenty-two superintendants,
and 576 workmen, chiefly from Sergiessk, were employed. These men relieved each
other every month, so that about 130 worked at one time. The annual produce of
this manufactory was full 60,000lb. of brimstone, and might easily have been
increased to 80,000lb. Thirty-six pounds weight stands the proprietor in from
fifty to eighty copeks, (100 copeks are in value 4s. 6d. English,) and
conveying it to Moscow in winter, with hired horses, costs him twelve copeks
for 36lb.

The loss of this sulphur-manufactory to the state, cannot be enough lamented;
for, as there is plenty of firewood in the place, was it properly conducted,
it might turn out to advantage. The buildings of the present works, are a
melting and refining-house. The melting-house is about 350 feet long, and
contained 51 brick furnaces, some of which now are in ruins. The brimstone ore
being first bruised, is melted in these furnaces in earthen pots, from which
the pure sulphur is suffered to run into receiving-vessels below, placed in
wooden troughs, filled with water. In order to refine it, it is melted again in
ovens, and afterward poured into moulds, standing in a trough of water. When
this manufactory was first set on foot, the furnaces had no chimnies, the
consequence of which was, that many of the workmen died of slow fevers and
consumptions; but this is not the case now.

The famous mountain, in which sulphur is found in masses, rises almost
perpendicularly from the shore of the Wolga, opposite the mouth of the river
Sok or Soka, to a height of 700 feet. The lime-mountains near it are still
higher, and the valley between them is covered with wood, with villages
interspersed. The cold in this valley is uncommonly great, even in summertime,
which induces the fishermen, who are employed on the river Wolga, to lodge here
at night, in order to avoid the flies, which dare not venture into this cold
air. I have been told by some Casanians of Gurjef, that going from the mouth of
the river Yaik, (or Jaik, for the jod J in Russia, is pronounced like a Y,)
along the coast of the Caspian sea to Astrabal, there is, at a place called
Pristan, between Tukkaragan and Tjutkaragan, a deep valley between the
mountains, where these very Casanians, who were sent from on board to fetch
water, could not, on account of the insupportable cold, stand it, but were
obliged to return to their ship, without their errand.

In order to ascend this sulphurous mountain, which is covered with
under-wood, I was in many places obliged to creep upon my knees, no path having
been cleared away; and it was so exceedingly steep, that I was often forced to
climb my way. It is inconceivable, that after working many years here, the
people have not opened a horse-way, and rendered the path up it easy, by gentle
windings. In which case, they might bring the sulphur down on horses; whereas,
it is now attended with a great deal of labor, the men carrying down the stone
in masses of 100 pounds weight, upon their shoulders. And yet, though the way
up and down is steep and rocky, and dangerous to a person passing it, without a
load, I did not hear of any accident happening to the men. The sulphur in this
mountain lies very deep. There is one opening on the top above 70 feet wide,
and upwards of 40 feet deep. They have worked ten years in this pit, and the
sulphur vein does not seem near exhausted. Other parts of the mountain consist
of limestone, stucco, and Muscovy talc. There are springs on it uncommonly
sulphurous, but clear, and ice and snow dwell here the whole year. Of the
under-wood growing on it, I saw, the Russian plane-tree, the buck-thorn,
(Rhamnus catharticus and Alpinus,) and the following plants; the hellebore,
(Helleborine,) in quantities; the lady's slipper, (calceolus;) the wind-flower,
(Centaurea Moschata; the laserwort, (Laserpitium trilobum;) the agaric, (Amanta
cervaria;) the chichling vetch, (Lathyris;) and the vetch, (vicia pisiformis;)
and, also the stock gilly-flower, (Cheiranthus erysimoides.) Upon the latter
were great swarms of beautiful insects, and butterflies. The stalks of the
Cervaria sent forth here a sweet, aromatic gum, that melted in the mouth, which
they did not do in any other part of the heath.

Samara, May 30. The weather was now warm, and the ox-fly very troublesome.
Here were such swarms also of a kind of gnat, that often darkened the sky, and
bit us so deep, as to leave the wounds bleeding. The inhabitants have no other
method of defending their faces from this pernicious insect, than by drawing
over their head a large net-cap, soaked in birch-oil. Every person that goes
out of town, provides himself with such a cap. Though this insect bites till
the blood runs, it happily gives no pain. On cattle and on birds, it gets in
among the hair and feathers, and runs about like a louse. This insect, called
the Moskara, leaves them about the end of June; but, another very troublesome
one comes in it is room; this is a kind of wasp, almost invisible, (tipula
solstitialis,) which does not sting, but flys about in such swarms, that a
person cannot stand still a moment, without having his mouth, nose and eyes
full of them. They call this insect Kochra, and defend themselves from it by
large nets, greased with hog's-lard. Here also grows, in bushy places, the
campion, (Lychnis Chalcedonica,) which the common people call cuckow-soap, and
use it to wash their hands and linen.

I sent part of my attendants on before me with the heavy baggage, from Samara
across the Kalmuc wastes to the river Jaik, stopping to take a further view of
this district myself, before I left it. I followed them however, on the 11th of
June, but before I had got half way to the place I ordered them to, a new
accident interrupted my progress. The wagon, in which some persons I had taken
as companions, rode, was overthrown from a height, and two of my people were
hurt; one was exceedingly bruised on the hip, and my waggoner had his right
hand shattered. I sent these men back to Samara, and proceeded with the rest to
Orenburg, passing through Alexieffkoi, inhabited by invalid soldiers and
Casanian tradesmen and farmers. From this place to the town of Kasakian, the
road lies straight, but there are no regular way-houses for accommodation, a
few cottages only excepted, scattered here and there, but where we could get
hay and water. The summer-road to Orenburg from Alexieffkoi, is over the hilly
or left side of the river Samara; but in winter, between the Samara and Kinel,
through alternate valleys and hills, for the space of seventy miles. I went the
winter-road, and fancy can scarce paint a prettier district; the most beautiful
woods of asps and birch, relieved, by turns, with green hills and luxuriant
meadows. No country surely deserves cultivation more than along the river
Samara, there being plenty of arable land, no want of wood, and great extent of
very rich and beautiful meadow. Here are a great many wild roe-deer without
tails, (Cervus pygargus,) and elks which rove about, as far as the river Samara.

The elk in winter, mostly feeds on the young twigs and the bark of the asp and
poplar-trees, but in summertime, seeks it is protection and nourishment in the
steps or uninhabited wastes. The roe is more found on the hilly districts, the
wind carrying off the snow quicker in winter, than in the low-grounds, and thus
giving it an opportunity to feed more plentifully. The Cossacks kill a great
deal of this game, and the chief season of hunting it is in March, the sun then
having sufficient power to melt the surface of the snow into a crust, on which
they can more readily come up with them in their snow-scates, a contrivance
used by the Laplanders also; whereas, the feet of these animals break through
the snow as they run, and are thereby impeded in their course. They are tracked
and driven into valleys, where the snow lies many feet deep, and are thus
brought within reach of a gun, or are more closely pursued and killed with a
lance. The roe, being a tender-footed animal, cannot run far; but the elk,
which is hunted by dogs, will often kill a dog by a kick. The roe-buck throws
off his heavy horns in November after rutting time, and gets new ones in
spring. The female roe, commonly brings forth two young ones about the month of
April; her horns are nearly like those of the buck, only more grown in spring,
but are yet rough and soft. Their skins are sold very cheap. The skin of the
elk is worth about 4s. 6d. and their meat fetches but a low price.

Besides the above animals, they have, farther along the Samara, great plenty
of very fine ermines, and a middle-sized marten, with a bright, yellow neck.
There are also upon the steps or wilds, some few beavers or otters, as also
foxes, and those Cossacks who are fond of hunting, will, in autumn, lie for
some time abroad on these steps, to watch for them. Foxes are less valuable,
the further south they are found up the Samara, till they degenerate into those
gray, step foxes, which the Kirguisians bring here to barter or truck with the
Kalmucks. The squirrel is rarely seen here; but is much sought after, on
account of it is fur, which is of a whitish color.

The country along the river Kinel, is pleasant and varied. The large village
Tscherask, has been built since the year 1744, by a colony from Little Russia,
who had formerly erected many dwelling places on spots about the boundary, at
the river Jaik, but were often plundered by Kirguisian robbers. The inhabitants
of this new flourishing place, live after their own country fashion; they have
neat houses with chimnies, good ovens, apply themselves chiefly to the
cultivation of tobacco and breeding of cattle, and live in abundant
sprightliness and freedom. They are governed by an officer chosen from among
themselves, and confirmed by the regency of Stawropal, whom they call Ataman,
and who has an assistant under him, called Jessaul. Their dress is like that of
the Kossacks or Polanders. The women wear nothing in summer but a shirt, worked
in the neck with needle work, and instead of a petticoat, they wear round the
waist, a piece of calimanco, plaided with various colors, and woven by
themselves, very much like the Scotch played. They wear on the head small caps
of varied colored stuff, bound on with strings, whose ends are worked with the
needle, and hang down behind. Girls let not their hair hang down as do the
Russians, but braid it into tresses, wind it round their heads, and bind it in
front with a party-colored band, ornamented with coral beads, etc. Their
method of courting, is not exactly like that of the highlanders of Friesland,
but very similar to it, and they have many ceremonies similar to those of the
Tartars. A courtship continues about two years, during the first year of which,
the young man is not suffered even to touch his sweetheart. On the day of
marriage, a kind of flag is carried after the bride on her return from church,
made of black or red stuff, as the bridegroom shall think proper, and which he
makes choice of, to acquaint the world with her conduct, it being a signal to
say, whether she has acted to his liking or not, during the last year of their
courtship, when he is entitled to take more liberties.

For the purpose of sheltering and feeding their cattle, they erect sheds or
stalls here and there, on the wastes. Their chief breed is horned cattle, and
they generally plough their land with oxen, though many of the farmers possess
from twenty to thirty horses. Their flocks of sheep are numerous. Many keep to
to the number of four hundred, but they do not consider their wool as the best,
it being rather long and coarse. They do not suffer the ram to be with the ewes
till after St. Peter's-day, which in the Russian Calendar is at the end of
June, a good custom to prevent the lambs being dropped too early. They are
careful to keep their cattle clean, and spread hay beneath the sheep in stalls,
to prevent any injury to the wool, which will fetch twelve or thirteen
shillings a pud, that is 36lb. They never have any murrain among their cattle;
the only distemper is a kind of itch, which they cure with tobacco water, and
as a remedy for maggots in sheep, they use the agrimony.

The cultivation of tobacco is the employment of the women; who sow also large
quantities of vegetables for their own use. But, want of rain this year, had
destroyed not only their garden-stuff, but all sorts of corn.

From the middle of June to the middle of July, women and children are busied
before harvest, in gathering that kind of cochineal, called Coccus Polonicus.
They find this insect chiefly on dry, barren soils, about the root of the
common strawberry and the cinque-foil, (Potentilla reptans.) In Little Russia,
they are said to collect them from a plant called Smolka, which, according to
the common opinion, is the St. John's wort. They cut out these plants with a
knife, and open the little, blue blisters which hang on the uppermost part of
the plant, in which, the insect is said to be contained. There are two or three
such blisters on a plant. The insect comes to perfection, sooner or later in
the month of June; and in July, creeps out. This plant is well known to the
women. But they prefer the insect when it is just ready to leave the plant, in
preference to those in a less perfect state, as it yields a better and a
brighter color. There is a saying among them, that all the eloped insects of a
whole district, assemble themselves on one bush, on a certain day, and that
those who go out earliest in the morning, on the Casanian feast day, (June
8th,) will surely meet with them. The cochineal when gathered, is cleared,
through a sieve, from the earth that hangs about it, dried in a pan over a slow
fire or in an oven, and then put away in some dry place. Owing to the great
trouble in collecting them, they never search for more than they want for their
own use, in order to dye their girdles or some woollen yarn, which they use as
an ornament to their dress. They soak this yarn twenty-four hours in a very
sour decoction, in which alum is mixed, letting it stand all this time in an
oven; after this, it is wrung and dyed. This done, the cochineal is bruised in
a pot, boiled up with water, and when all the color is extracted, it is
strained, and the yarn boiled in it. With one handful of cochineal, they dye
about a pound weight of wool; but this color does not look better than that
prepared from the marjoram, (Origanum;) it is preferred only, because it fades
less.

In this high and wild country, there are Marmotes in plenty, many bears,
inhabiting the bushy vales, bustards and cranes, and in the rivers, tortoises.

On the boundary of Samara there are several forts, each garrisoned with about
thirty invalids, and inhabited by Cossacks, with some pieces of iron ordnance.
At one of the forts, that of Busuluzkaja, situated near the brook of the same
name, the commanding-officer of the line or boundary has a very good house, and
the houses of the Cossacks and soldiers, form four cross streets, as they do in
the other forts, the church, standing in the center, in a kind of square. Among
the Cossacks here settled are many Tartars, who hunt the mountains and deserts,
and kill wild horses for food. These are not the natural produce of the
country, but the progeny of some tame horses that have run away from their
owners. They perfectly resemble the horses of Little Russia, except, that their
heads are thicker, the ears more pointed, and the nose short, upstanding manes,
and short tails. The most common color is a fallow brown; though there are
some gray, and some of a deep brown, but no pie-bald or black. They go about in
herds from five to twenty, consisting of mares, colts, and one stallion. When
the stallion-colts grow big, the old horse drives them from the herd, and they
are seen to follow the herd at a distance, till they are old and strong enough
to become the sire of a herd themselves. They are said to scent a man at the
distance of near a mile, if the wind sets in their favor, and will fly from
their pursuer; but, in summertime, when they are tormented by the flies, they
are easily caught. They catch wild stallions by leading out a mare, which
entices them within shot. In the fort where I was, they had a wild colt, but he
being too fierce to be broke in, they got rid of him. He seemed to me to have
uncommon strength.

There were formerly in this district, a great many beavers, otters, and
wild-boars; but they have been extirpated by the Cossacks, who are great
hunters. Badgers there are in plenty, bears and elks. Last spring, the country
was overrun with antilopes, though this animal had not been seen here for many
years before. The dryness of the season having brought them here in large herds
or flocks, from the southern parts. They ventured even into the low grounds,
and meadows. As this animal casts it is young in the beginning of May, we saw
some young ones, and, like lambs, found they were scarce able to walk for some
days after they were dropped. Some of these have been taken, brought up with
milk, and rendered so tame, as to follow their owner about like a dog, answer
to a name, and swim through waters after him. As they grow older, they will
search for their food near the house where they have been fed, and if suffered
to go at large, will not wander far from the village, but return at night. I
could not have believed this, had I not been an eyewitness of the fact. These
tame-bred antilopes, which resemble a she-goat, are not in the least afraid of
dogs, nor will dogs molest them, any more than other domestic animals. Their
flesh, if not above one year old, would be preferable to that of the roe, if it
did not smell so strong of wormwood, which is their favorite food; yet this
scent, when the meat is roasted and cold, goes off. The old ones are very
disgustful, on account of their backs being covered with sores, arising from
maggots, almost as thick as one's finger, deposited in their skin in an embryo
state, by a peculiar species of fly; (Oestrus antilopum,) so that there is
scarce a spot to be found on their backs, which is not infected.

The mountains in this district are frequented by abundance of eagles and other
birds of prey; I saw here the yellow-headed, black eagle. The country people
will often take the eagles from their nests, built on high trees, bring them up
and sell them to the Kirguisians, at a very good price. Here is also a very
rare bird, (Pratincola Cram.) which feeds upon grass-hoppers, and other
insects. When they soar, they make a shrilling noise. Some have ridiculously
thought this bird a species of swallow, but there is in reality no pretense for
this. His bill is like that of the cuckoo, he has a white stripe from the eye
about the throat, and his flight and flying features, are like those of the
sea-swallow, (Sterna,) but his feet like that of the curlew.

Here are many tumuli throughout this country, but not raised very high above
the ground. Some Cossacks, who make it their business to open these graves,
assured me, they found some uncommonly large human bones in them; for example,
a shin-bone, that; set up against the leg of a full-grown person, reached
higher than the knee. It is said, that a Kalmuck once out on a shooting party,
found, laying in one of these tumuli, a transparent well-polished stone set in
silver, which was sold by a third person, into whose hands it fell, for above
100 rubles, each ruble 4s. 6d. English. All the arrows, arms, and other
instruments, found in these graves, are made of copper. Sometimes they find
gold, and one of the Cossacks of Tozkaja, found upon a corpse a few years
since, a golden neck-ring.

Sorotschinskaja, is, of all the forts erected on the Samarian line or
boundary, the most considerable and best inhabited. It has a ditch, and a
breast-work with chevaux-de-frize in a regular form, with some wooden towers.
Besides many good houses belonging to the Cossacks, the commanding officer has
a hotel, and here is also a courthouse. The commander-in-chief of the whole
Samarian line, dwelt here formerly. These last two buildings, and a wooden
church, stand in the square and open part of the fort, and here is a good
bridge built over the Samara. The river is very inconsiderable, and is so
shallow and serpentine, that it is scarcely conceivable how barges could come
up to this fortress from Orenburg; and that they did is incontestible, from the
many anchors found here.

In my way on, at one of the redoubts, I was told, I had passed a tumulus
recently opened, on which there stood erected a stone, having the face of a man
cut on it, and another lying, with the shape of a man engraved on it. This
intelligence excited my curiosity, and made me desirous of examining further
into it. I therefore procured a number of workmen with proper tools, and went
to this place, at the distance of 19 miles, on the 20th of June.

The opened tumulus on which the stones had lain, is one of the most
considerable ones in the whole district; is near the river Samara, and just
opposite the highest of all the mountains seen on the opposite side of the
water. They had dug to the depth of ten feet and a half, which was the exact
height the hill was raised from the ground; and it is said, they found in it
some valuable things. I found myself, in the ground that was thrown up, a
little piece of polished and carved mother-of-pearl, which seemed not the least
decayed, and I found also, a great many human and marmot bones. Within the cave
was laid a large flat, rock-stone, which probably had covered the body. The
stone which I was told lay on the surface, and on which was engraved or cut,
the complete figure of a man, was broken into small pieces, and from what I
could see of it, appeared to be of a very soft, sandy nature, of which, a great
variety is dug from an adjacent mountain; but the other stone, which stood at
the east end upright, is a hard and nearly triangular flat piece of rock, about
four spans and a half in height, and it is upper angle apparently bearing some
rough touches of a chizel, shaping out the face of a man.

In these tumuli are found bad iron-work, points of arrows, and steels to
strike fire with, and in some, heads of horses. They told me, that the largest
tumuli contain no valuable articles, such things being only found in the
smaller ones. The reason perhaps is, that the smaller tumuli were the graves of
women, to whom some ornaments were sacrificed; whereas, the higher tumuli seem
either to have belonged to the Tartars of Nagaja, or to the Kirguisians, as
their present tombs much resemble these. But those that are lined with brick,
as many are, probably belonged to some older nation.

About thirty-six miles short of Orenburg, is the fortress Talistschewa,
situated on a considerable height, where the river Kamysch Samara falls into
the Jaik. It is a regular square, walled with timber, with chevaux-de-frize and
wooden batteries, and a double church, one for the summer, and a smaller one,
with fire-places, for the winter, garrisoned by a party of dragoons, and
settled by Cossacks. Here are good houses belonging to the officers, and about
200 wooden dwellings; consequently, next to Orenburg, this may be considered as
one of the greatest and most populous places of the Jaikian line. Here reside
also the officers of the troops quartered in other forts, and the
commanders-in-chief of the district. I saw the troops exercised, and was
present at some of their amusements, in company with the commanding officer.
The Kalmucks entertained us first with a concert, in their own way; a
tolerable, good voice sung various Kalmuc love-songs, consisting of distorted
and mournful tones and dissonances. Two others accompanied the voice, one with
a Turkish rebeck with four strings, the other with a remarkable kind of flute,
made of the dry and hollow stalk of the American sun-flower, (Umbellata,)
covered with a gut. It had three holes at the small end, which were stopped
occasionally, with three fingers of one hand; whilst the other hand, according
to the tune, stopped the bottom of the flute or pipe. The upper-end or orifice,
without any mouth-piece, is applied to the upper teeth, and closed between the
upper lip and the tongue. It requires an extraordinary exertion of the voice,
to produce sounds upon such a pipe; but, in the hands of a good player it
resembles a fife. The Kalmucks call it Zurr, the Tartars Kurah, and the
Cossacks of Jaik, who also make use of it, give it the name of Tschibuisga. The
rebeck is called Biwa by the Kalmucks, and has no other bottom than a hollow,
wooden cylinder, over which is stretched a dried bladder, as parchment over a
drum. On this a bridge is fixed, and over this four lengths of cat-gut are
strained on a long handle. It is played with a bow, on which two rows of
horsehair are strained. These pass through the strings in such a manner, as to
sound two in unison, at the same draw of the bow. Besides the above
instruments, the Kalmucks have a two-stringed base-viol, a harp like a
dulcimer, and a large jews-harp, which make up their base.

Next, several couples of young lads gave us a specimen of their art in
wrestling. When at this sport, they tuck up their under-robes round their
waist, and strive to throw each other down, and are very clever at this
exercise. They then shot at a mark with arrows, and next into the air; and
concluded their diversions with a game at chess, wherein they followed all the
customary rules, except advancing at the beginning with three men, instead of
one.

The Baskirs could amuse us only with arrow-shooting and Tartarian dances. But
what was remarkable, a man hoary with age, and having only two teeth in his
mouth, played very masterly on the abovementioned flute, and was even so
expert as to play two tunes at once. The songs of the Tartars, compared with
Kalmuck melody, were as the Italian music is to the French, and expressed
generally something warlike and manly. The Tartarian dances consist in a
transposition of the feet, and some very voluptuous attitudes and motions of
the body and limbs, accompanied with hissing and clapping of hands.

Here I met with a plant which I never saw any description of, nor ever met
with, any where else. The Prenanthes hispida. The pheasant is a bird not
uncommon here, and it is feathers are worn as an ornament in the cap.

June 30. On the 30th of June, I pursued my journey to Orenburg, and was
obliged to be escorted by relieves of Cossacks, or some other light troops,
from post to post, to be safe against the Kirguisian plunderers, and it was at
this season the more necessary, because, for want of sufficient pasture at
home, they had brought their cattle to pasture here, and had taken up their
quarters in this district.

On the first of July, I had about twelve miles to travel to Orenburg, and set
out for that place in the morning. The description of this beautiful city and
it is environs, and also of it is public buildings, has been so amply and ably
set forth already, that was I to say any thing of it, I should only be a
copyist. I will, however, venture to say from myself, that the situation of
this place is very advantageous for Asiatic commerce. They endeavor to make it
the center of it, and it is perfectly adapted to that end, and to be the
residence of wealthy merchants, and the establishment of such manufactures, as
the eastern nations are most in want of. Was such a plan set on foot, Orenburg
would incontestibly become one of the most flourishing and important provincial
cities, of the whole Russian Empire. Yet the profitable trade of this place is
chiefly carried on by adventurers from the most distant parts of the empire,
who, after having bartered their goods or sold them, return with their gain to
their respective countries. These people come annually in great caravans,
bringing with them foreign goods of all kinds, which this place itself and it is
environs would produce, if manufactories were erected, and properly conducted.

The trade of this city consists now in the sale of all sorts of woollen
cloths, especially red and scarlet, velvet, blue and white linens, hides,
copper and iron kettles, chiefly brought here from the most distant
manufactories of Siberia; all sorts of ornaments for dress of tin and iron,
needles, thimbles, glass and coral beads, and other little matters requisite
for clothing, and for the harness of horses. Also all materials for dying,
such as indigo, woad, cochineal, alum, vitriol, likewise sugar, and some kinds
of furs, particularly beaver and otter fur. Besides these things, the
Kirguisians purchase of the Russian merchants a great deal of cotton stuffs,
and barter it to the Bucharians for furs; of course, the cotton-manufactories
of this country are very profitable, and bring in a large revenue to the
empire, though the Russians purchase the materials of which the cotton is made,
of the Bucharians and the people of Chiwinza. I am well assured, that there are
many districts in the southern parts of Russia, where the cotton-plant thrives
well, and it might therefore be an inland production. It has not indeed thriven
in the districts of Orenburg and the Sakmara; the Tartars having made an
unsuccessful trial of it. But this is owing to the great change from heat to
cold, occasioned by the adjacent mountains, to the poorness of the soil, and
the dryness of the land. Were such attempts made on the rivers Samara, Motscha,
Irgis, and some of the lower districts of the Wolga, they would be attended
with success.

The principal articles which the Asiatic merchants, who come here in caravans,
barter for the abovementioned goods, are gold and silver, chiefly in Persian
coin and Rupees, gold-dust, some lapis-lazuli, rubies and other precious
stones; also a great deal of raw and spun cotton, a kind of finer Indian
callico, than what is general, ready-made gowns of various goodness; black and
gray, fine, Bucharian lamb-skins, which are sold at a great price, two kinds of
wild cat-skins, spotted like a tyger's, tigers skins, etc. Sometimes the
Bucharians will bring lumps of saltpetre, which is found in masses in such
parts of their country as were the site of old towns and burial-places. Their
commerce now, in raw silk, is very low, and all kind of finer Indian
merchandise is brought but sparingly, either because there are not sufficient
buyers among the Russian merchants, or because the Bucharians, as they
themselves acknowledge, could not get such a price for them as would be
adequate to the expense of bringing them. It is also to be considered, that the
northern part of India does not produce such rich articles as are manufactured
in the warmer climes which lie near the Indian ocean; so that were the
Bucharians ever so willing to bring them, they could not expect to rival the
sea-trade in such kind of merchandise.

But, among the Bucharian trafic, I must not omit to mention such articles as
relate to natural history. -- They bring then several fruits of their own
country, as dried, wild apricots and peaches, a kind of small currants, which
have either a very large kernel or none at all; nuts of the species of the
beech-tree; worm-seed, which they say they get from India, and which, if thrown
into canals in gardens and plantations, will destroy particular worms and
catipillars. They bring also seed of melons, water-melons and wild Bucharian
barley. (Holcus Saccharatus).

There is no branch of the Bucharian trade more important, or any that would
turn out more advantageous to the state, by increasing the Russian
manufactories, than the importation of raw-goods; among which, the silk-trade
has been but little encouraged. Camel's hair would be another rich article of
commerce, as it might not only be manufactured at home, but be exported: and it
can be purchased of the Kalmucks and Kirguisians, at the cheap rate from two
shillings English to eleven shillings, for 36 pounds weight.

Bartering with the Kirguisians for cattle, is also a lucrative branch of
commerce. Scarce a year passes but they sell to the number of from 40, to
60,000 sheep, and about 10,000 horses. The latter are conveyed into Russia; but
the sheep are mostly killed in and about Orenburg, and the towns situated on
the Wolga. The fat is transported to the seaports of the empire, where it is
sold for very little money, under the denomination of Russian tallow. Mutton
therefore is to be had at Orenburg, in the summertime, for little or nothing,
as the dealers are contented with the gain they get from the fat of the tail
only of a Kirguisian sheep, which weighs sometimes about 36 pounds, and after
being melted down, will yield thirty pounds and upwards of tallow.

Besides this great quantity of large and small cattle, the Kirguisians bring
to market a great number of common furs, wolves-skins, foxes, wild-cat skins,
and many slunk lamb-skins. The Kirguisians also sell great variety of
felt-covers and carpets, which they make of sheeps-wool, elegant and of various
colors. As these people are but little skilled in commerce, they truck them
away for Russian commodities of small value, though they are now daily
improving in cunning and prudence.

There is brought to market at Orenburg, the gold eagle, (Falco Chrysatus,) of
which the Kirguifians are very fond, purchasing them for hunting of wolves,
foxes, and antelopes. There is a certain token in the motion of this bird, by
which they judge of it is goodness and docility, for they are not all adapted to
the chase. A Kirguisian will sometimes give an excellent horse for one of these
birds; when for another, he would not give even a sheep-skin, which among them
is one of their smallest coins. To judge then of a gold eagle, they will often
sit a great while looking at it. I must also mention, that the Kalmucks and
Baschirs breed a great many camels, which they sell at Orenburg to the
Bucharians, who commonly leave this city with much greater loads than they
bring. The Bucharians bring their goods on the backs of little asses, and
afterward try to dispose of them, but the people here do not like them, nor
has this animal or the mule, been ever bred in Russia.

July 3. On the 3d of July, I had the pleasure of going to, and inspecting the
salt-works of Ilezkaja, 50 miles off, in company with his Excellency Major
General Reinsdorff, the present governor of Orenburg, escorted with a strong
guard of Cossacks, relieved from post to post. To go to this place, we cross a
bridge of boats, which connects the city of Orenburg, with the great and
well built marketplace. All the heath from Orenburg, for a distance of 17
miles, had been wantonly fired by the Kirguisians, which is too often done in
this wild country, and prevented me finding even a single root of that curious
plant, which has been described by Dr. Rinder, and named from him.

These salt-works have a small fortress to defend them, garrisoned by Cossacks.
The town is inhabited by thirty superintendants over an exiled people, by whom
rock-salt is here dug, at the expense of the crown. There is one captain who
presides over the works, and another who commands the fort.

About 280 feet south-east of this fort, rises a bare and white stucco
mountain, in form of a sugar loaf, full of clefts, and is called the
watch-mountain, from having a guard of soldiers stationed on the top of it,
commanding a view over a considerable part of the country. On the top is a
cleft, which once was very deep, but is now partly filled up. The Kirguisians
consider this mountain as divine, and used formerly to throw various furs and
other trifles into the cleft, by way of vow or sacrifice. Even to this day,
they come round the hill at certain times, in solemn procession, and say their
prayers, kneeling; having first bathed and cleaned themselves in the adjacent
pools. It is related, that before the pit or cleft was filled up, some covetous
person in hopes of finding treasure, made a descent into it, and found the cold
insupportable.

Between the watch-mountain and the fort, lies the salt-vein; it is greatest
diameter is about 600 fathoms, (each fathom seven feet English,) and the cross
diameter 550. To get at the rock-salt, they dig sometimes three or four fathoms
deep, but in some places it lies so high, that we may touch the solid salt with
a dagger, or a ram-rod. There are a great many freshwater springs about this
place, which seem to run all to this salt-rock, and in such quantities, as
sometimes to interrupt the working it.

Salt-mines. The nature both of the salt, and the ground which covers it, may
be best seen in that large and open mine, where they are digging at present,
and have so done, for many years past. This mine, downwards from the
watch-mountain, including all it is windings, is about 300 fathoms. The pit, or
open part at top, is now above sixty fathoms long, and in some places, from
nine to ten fathoms broad, and the salt has been dug out in places, to the
depth of three fathoms; but, by the orders of General Reinsdorff, they are now
going deeper. They had no method of lading out the water from this mine, but by
pails, his excellency has, however, had a depending part dug, and the water is
from thence worked out by a machine.

The present method of digging the salt, is as follows: they first dig narrow
cross-drains with pick-axes, to a certain depth, so as to leave a block of
salt, about an ell broad, and an ell and a half to two fathoms long, between
the channels, and this block is raised by levers, wedges, and breakers.

Over the pure and solid rock-salt, in it is whole extent, is nothing but a miry
land, consisting of a coarse yellow quick-sand, lying in heaps, from two to
three fathoms high. Near the bed of salt, the sand is penetrated with salt
water, and if dried, becomes hard as stone. The vein of salt does not seem to
lie horizontally, but to wave, being in some places deeper, in others shallower.

How deep these mines run, is not known with any certainty, they are working
now only on the surface. The mountain-borer, which I directed to be applied,
(but with great labor,) could not be worked down more than half an ell a day,
into the solid rock. It has been pierced in autumn, to the depth of rather
better than twenty else, but it could be bored no farther, being stopped by a
black, impenetrable stone. In a shaft, at some little distance from the great
salt-pit, they met with a blackish marle, (at the depth of three fathoms,) so
solid, that it could not be removed with spades.

The salt is generally very pure, solid, and of a white color, and breaks,
when knocked to pieces, in little square lumps, like dice. It dissolves in
water rather slower than sea salt, but has been found not so strong to salt
meat with. Some masses of about 36lb. weight, are here and there found as clear
and transparent as crystal, and capable of being worked into boxes, and other
toys.

Here are a great many salt-pools near this spot, in which the Kirguisians
occasionally bathe, for the cure of certain disorders. The water is so
powerful, that a man who goes into it breast-high, is lifted up, and lies upon
the surface like a plank. It is a common saying, that the water in these pits
is at certain times, during the cold weather in autumn, cold on the surface,
but near the bottom so warm, and sometimes so hot, as not to bear the hand in
it, but I could find no difference in any I felt, which during cloudy and cool
weather, was five degrees colder than the air. If this report be true, I should
suppose, that the salt crust covering the bottom of the pool, attracts the
sun's heat like a burning-glass, and thus renders the water near it hot.
Admitting this to be the case, the reason why I could discover no difference
was, that the sun had not shone, when I was there, for several days. I don't
know of any reason more probable.

The most common plant growing here is, the salt-wort, (Salicornia herbacea,)
which, being pickled with spice and vinegar, is a very palatable sauce. The
plantain, (Plantago Salsa,) growing on this land, takes on a very pale
red-colour, and is very salt to the taste. I should suppose, that from this and
other salt-plants, the salt [alkali, (soda) might be prepared: but, in a
chemical process on the salt-wort, at Orenburg, it was found to contain too
much culinary salt. Sixty or seventy pound weight of this plant dried, yielded
twenty pounds of salt-ashes. I shall show hereafter, that the Russians, prepare
and export great quantities of alkali, but yet none from this plant.

The salt of Ilezkaja, is mostly dug in summertime, the workmen are paid at the
rate of half a copec, for 36lb. weight. There were now laying before the pit
many ton weight of salt, ready to be conveyed away. Winter is the season of
transporting it, which is done by the Baskirs and vagaband peasants, who have
wandered from different provinces of the Empire, and are settled in the
district of Orenburg. The price of transport from the mine to the salt-office,
at the river Aschkader, is paid at the rate of six copecs or about 3d. English,
per pud, (each pud 36lb. English.) Thence it is conveyed in barges on the
rivers Belaja, Kama, and Wolga. In this way did they transport throughout the
Empire, in the course of the last year, above a million of puds, and the
quantity conveyed away must have been considerably increased, since that time,
by the present, well-directed regulations; two new salt-offices having been
erected, one upon the river Ik, and the other on the Samara.

Before I leave this remarkable spot, I must mention, that notwithstanding the
saltness of the soil, in one of the gardens here, not only diverse sorts of
vegetables seemed to thrive well, but the tobacco plant, raised from Virginia
seed, came on well, and had a fine smell; which leaves not the least doubt, but
that tobacco might be raised with great success, on the salt heaths, between
the rivers Jaik and Wolga. It ought also to be noticed, that even in this salt
district, as also upon the whole southern step or heath about the river Jaik,
the garden tulip, (Tulipa Gesneri,) with yellow and red cups, is every where
seen. They are rather smaller than our European ones, yet have been known to
increase in their size considerably, by removing them into good garden soil.

Before I quit Orenburg, I will take notice of a neighboring copper-mine.
Though I did not see it myself, I am able to describe it, from the accounts I
received. This mine is not far from Orenburg, and formerly belonged to Count
Alexander Schuwalof, who has since sold it, with some other lands, etc. It has
not for eight years been worked, any thing worth mentioning. To protect the
workmen from the Kirguisians, on one of whose heaths it stands, the place is
defended by an intrenchment, and guarded by some ordnance, and a company of
soldiers. This discovery was made some years back, in the old shafts, scattered
about the mountain. Upon all the Uralian mountains are many such old shafts or
pits seen, which have been undoubtedly made in former times by some industrious
miners, but unknown to us. The most considerable mines in the district of
Orenburg, owe their discovery to old vestiges of these miners, which consist of
round pits, and deep subterraneous passages, some of them so narrow, that they
must have had much trouble to work in them. In many, they could not stand
upright. Near Saigatschi Rudnik several pits have been found and a stream-work
uncommonly spacious and in very good state. On clearing it out, they discovered
some cakes of melted copper and some round pots of white clay, in which they
melted the ore, also some bones of workmen, on whom the ground had fallen in,
but not the least traces of a hearth or furnace. In some of these old spots
they have found a beautiful green and clear copperas.

The stone in which the ore lies, in a very compact green mass, is yellow,
soft, coarse and sandy, and above the ore, lie broken layers of soft, red
marble, but the most curious circumstance is that near the ore in the
sand-stone, is almost every where small and large pieces of trunks of trees,
petrified into a kind of rock, that rings when struck with a steel, and gives
fire like a flint. Some of these petrifactions are brown and seem to be pieces
of linden and other trees, and encrusted with verdigrease and blue vitriol.

However rare such wood-petrifactions are in other districts, yet the ores dug
in the southern districts of the Uralian mountains abound with them. All the
mines along the middle part of the river Jaik both on the Russian and
Kirguisian side; and those near the rivulets and brooks that flow into the
Samara, are more or less crowded with such petrified pieces of wood, and sooty
pieces of sprays, resembling charcoal. They often find huge trunks, with some
of their roots and branches. In the winter 1768, I sent from Orenburg, to the
museum of natural history, at Petersburgh, a piece of root, which had lain
several years in this city, and was larger than could be compassed by the arms;
it belonged to a trunk near seventy feet long. It Is back was changed into a
rich, copper ore, having been found in the mine abovementioned, with another
laying across it, underneath a layer of black ground.

Along the line of the Jaik are wooden redoubts, erected at certain distances,
and in the midway between each is a guard station and a pyramid erected on some
high ground, with wreaths of pitched cords and other inflammable materials,
wound round them, which are occasionally set fire to, as a signal to the
adjacent guard-station, when the plundering and rapacious Kirguisians have made
any incursion or committed any depredation.

We here met with a Chiwian caravan, consisting of thirty camels, which, for
want of food in this parched country, were scarce able to walk. Those used by
the Asiatic caravans are mostly two bunched camels, or dromedaries. Those with
one bunch on their back, are seldom used for this purpose. They pass a cord
through the bridge of their noses, and, during their march, tie one to the tail
of another, the goods hanging in large bales on both sides on wooden
pack-saddles. Each load is wrapped in a coarse, cotton stuff, tied with cotton
strings, and to shelter it from the weather, is covered with felts tied on with
hair-ropes. For riding and the carriage of provisions, they use asses, not
unlike European ones.

On one of these mountains, in this district, is dug talc in sheets, which are
fit for window lights, but it is never found in pieces above a yard square; and
as it is not genuine ising-glass or talc, but only a gypseous spathum, which
does not split pure and fine, is destitute of the other properties of genuine
talc, it does not deserve much attention. This mountain was surveyed in 1757,
by a land-surveyor, sent from the mine-office, at Orenburg, who has fixed it is
distance at about four miles from the fortress Sheltoi, erected upon the Samara.

The brooks in the vicinage of these mountains swell so much in spring, from
the abundance of snow-water, that one sees whole trees drawn up by the roots
and lying about in them. On some of these mountains is found a great deal of
jasper, some of a pale-green color and some flaming red. On one, the fortress
Orskaja is erected, about half a mile from the mouth of the river Or. In it is
center, stands a pretty stone-built church, which may be seen on all sides from
far. Near it stands the uncommonly well-situated observatory, erected by
Lieutenant Euler, to observe the transit of Venus over the Sun; round about the
hill are dwelling-houses, but none tolerable, except that of the
commanding-officer, who is a lieutenant general. The Asiatic caravans, which go
to Orenburg, cross the river Jaik at this part of the Russian-boundary. Here
their goods are sealed up, and they can sell only as much as will enable them
to hire wagons to carry their merchandise on, in case they should knock up
their camels.

The mountain on which this fort stands consists entirely of Jasper. The stone
on the surface is rough and rocky, but the deeper, the more fine and beautiful
is the color, a very pleasing, pale seagreen and a deep brown-red. Some is
white, some gray, and a great deal of it is black with flame-coloured veins and
spots. It has been often dug into by miners sent from the Petersburgh
manufactory at Catherineburgh, and I am persuaded, was it properly done by
regular shafts, it would produce beautiful plates of jasper. By examining into
the nature and mixture of these jaspers, it cannot be doubted, but that they
were formerly a soft, varied-coloured loam, now petrified. On the uppermost
parts of this mountain is nothing to be seen but a milk-white quartz, scarcely
covered with earth. On the summit of all the mountains, in this chain along the
Jaik, are Kirguisian tumuli, consisting of the best jasper. Great pains have
been taken to select such a heap of jasper-stone as form these graves, which
rise considerably from the ground.

July 13. I visited this chain of mountains about the middle of July. The
valleys have a saltish soil, and lead one to suppose, that the salts, which are
derived from the burning of the heath and the urine of the cattle, afterward
washed down into the vales by the rain and snow, are additional causes of the
many salt spots found in the southern steps; though it is past a doubt that the
strongest of them originate from some hidden and subterraneous sources, for
there is no district in the known world that can boast of such an abundance of
mineral salt, as the southern parts of Russia, Siberia, and the vast extent of
Tartary.

The line of forts all along the river Jaik, were erected to defend the
interior provinces of Russia from the incursions of the Kirgese. These forts
are seldom garrisoned with more than a company of soldiers from twenty to
thirty in number. For though the Kirguisians are very fond of plunder, they do
not like the Arabs make their inroads in large bodies, but in small gangs, and
show but little courage.

Jaizkoi Kasatschei Gorodok, July, 25. In tracing the river Jaik I reached
Jaizkoi Gorodok, the chief city of the Jaikian Cossacks, on the 25th of July.
This place is situated (according to the observations made by Lieutenant Euler,
in my presence) in north latitude 51 degrees. 10 min. 46 sec. at the banks between
which once flowed the Jaik, whose course is now more eastern and straight. The
district about the city is elevated and tolerably even. The city is very
irregularly built in form of a crescent; in one part it is encompassed with a
breast-work, supported with chevaux-de-frize and a ditch, and is furnished with
some pieces of ordnance, but is open to the river Jaik, being on that side safe
enough. The number of wooden dwelling-houses, which are chiefly built according
to the old Russian fashion, but large and spacious, amounts to about 3000. They
are in general divided into narrow streets, and built very close together. The
principal street, which crosses the whole-city, from the side toward Orenburg
to the river Tschagan, is very crooked and irregular, but it is wide and
ornamented with the best houses, Near this street stands a good stone-built
church and the market, where there are all sorts of provisions and many other
things. Farther on, toward the well built cathedral, are a great many shops,
under the houses, where foreign merchants sell a great deal of good merchandise
very cheap: a little beyond this, are the suburbs, where the Cossacks of this
nation live together, and have a Mesched, or house of prayer, built with wood
and painted white. There is also a third church built with wood, in this
principal street, besides which, there are two chapels built with the same
materials, but with few ornaments; and which are very seldom attended by the
Cossacks, who call themselves the Old Faithful, and perform their devotions
chiefly in their own houses; so that even on the most solemn festivals, they
scarce do more than assemble round the church, during the time of service, or
sit and kneel on the outside of the building. It is ascribed to this prejudice,
that a church which had been burnt down and they had began to rebuild with
wood, more than twenty years back, remains at this day unfinished.

The city, in general, is very populous. Besides the great number of foreign
merchants, who reside there at all times, and a still greater number of hired
people and workmen, who get their living there, it is calculated that the
Cossacks alone amount to above. 50,000, among which are reckoned 4800 enlisted
soldiers, belonging partly to the army, and partly to the garrisons of the
line. In this number, are a great many Mahomedan Tartars, unconverted Kalmucks,
and therefore called Kysilbashes, partly of Truckmenian, partly of Persian
extraction, and generally well-skilled in the cultivation of melon-grounds.
Those who have turned christians, are called Baldyri. There are also among the
latter many Kalmucks, who have embraced the christian religion, that they might
not be delivered up to the hordes, from which they have deserted.

The Jaikian Cossacks having settled in an entirely wild country, there is no
determining the exact boundary of their district. On the left shore of the
Jaik, which is inhabited by the Kirguisians, they dare not lay claim to any
thing but the hay that grows in the meadows on the western side. They call all
the heaths or steps their own, from their city toward the Caspian sea, as far
as the river can be seen; and their neighbors on that side, viz. the Ordinzian
Kalmucks, contest not the matter with them. The greatest claim they maintain
is, to the river itself and it is fisheries, of which they are fully masters.

The chief of the Jaikian Cossacks is a person, called by them Woiskowoi
Ataman, now residing in Jaizkoi-Gorodok, who is established by, and is
subordinate to, the council of war belonging to the empire; but his rank is not
fixed. He has under him twenty elders, or Starchins, the principal of whom are
always sitting as judges in the courthouse. This council has a recorder, a
secretary, an interpreter, a few clerks, and other officers. The chief, or
ataman, has two adjutants; the lower ranks of officers are sotniks and
dessatniks, and no one can arrive at the honor of being an elder or starchin,
till he has served in the city as a dessatnik, sotnik, and adjutant; for those
that serve in the forts, on the line under these titles, are inferior, in point
of rank, to the former. Every officer belonging to this regency has a proper
income, and several privileges from the crown, but those who are not converted
to the christian faith, can never rise to any dignity higher than a sotnik.

The power of this regency is very much circumscribed, for the constitution of
the Jaikians is merely democratical. No public matter can be decided but in a
general assembly of the people, which they call Krug, (circle.) If any thing is
to be done that requires a krug, or if the people are to receive any high,
imperial commands, the bell rings, which calls them together. The usual time is
between ten and eleven in the forenoon, but the assembly may be convened at any
other time. At which time, all the Cossacks in the city are drawn up round the
courthouse, which is built with stone, and stands, near the cathedral, in a
square, encompassed with iron rails, round which the people stand, but without
any particular order. When the assembly is sufficiently numerous, and the chief
or ataman, (who is already with his elders within the courthouse,) is made
acquainted with it by his adjutants, he goes out on the covered steps before
the courthouse, (having in his hand a staff, with a silver head, gilt,)
accompanied by the elders. The two adjutants then enter the square, lay their
caps and staves on the ground, and after having said the usual prayers, bow
first to the chiefs, next to the elders, and then to the people every way, who
return the salute. This done, they take up their caps and staves again, which
are the ensigns of their order, approach the chief and lay their caps at his
feet, bearing their staves in their hands. After having received from the chief
the matter to be debated on, they go back to the people, and when the senior of
the two has called silence in a particular form, they both repeat the word
Pomolschite, (silence,) and then tell the people aloud, the subject to be
determined on. This done, they collect their suffrages or votes, and carry them
to the chief, who makes his reply to the people through his adjutants, or
informs them of the result of the poll. The common acclamation of the people
when they consent, at one of these meetings, is Soglasny wasche Wy soko rodie,
that is, "We acquiesce, highborn gentlemen," but they declare their dissent,
by Ne Soglasny, muttering and bringing up the liberties of their ancestors.

The commands of the supreme council, are announced to the people by their
secretary, who places himself between the two adjutants, and reads them aloud,
the people standing uncovered.

It is needless to mention any thing respecting the first settlement and events
of the Jaikian Cossacks, it being most circumstantially related in the
topography of Orenburg. I will, however, say something of their present state.
Their manner and way of living is as free and unconstrained as their
government. Young people are continually amusing themselves with a variety of
sports, and the old are not a little addicted to drinking and to idleness. The
female sex are at no loss to give themselves pleasure and delight, as much in
intrigue as in dress. The latter no way differs from that worn by the Russians,
except in the high colors of their shirts, and the form of their caps, which
stand up straight in the front, are round and flat at top, and commonly very
richly embroidered. That worn by the men is the common Cossack or Polish dress.
There are among them some people of knowledge and good manners, and, about the
river Jaik, we frequently meet with politeness and cleanliness, which arises
from their intercourse with foreign merchants. They were formerly very
uncivilized, and had some very cruel customs. A creditor was authorized to
seize his debtor, tie a rope about his left arm, and lead him about publicly,
or treat him as ill and contemptuously as he pleased, till his debt was paid,
either by friends or by alms. But as the right arm is used among Popish
Cossacks to make the sign of the cross, should the creditor tie his debtor's
right arm by mistake, he incurred a punishment for so doing, and lost all claim
to the debt. When a wife had given her husband offense, he was at liberty to
dispose of her by sale, at any of their public meetings, and the price paid
was often but a trifle.

On all solemnities both of church and state, the people assemble about the
courthouse, and are treated with bread, fish and brandy,

Within the hall, the regalia being removed, the tables are spread with all
sorts of strong liquors, dried fish, roe (or caviar) and bread, when the
Sovereign's health is drank by the Ataman and Starchins, under the firing of
the great guns, and the whole is concluded by drinking to the prosperity of
government and the welfare of the community.

Young people enjoy a great deal of amusement. Their courtship and nuptials
deserve to be noticed. From the very day of a solemn betrothing, which is done
with many ridiculous circumstances, to the day of marriage, which is seldom
sooner than twenty weeks, all the young maidens of the bride's acquaintance
assemble every evening at her house, and divert themselves with singing and
dancing. During this time, the bridegroom is authorized to take a husband's
liberties with his bride, but with some secrecy. Before the wedding, the
bridegroom presents his bride with a complete female dress, and she, in return,
presents him with a cap, boots, and shirt. When the nuptial ceremony is over,
the bride returns to her house from the church in an open wagon (telega).
Behind her, sit her mother and the bride-maid, their fingers full of rings and
holding out on each side a piece of linen to hide the bride's face from the
spectators. Before the wagon walks the bridegroom with his father and
relations. Behind ride several, among whom is one carrying at the end of a long
pole, like a flag, a piece of stuff, striped with several colors, such as is
worn by the Circassian women, by way of petticoat; and it is strange that the
women of this district do not wear it likewise. The nuptials are next
celebrated with dancing and singing, and mostly in the streets. Tartarian
dances are frequent at such festivals, and there are many young people who
perform the varied and innumerable motions of the body with great strength and
wonderful agility. Athletic exercises they practice from their childhood, as
also shooting with the bow, the use of firearms, and the lance, in which they
are eminently skilled.

I have already said, that the line or boundary along the river Jaik, besides
the little forts and stations, are chiefly garrisoned by Cossacks; for this
purpose they enlist every year, about twelfth-tide, a thousand volunteers to
relieve those posted there the year preceding. Many of these soldiers settle
afterward in or near these fortresses, continue in the service and breed
cattle, acting as substitutes for others, and receive their pay, preferring
this life to the laborious and uncertain trade of fishing. At every new levy,
the volunteers are accepted at a public meeting, and their pay is there
settled, according to each man's respective circumstances, generally as little
as possible. For these troops they elect a certain number of officers, and the
colonel is subordinate to the Ataman.

I will proceed now to their several employs and the manner in which the
Jaikian Cossacks get their living. They have among themselves, shoe-makers,
smiths, carpenters, etc. and never suffer strangers of these denominations to
settle among them. Their town is supplied with such articles as are not made
here, by foreign traders, who travel to this place to purchase fish. Some of
the Cossack women make camblets of different goodness and value; the most
common sort is very durable and cheap, and they manufacture some of so
superfine a quality, as not only to rival the camblets of Brussels, but would
excel them, was it not for the defect common to all their drapery and stuff,
that of being made in very small and narrow pieces. The Tartarian name of these
stuffs is Armak, and seems to have been invented by the Kirguisians or Kirgese,
whose women manufacture a coarse kind of camblet. As camel-hair is to be bought
here in great perfection, and at so low a price as about 9s. English for 36
pounds weight, it is a pity that encouragement is not given them to manufacture
a stuff of this hair in large pieces, which would find purchasers every where.
They, at present, breed very few camels, not selling any great number to the
Asiatic caravans; but there is no animal that would thrive better on, or are
more fond of, the salt plants that overspread the heaths of this district.

Breeding of cattle is one of the principal occupations of the Cossacks; but
the Russians attend only to horses, and to horned cattle. Both prosper well in
this warm country, and acquire a handsome form. Their horses are no way
inferior to Russian horses, in beauty, strength and courage. They live both
summer and winter on the heaths, and never fare better, till when taken up to
hard labor. The dry ground gives them a fine, hard hoof, and renders shoeing
unnecessary.

On account of their breeding of cattle, many of the Cossacks have enclosures
or cattle-yards, on those parts of the heaths, where there is the best pasture.
Such Tartars, as keep great flocks of sheep, wander about with tents, made of
felts, but the Russians erect wicker huts, where they gather their sheep at
night, and plaster these huts with mud. They drive great herds of cattle from
the Jaik to the Wolga, and transport great quantities of hides and tallow to
those towns, where there are a number of tanneries, and soap-manufactories, as
Casan, Jaroslaw, Arsamas, etc.

Another branch of employ is hunting heath or step-foxes, wolves, beavers, and
wild boars, of which sport they are very fond. The season for this, is the
first three winter-months, when they are tracked in the snow. And they follow
this business close up, especially when they have had an unsuccessful fishery.

But the chief employment of the Cossacks about the river Jaik is fishing,
wherein they are regulated by many customary laws. They fish but four times a
year in that river, and only three of these seasons they consider of any
importance. The first principal time is in January, when they fish with hooks;
the second is in May, and continues till June; the third, and least
considerable, is the autumnal season, in October, and they finish in the
beginning of December, with nets; which they set under the ice, not in the Jaik
itself, but in it is branches, and the lakes upon the heaths. At this lake
fishing-time, they catch only a few small fish for their own use.

The crown, in laying a moderate duty on the fishgarth or wear, formerly made
upon the river near Gurjef, had confined the fisheries to the Jaikian Cossacks;
but, they having demolished that garth and erected another at the further end
of their city, which stops the passage of the whole river, the fish from the
Caspian sea can come no higher up than Jaizkoi Gorodok.

I will now proceed to give my readers some accouht of these fisheries. The
kinds of fish caught in this river, are the horn-fish, sturgeon, shad, barbel,
bream, salmon, and a variety of small fish.

Of all the wandering fish, the first that comes up the river is the white
salmon, and that in February. They are caught beneath the ice by hooks, baited
with pieces of fish. In March, April and May, the several kinds of sturgeon
shoot their way from the sea, and swim up the Jaik, in shoals. I have been well
informed, that at certain seasons, they place cannon on the banks of the river
near the wear, at Jaizkoi Gorodok, load them with powder only, and fire often
into the water to repel the impetuosity of those vast shoals of large fish,
that would otherwise break the wear, that crosses the river. They say, and it
is very probable, that the sturgeon comes up into the river in the month of
April, when the willow buds, to spawn, and that they rub themselves upon the
stony ground to get rid of their roe; though, as I have observed before, young
sturgeons are never caught. From a conviction that the Russia sturgeon and
horn-fish, pass the winter in this river, they have a law that obliges them to
throw all they catch, into the water again, because, when re-caught in winter,
and transported in a frozen state, they fetch a greater price, and thus
contribute to the public interest. And they enforce this law so strictly, as
constantly to deprive him that breaks it, of all his fish-provision, and whip
him into the bargain.

It is chiefly sturgeons and bjelugas that are caught with hooks, in January.
These fishes are said to lay themselves in rows, in deep parts of the river,
toward the latter end of autumn, and so pass the winter in a certain state of
rest, though not without motion or sensibility. Now, as the river Jaik, from
it is sandy bed, is continually changing it is depth, owing to the inundations in
spring, that wash away the banks beneath the water, it is uncertain in what
spots the fish lie. On this account, in autumn, when the ice begins to form
itself, the Cossacks will watch the motions of these fishes; for it is said,
that before they lay themselves up, they play some time upon the surface of the
water, and leap several times over those spots where they mean to winter.
Others go out upon the ice, as soon as the river is frozen, and lay down on
those spots where the water is clearest, and will tell you, that by putting a
cloth over their heads, they can see the fish lying at the bottom.

When the time of the hook-fishing is come, which is commonly on the third or
fourth of January, a general assembly of the people is held, when it is asked
about, whether the absent Cossacks are returned; an enquiry, also, is made in
what places the fish is supposed to lie, and finally, what day is fixed to
begin fishing. In this and other fisheries, with an intent to keep order, they
elect an ataman or chief, from the starchins, under whose command they choose
some elders and an adjutant, as conductors of the rest: but the inferior
Cossacks join as it were in partnership, five or six together. Every thing is
prepared before the day fixed, and care is taken to have good sharp hooks and
poles of various lengths on which the hooks are fastened. Before the fishing
day arrives, every Cossack enlisted, though not on duty on the lines, receives
a written license, sealed with the regency-seal. A Cossack that has served his
year, or one that has not yet served, may procure a license to fish, by getting
himself registered. No person can have more than one of these written licenses,
except the members of the regency, who have some exclusive privileges. The
ataman, or chief, is entitled to four, the starchin to three, and the inferior
officers to two licenses each. The clerks have only one license granted to two,
and every resident priest has one. Those who have these licenses can sell them,
which enables many, who have no claim to a license, to purchase one.

On the day appointed, all those Cossacks who have written powers, assemble
themselves with sledges, and every necessary implement before sunrise, in a
certain place, before the town, and range themselves into a line, in the same
order in which they reach the ground. Here they are received by the ataman,
elected for the fishery, and care is taken, that every Cossack has a firelock,
in order to defend themselves against any attack made on them by the
Kirguisians. This done, two officers exhort the people to behave orderly and
quietly, and as soon as day begins, a signal is given from the town, by the
firing of two pieces of cannon; upon which, every one hastens, as quick as his
horse can carry him, to the district appointed for the fishery, in order to
choose the most advantageous spot. Yet no one dares begin to open the ice, till
every one has taken his place, and the ataman has fired a gun or two, by way of
signal to begin.

I must notice here, that the river is divided into two parts, one for the
spring and autumn-fishing, and the other for the hook-fishing, alone. The
latter begins just beyond the town, and continues to the distance of 300 miles;
and from thence to the Caspian sea, the river remains undisturbed, till the
net-fishing comes on. At first setting off, they fish only one day, to enable
the poorer Cossacks to purchase with the gain of that day, provisions, and
other necessary things. Five or six days after, the great fishery begins, and
lasts for nine days, fishing about twenty miles of the river each day. Each day
the Cossacks hasten to the spot, where they are to begin, before dawn, and
there wait for the signal of the ataman.

Every man makes, on the spot where he means to fish, a moderately round
opening in the ice. One may fish as near another as he pleases, but no one can
have two openings, at a time; yet, when he leaves one opening he may make
another, and a second may occupy the spot he left. By frequent changings and
trials, they will fish in the course of the day the whole district, appointed
for that day's fishery. Where the places are not very deep, they use hooks,
with short poles. The pole, with the hook on it, is put down to the bottom of
the river, and as the disturbed fish rise, they draw up the pole, and hook the
fish. This done, they bring it within reach of a short hook, which they have in
their other hand, and with which they hook the fish afresh, and pull it up upon
the ice. If two men hook the same fish, it is divided between them, and if one
has not strength enough to pull a fish out, he calls his next neighbor to
assist, and the fish is divided. One man shall have sometimes the good-luck to
hook ten or twelve large fishes in a day, when another shall not be able to
catch an equal number in the whole month, perhaps not sufficient to pay his
expenses. A man commonly makes a vow before he leaves the town, to give the
first fish he hooks, or perhaps more, to the church, on condition fortune
favors him. And they are supersticious enough to believe, that in case they
hook a frog, (of which there are some of very enormous size in this river); the
person to whom this disaster happens, if he ever changes his spot or hooks,
will not catch a fish the whole winter.

The second great fishery is in the spring, for the fish Sewrjug. As soon, in
the month of May, as accounts arrive from Gurjef, sent by the Cossacks
quartered there, to watch for the said fish, that it makes it is appearance in
the mouth of the river Jaik, they prepare every thing to catch it. The same
orders and ceremonies are observed, as in the winter. An ataman is chosen, whom
every one, who has a written power, is bound to obey. A certain district is set
out for the fishing, by a rope drawn across the river, which no one is to pass.
This fishery last only three days, as the sewrjugs, when disturbed, return into
the sea. The last fishery is commonly finished in one day. This is carried on
at the mouth of the river, and begins with the usual ceremonies, as before, at
daybreak, each endeavoring at a signal given, to out-row the other, before
the nets are spread, for every one who fishes, has a boat and net to himself.
These boats are made of the trunks of black and white poplar, (no other tree
here being of sufficient diameter, for the purpose,) tanned on the outside with
the asphaltos, which I have already mentioned, and which is found here in
abundance. The nets they use, for Bjeluga fishing, are from 20 to 30 fathoms
long, each fathom, seven feet English.

'To observe the struggle,' says Mr. Gmelin, there is in the Bjeluga fisheries,
is pleasant. When the cold sets in, the fish retire to their lurking places for
the winter, at which time, as the bjeluga holes are well known, the commander
of the fishery, orders all the inspectors to forbid the fishermen from
exercising their profession in such places as these fish lie, and all masters
of vessels on the river, not to make any noise, nor fire any gun to disturb
them.

On the day when the great fish-chace is settled, after the fish have been seen
to rise several times to the surface of the water, and then plunge to the
bottom, which is generally about the beginning of November, the fishermen are
appointed to attend at a certain hour, with their boats and implements; and the
commander, inviting his friends to the diversion, the evening before, repairs
with them to one of these hurdle-dams or fences, across an arm of the river,
for at each of these dams a number of laborers are kept at a regular fixed
salary, have houses to live in, and a church for public worship. The company
continue here all night regaling themselves, and at break of day, proceed to
the bjeluga-holes, with a universal silence.

Having prepared their nets, and disposed their boats in proper order, the
firing of a musket is the signal for departure. At this signal, all the boats,
to the number of 300, start at once; and no sooner are the nets cast, and all
the passages closed, then the most horrid cries and shouts of the fishermen,
succeed the profound silence that reigned before. The affrighted fish endeavor
to escape by all sorts of means, some gain the surface of the water, others not
daring to venture so high, remain in the middle region; some strive to shun the
danger by the most irregular contorsions, but none can escape, being
encompassed by a troop of fishermen and nets. The sport now increases, enormous
fish are seen tumbling, head over tail, on the surface of the river, and others
oversetting the boats. In one place fishermen, wet from head to foot, making an
uproar as if they were possessed, and indeed they are so, most of them being
drunk; in another place, loud and violent disputes and torrents of abuse take
place, on the driving together of two boats, When fortune is more favorable to
one than another, we see the effects of jealousy; at last, all order seems to
be banished, all persons row where they can, and hence arise a thousand fresh
disputes, as the nets entangle, and the boats ride and drive upon each other.

The great sturgeons, (Ichthyocolloe,) which at some seasons are more than ten
men can master, are at FISHING IN THE YAICK
this time so feeble, that two fishermen can take one at ease, such an effect
has the cold upon them. This fishing lasts commonly for two hours, and when
over, the fishermen flock to the chief to deliver their fish, and receive their
reward. This again breeds new subjects of jealousy and quarrel, fresh clamor,
and fresh bawling. Every gang struggles, to get first, and they often fight;
they beat and knock one another about; oars are broken, boats are split, and
very often a part of the combatants are tumbled into the river, and perish. Mr.
Gmelin, who was present at one of these fishing-parties, on the 3d of November,
1769, declares, that there were taken in less than two hours, more than 500
bjelugas of different sizes, but the generality of them are, from thirteen,
fourteen, to twenty-three hundred weight each. He adds, that there was not
found in all that number, any more than one sewrjug, and one common sturgeon.

It is affirmed by fishermen in general, that they sometimes meet with fish,
hermaphrodites, as well among the bjelugas as other kinds of sturgeon; that is,
fish that have a milt on one side, and spawn on the other. The same thing has
been observed in Holland among the chevins, or large cod-fish.

'The river Wolga,' says Took, has a great resembance to the Nile in Egypt,
for it receives into it is channel so infinite a number of rivers and streams,
that when these are increased by the melting of the snows, the waters rise
above their usual level, and not only overflow the low islands in the river, so
as that ships pass over them, but all the plains that lie on each side the
river are so overwhelmed, that nothing but the tops of the highest trees appear
above the surface of the water; and when the water leaves these plains, the
land is in the highest state of richness and fertility. But on account of it is
numerous windings, angles, flats, isles, shelves and sand-banks, the most
experienced sailors are kept in continual alarm. It is only in the months of
May and June that large vessels sail on it with security and ease, when the
waters are swelled as I have mentioned. The widest part of this river is
between Tzaritzin and Astrachan. At Astrachan it is 2200 feet over, at
Tzaritzin about three-fourths of a mile, and it divides itself into a greater
number of branches than any known river in the world. At Astrachan the river
rises or swells about six feet, at Tzaritzin higher, and the flats and and
valleys all round are so entirely deluged that they have the appearance of a
large ocean, and the hares and fieldmice are destroyed by thousands. The
animals of a larger kind, such as wolves, foxes, wild-bores, etc. have,
probably, a presentiment of the approaching flood, as they take their flight to
the inland steps; but, when the high waters take the hares by surprise, so as
entirely to surround them, they seek a refuge on the higher lands, and when the
inundation reaches those also, there is scarcely one that can escape: if the
water does not by chance reach them, the hunters do, and these take them, with
their hands, alive. Rats and mice will, sometimes, take the resolution to
escape by swimming, and desperately strike, in troops, for the Wolga itself, in
order to gain it is high western shore, and in doing this will swim upwards of
two miles, and perish at last; others take to the trees, where birds of prey
wait their coming, and the bjeluga will shake the smaller trees with it is tail,
tumble them down and devour them alive; so will they the young crows that have
not learnt to fly. The mouth of this river, at Astrachan, is full of rushes,
and is a harbor for wild boars, who feed upon the rats that dwell among them.

The fisheries in this river, though very profitable, are often attended with
great danger, for when a south wind rises, the waves of the sea flow toward
the mouth and violently raise the ice. If then a strong wind from the south,
north-west or east, should suddenly succeed, it causes a reflux of the water
toward the sea; the ice rushes on and often breaks into pieces of enormous
magnitude. Pieces will drive out to sea containing fifteen or twenty square
miles. When this happens, all the fishermen that are on it, are soon swallowed
up and lost.

In these cruel circumstances, as soon as the unfortunate wretches perceive
themselves disjointed from the shore, they keep a look-out, to observe toward
what point they are driven by the waves. If they find they are floating to the
open sea, they stand in the same place immovable as statues, waiting the
dreadful decision of their fate; but if there remains any hope of reaching
land, they leap upon the horses they usually take with them for drawing the
fish, and gallop full speed toward the leeward side, hoping the piece of ice,
in it is passage, will come in contact with the shore, and give them an
opportunity of leaping on the land in the moment of contact. If they lose this
moment, the ice repelled with violence toward the sea, will soon go to pieces
by the agitation of the waves, and their destruction is more certain than ever.

It is natural to imagine that a state of life so full of danger, will be
followed only by people already reduced to the most abject state of misery, and
who have often merited the last inflictions of civil justice by their
delinquencies. From the time they embrace this calling, they are fixed in a
perpetual bondage, by the advances their necessities oblige them to accept of
their employers, who frequently take advantage of this circumstance to subject
them to the most cruel injustice; though they only are gainers by their toil,
growing rich by their miseries, whilst the unfortunate laborers are plunging
deeper and deeper into distress.

These fisheries ended, the Cossacks proceed to other business. They travel to
purchase bread in the districts of the Wolga and Samara, and toward the latter
end of summer, cut and make their hay.

During the hook-fishing, a great many buyers come here from the most distant
parts of the Russian empire. Sturgeons caught in winter, are sold to these
buyers as they are caught, who dress the fish and roe, barrel it and transport
it frozen. Ten good sizable sturgeons will sell for from thirty to forty-five
rubles, each ruble 4s. 6d. but a large sturgeon, even without a roe, will fetch
six or seven rubles. The largest bjeluga sturgeon caught in the river Jaik,
will weigh above 1000 lb. and yield 200 lb. of roe, or cavear. The sturgeons
here are about seven feet long, and weigh about 200 lb. but the spawners are
generally the largest, and will yield sometimes 36 lb. weight of roe, and are
sold, at the first hand, for two rubles. A few years ago, they found a great
part of the roe in an old bjeluga petrified, though the bjeluga-stone, which is
the petrified roe, is very scarce indeed.

'This stone,' says Mr. Sokolof, who visited the Caspian fisheries, is found
lying lengthways under the cartilages of the back, in the part where the
kidneys of other animals are. The instant it is taken from the fish, it is soft
and moist, but quickly hardens in the air. It Is size never exceeds that of a
hen's egg; it is sometimes oval and sometimes a little flatted or bent toward
the place where it is fastened to the back. It may be scraped with a knife, but
with difficulty, and does not ferment when mixed with acids. Though it has
little merit, it holds a considerable rank among the domestic remedies of the
Russians, who administer the scrapings in small doses, mixed with water, in
difficult labors, in the diseases of children, and against stoppages in the
urinary passages. The value of a stone is a ruble.

The fresh roe, being softly worked with the hand, through a coarse sieve, is
thus cleaned, and as in this southern clime, the mild weather begins soon after
new year's day, they salt it to prevent it is spoiling. It is afterward pressed
down in barrels with the feet, and conveyed to very distant parts.

They also dry the back sinews of the Sewrjug sturgeon, make them up in bundles
of twenty-five each, and sell them for food, at the rate of three or four
rubles a thousand; and as they hold every part of the sturgeon to be eatable,
they preserve the stomach of it, and eat it as a dainty. But the most valuable
part of this fish is it is bladder. Those merchants who buy the whole fish,
commonly sell back the bladder to the Cossacks, who make isinglass from it,
which is done here in one way only. As the bladder is taken fresh from the
fish, they wash and spread it in the air to dry, then divide the inner skin, or
white skin, which is the isinglass, from the outer; wrap it up in a moist cloth
to make it pliable, and then roll it up and pinch it into the form of a serpent
or a heart, and let it dry again in the shade. This is sold at different
prices, according to what fish it is taken from, from twelve to forty rubles
per pud, each pud 36 pounds English.

Salt is also a very considerable article in the Jaikian fisheries. The
Cossacks have liberty to provide themselves with a sufficient quantity to salt
their fish and roe, which are conveyed into Russia, and use many thousand puds
for this purpose. Indeed the steps or heaths about this river are so abundantly
provided, by nature, with this mineral treasure, that the inhabitants will
never want it. They once fetched this salt in summertime, for the use of the
town, from the distance of seventy miles, with an escort of 200 armed men; but
at present they have it from the seaside. Their provisions, when salted, are
kept, in all the guard-stations, in pits made in the ground, or in tubs covered
with mats and clay.

The Jaikian Cossacks know nothing of agriculture, perhaps the defense of their
forts leaves them no time for husbandry, or, as they justly remark, the too
great saltness of the land will not allow it. I think the Bucharian millet
would grow here. This plant prospers, with some care, exceedingly well among
the Asiatic nations, on a soil and in a climate similar to this. It is the only
kind of corn the Bucharians have, and the high and thick stalks of this plant
serve the inhabitants of those woodless countries for firing. It is no wonder,
therefore, that the Bucharians should cultivate it, and have a solemn and
universal feast at seed-time. A single plant will often yield two pounds weight
of millet. Tobacco might also be planted here with success, if the Cossacks did
not abhor it, from some religious prejudice.

They are here great lovers of the water-melon, and raise great quantities of
them, besides all sorts of vegetables for the kitchen. There is not less than
fifty large water-melon gardens, in and about this town, Jaizkoi Gorodok, the
fruit of which is sold for a trifle. These gardens are divided into long
fields, enclosed only with a hedge, and to all parts of these gardens, they
conduct the water in the manner of the eastern nations, in clay trenches, in
order to water the plants sufficiently. Of course, these gardens are always
near some flowing or standing water, where they raise the water by a
water-gallows. During the ripening of this fruit, they keep continual watch, to
frighten the crows and magpies, which are no where more daring and rapacious
than in (...) district.

Jaizkoi Gorodok, owing to it is high and open situation, is a healthy town, and
the people know no other disorders than such as proceed from their way of life
and a certain contagion of lust, which is a universal and common disorder. All
the inhabitants are strong, robust and of a large size, not excepting the
women; and this lust-disorder, is a kind of leprosy, little known in Europe,
but general along the districts of the river Jaik. It is the same disorder
known in Astrachan by the name of the Crimean sickness, brought from the
Crimea, in former campaigns. The Jaikian Cossacks assured me, that it was
brought to Astrachan by a regiment that served in a Persian war. They call it
the black distemper, one of it is first symptoms being a livid color that
covers the face. I saw several persons laboring under it to the highest
degree. The patient suffers with it four or five years, before it attains it is
height, and they say it is in the seventh year only that it proves mortal. It
does not infect all persons who attend the sick, at least not during the four
years. I have seen a family in Jaizkoi Gorodok, where the eldest brother was
first afflicted with it; three years after, the youngest brother caught it, and
one year after this, the mother, and yet the wives of both, who cohabited with
their respective husbands all the time, were free and clear from it. It seizes
chiefly the robust and persons of middle age. The first and second year, the
patient feels no particular pain, nor is sensible of any weakness. His face
looks blue, as if he was choked, and this is followed with a number of
blue-red spots or blotches on the wrist, sides and face, which occasions an
extreme roughness of the skin in those places, or scurf, called, in medicine,
impetigo. Some have no spots at all in their faces, for the first year, but a
few small ones about their joints. In the beginning of this distemper, patients
are somewhat feverish, but after two years, they all suffer the smartest pain
in their limbs and joints, begin to lose their appetite, strength and
countenance, and become very faint. At this period, the leprosy is more
virulent and spreads itself all over the body, not in thick and deep-red spots,
but in flat and scabby blotches, which exulcerate by degrees and leave a bad
scurf, continuing longer than any similar irruption. When the scurf drys away,
the parts itch, and the skin underneath the scurf naturally heals, but if the
patient scratches it or picks off the scab, it is followed by an increasing,
angry boil, that will penetrate even to the bone. When this happens in the
fingers, it destroys them quite, and they will fall away, joint by joint. The
legs are commonly most covered with spots, but, by degrees, no part of the body
is free from them, except the palms of the hands, the inside of the joints of
the arms, the armpits, the backside and knuckle-joints. These parts, even in
the most desperate state of the distemper, are always clear as at other times,
as is also that part of the head on which the hair grows. Those with whom the
distemper continues to the seventh or eighth year, have their nostrils, the
inside of the mouth and throat and windpipe exulcerated, and it is probable
that the inward and more noble parts are infected with boils e're the distemper
proves mortal. Yet in it is last period, it affects the constitution and
strength less than one should expect, for the pains are commonly tolerable and
the natural functions go on regularly. It does not appear that the patient, as
in other leprous disorders, feels an uncommon lustful desire; this appetite
they lose gradually; nor do they lose their hair, except on the eyebrows,
which are always itching, and on the exulcerated parts. It is said, that this
disorder is cured in Crimean Tartary by a decoction of the plant anbasis
aphylla, which grows there and also about the river Jaik. I doubt much whether
mercury would radically cure it. At Orenburg, they salivated a Cossack
afflicted with it, in it is middle period; he lost much blood, and afterward
seemed better; but, being suffered to return to his former diet and way of
living, the leprosy returned and raged with redoubled violence. Mercurial
lotions externally applied and antimonials taken internally, would, probably,
be a better treatment, but such experiments require the skill of able
physicians.

By way of closing this account of Jaizkoi Gorodok, I will mention some of
their most common and pernicious insects, which are moths or tarakans, and
crickets; they have also a large kind of wandering field-rat. (The surmulet of
Buffon). I no where met with so many crickets as in this place, owing partly to
the warm and dry situation of the town, and partly to a bad custom the people
have, of stuffing the seams of their houses between the beams, with fine hay,
having no moss for that purpose, and these insects liking to take up their
abode in this hay. With respect to the field-rat, the Cossacks assured me,
there had not been any in their country, about the river Jaik, for three years
past, though the northern parts of Russia and Siberia abound with them; but,
that owing to a dry and burning summer, vast quantities of them came one
evening from the step of Samara to this town, and were seen by many of the
inhabitants to make their entrance partly through a certain gate and partly
over the ramparts. From this time they became exceedingly troublesome, having
remained all the summer in town, for want of food on the step. It is
remarkable, and I had it from good authority, that these mischievous guests
never trespass on one side of the principal street, which leads through the
town, but always keep on the eastern side.

Account of the Kalmucks. During my stay at Jaizkoi Gorodok, I often visited
the Kalmucks, who live on the step between this and Samara, in great numbers.
But as I could gather from them little of the history of this remarkable
nation, during the time when the great Horde retired from the river Jaik, and
marched to the western shore of the Wolga, on account of the Kubanian war; I
will content myself with putting here together, what I could collect of their
way of living, customs and religion.

According to Albulgasi, indeed, they are a branch of the Mongols, who, in very
remote ages, wandered about the deserts, on both sides of the mountains that
divide Dauria from the present Chinese Mongalia and the southern parts of the
Sayane-hills. Long before the end of the twelfth century, they were separated
into three branches under the denomination of Mongols, Oirats and Burats;
Tschingis Khan, who lived about 1300, united them under one monarchy, became
their sovereign and made their several princes tributary to him. He conquered
China and subdued the Tartars.

When the Mongols were driven out of China, in 1368, the united Mongol and
Tartar Hordes, after subduing their western neighbors, spread into Russia and
other parts of Europe, and there formed new colonies. Under the descendant of
Tschingis, the princes divided again, and thus, with the addition of Russian
conquests, the vast Mongol-Thibetan empire was entirely disjointed in the
sixteenth century. From this dispersion of the people arose the present Mongol
and Tartar nations. Tschingis Khan and Timur Bek, who attacked China and
wrested it out of the hands of the founder of the new dynasty of Ming, sprung
from one and the same ancestor.

Of the three branches, the Mongols, the Burats and the Oirats, I shall speak
but of the latter, who are commonly called Kalmucks.

'These deserts,' says Took, which the Kalmucks inhabit, lie between the Don
and the Wolga, and on the river Ural from Irgis to the Caspian sea. They
consist of a stony loam, are quite burnt up, destitute of wood, abound in salt,
contain many fresh water lakes, as well as salt lakes, and produce wholesome
herbage, which makes their cattle vigorous and fat.

The present Kalmucks are of three tribes. Torgouts, Sjungorians and Derbets,
and consist of about 20,000 families, dividing themselves into three ranks, the
nobility, whom they call white-bones; the common people, who are bondmen, whom
they distinguish by the name of black-bones; and, the clergy, who are descended
from both ranks, and are freemen. The noble ladies are called white-flesh, the
common women black-flesh.

I spell the word Kalmuck agreeable to the Russian pronunciation; but,
according to it is true etimology, I should have written it Chalmack or
Chalimack, this being the name the Tartars give the Kalmucks: Chalimack, in the
Tartarian language, signifies revolted. But some Kalmucks give another
derivation, from their own language, and say it is composed of the words
KALMUCKS.
Gal, which, in the Kalmuck and Mongalian language, means fire, and aimak,
which implies a tribe, or a division of the Ulusses, and thus means courageous;
in the same manner their brethren, the Mongalians, derive their name from Men
and Gal. The different races of Kalmucks, however, give themselves universally
the name of Eljud or Oljud.

The Kalmucks are, in general, middle-sized men, though there are more short
than tall. They are all well-made, and I do not recollect ever seeing one
maimed or deformed. The education of their children, while infants, which they
leave solely to nature, must give them healthy and perfect bodies, though they
are slender and their limbs slight. I never saw a fat, corpulent Kalmuck, at
least among the common men; though among the Kirguisians and Baskirs, who live
quite in the same manner, many are often very bulky and corpulent. The
complexion of their face and body is tolerably white, but their infants are
quite so. It being a custom, among the common people, to let their children run
about stark naked in the burning sun and the smoke of their felt-tents, and
even grown persons sleeping quite naked, it changes their natural complexion to
a yellow-brown; but this is not so visible in the women. Among their ladies of
distinction, are seen some very white faces, and these appear more so from the
blackness of their hair. In this, as well as in the features of their faces,
they are perfectly like the women of China.

It is unnecessary to describe the common features of the Kalmuck men, they
being sufficiently known. Took says, They are, for the most part, raw-boned
and stout; their visage is so flat that the skull of a Kalmuck may easily be
known from that of any other man. The eyes too are smaller and the corners of
them flatter than among the Europeans; they have thick lips, a small nose and a
short chin, and their beard is scanty and appears late. Their teeth are even
and white, their complexion a reddish-brown, and their knees always stand
outward, like a bow, which proceeds from their manner of sitting on their
ancles and their being almost constantly on horseback. The women are of the
same shape and make with the men, only that their complexion is very clear and
of a wholesome white and red. According to some travelers, one might be led to
suppose, that all the faces of the Kalmucks are deformed and frightful, but
this is not the case. There are, among both sexes, many round and pleasant
faces, some whose features are so regular, that they would not want admirers in
any European city; though it seems a characteristic of this people, that the
corners of their eyes and eyebrows have a slant direction, and the bridge of
their noses are short and flat. I found, that the Dsungorians were generally
taller and had a prettier visage than the Torgouts, the former having,
probably, received a greater mixture of Tartarian blood, by the rape of the
women belonging to this latter nation. As to the blackness of their hair, with
which their children are born, I did not see among the Kalmucks, a single
exception, nor the least degeneration into a brown color. Full-grown men have
a strong and large beard, but they leave only a whisker turned up on their
upper lip, and a tuft upon their under one. Old persons, and especially
priests, leave a whisker and let the hair grow over the corners of the mouth,
on the lower lip, underneath the chin and about the neck. The rest of the face
is kept clear, by plucking it, and cutting it with sizzars and rough knives.
The Kalmucks, also, like the Tartars, accustom themselves in this manner to
extirpate the hair from other parts of the body.

Having now spoken of their persons, I will proceed to their minds, in which I
shall have an opportunity to be more favorable in many points than travelers
in general have been. In this respect, they are far before other Nomades or
shepherd-nations. The socialness, hospitality, candor, officiousness and a
certain gaiety which never leaves a Kalmuck, but distinguishes him from the
more phlegmatic Kirguisian, may be called good qualifications, but their
idleness, want of cleanliness and knavery, which they too often misemploy, are
justly to be deemed their principal vices: a love of idleness is common and
natural to all nations who lead an unlimited, careless and pastoral life; yet
the Kalmucks have less of it, owing to their sprightliness. But their
filthiness or nastiness can no way be contradicted or excused, and, perhaps, is
to be ascribed, as in the lower classes of the French, more to their education
and volatility than to sloth; for the Kalmuck women, perform their domestic
offices, with great industry, and are, therefore, much courted and coveted by
the Kirgueses. As to their mental faculties, their knowledge is certainly much
limited, but, in spite of all their ignorance, they have a very good, quick and
natural understanding, which might be very easily cultivated and improved, if
their way of living and natural sprightliness were not insuperable obstacles.
Though generally choleric, they live more friendly together, than one should
expect from their mode of living. Among themselves they are social and
hospitable; they like to share every thing that can be enjoyed, and never keep
any thing to themselves alone. When eating, drinking, or smoking tobacco, every
one present must be a partaker; and if, for example, there should be but one
tobacco-pipe, they must all use it by turns. If one is presented with tobacco,
fruit, or other eatables, he will divide it with his friends or those who are
next him. If a family has made a provision of milk to make brandy of, they will
call in their neighbors to help to consume this blessing. But this liberality
mostly extends itself to eatables, for they never part with any of their
property. However thievishly inclined they may have been described, yet they
never steal any thing from their countrymen, unless there be hostilities among
the Ulusses. Indeed, most of the robberies with which they have been charged,
arise from hostility or a spirit of revenge, but this is not done by violence,
but craft. I have been told, that these Ulusses, who, formerly, were under the
government of Nasarmamut, but now under Bambar, one of his successors, a person
renowned for his warlike disposition, have always been famous for robbery, but,
that among all other Ulusses, if the least care is taken of their property, no
such attempts are made.

As the Kalmucks know not how to make any sort of stuff for clothing, they are
obliged to buy it all. The common people seldom wear any thing but sheep and
other skins, and felts, which they throw over them in the rain, by way of
cloak. The better class of men wear an upper-garment, like that worn by the
Poles, except the sleeves which are close and narrow, and an undergarment,
buttoned all the way down and bound close to the body with a girdle. Those of
distinction wear a short shirt under it, open before, and wide breeches, made
of linen, which reach down and are fastened into the buskins. The poor do
without a shirt, and are not less gay in their narrow coat or fur, which they
fasten round them with a girdle.

The upper-garment and boots of the women, differ but little from those of the
men, only that their cloaks are lighter made and of better stuff, a little
longer and more elegant and lighter about the arms. Those who are ladies of
distinction, wear over the under-garment or beschmet, a rich and long floating
waistcoat, without sleeves, and hang the upper-garment, or fur, upon one or
both shoulders. As the women have their undergarment and shirt open before,
they can uncover their bosom to the girdle, and always do, in the
summer-season, when they mean to be well dressed.

The women would be scarcely distinguished from the men, if it was not for
their head-dress, and in this, married women differ from the maidens. The heads
of the men are commonly clipped close, leaving only a long tuft of hair behind,
in the center of the crown, which those of distinction generally braid into two
or three tresses. The Torgouts wear, both summer and winter, a small round cap,
bordered with fur. The Sjungorians commonly wear a summer hat, covered with
felt, just like those of the Chinese, except it is being smaller and having a
flatter brim. All wear, upon the crown, a large spreading fringe, which hangs
down under the cap. A Kalmuck's ears, like those of the Tartars, stand at a
distance from his head, and the cap comes down to the root of the ears. This
prominence of ear is more visible in the Kalmucks than the Tartars, the ears of
the former being rather larger.

Boys hair is shorn from their infancy, but the women do not like to have their
hair cut; girls run about like furies with bewildered locks; but at the age of
ten or twelve, when a Kalmuck lady is marriageable, her hair is plaited in as
many tresses as she pleases, and wound round the head. When a girl, however, is
married, these tresses are undone, and the hair is braided into two large ones
only, which hang down in tails over both shoulders. The ordinary class of
women, whilst at work, put theirs into a linen bag. The caps of wives and
maidens are partly the same, except that the lower class wear them only when
they go out or are well-dressed. It is a round, flat cap, bordered with fur and
covers only the upper part of the head. Women of distinction wear higher caps
of a richer, silk stuff, with a broad brim, cocked up before and behind, and
lined with black velvet. They seem fond of spreading, on the top of their caps,
a broad fringe, that hangs down on all sides. Such a cap they call chalban, the
common ones maihalhu. All the women wear earrings. Some maidens are silly
enough to smear their faces with red and white paint, and some women will wear
a large, gold ring in their nostrils.

Kalmuck dwellings are like those huts made of felts, common in all Asiatic
nomades, and very well known in Russia. They are called Jourts, the truly
ingenious structure of which I will endeavor to describe, for the
entertainment of my foreign readers, more circumstantially than has hitherto
been done. (See the plate of Kalmucks removing, which represents one Kalmuck
tent on the outside and the section of another). The skeleton of those
felt-huts consists first of wattled hurdles, formed thirty inches thick, by
seven or eight different pieces, seven feet long and five broad, placed one
upon another and fastened together in a kind of panel with willow rods;
several of these pannels are set up in a circular form and joined at the ends
with hair-ropes, or bands, forming the circumference of the tent. The door is
made in the same manner but not so thick, and ornamented with a border; ropes
serve instead of hinges, by tying the piece that forms the door to the hurdle
next it. Three long willow-poles are then set up, with a ring on the top, made
of wicker, to form the roof; through which ring, the ends of a great number of
poles are put, the other end fixed in the hurdles below, and fastened with
strings. This being neatly executed, the whole is painted red. The skeleton now
completed, is covered with felts, or a cloth made of wool, united without
weaving, large enough to cover and sit it, and fastened on with cords wound
round it. In winter, all is shut close, but in summer, the sides are left open,
by throwing aside the covering. In very cold weather, they lay over the whole
tent, an additional covering of felts and mats, binding them on as before. The
part within the ring at top, is left open for a chimney, but, as a shelter from
the wind and rain, some cross circular pieces are fixed over it, KALMUCKS
REMOVING
on which they occasionally throw a felt, on the windward side, and when the
fire is burnt out within, they will cover the whole opening, to keep the hut
warm.

In the center of this tent stands, always, a great iron trivet, under which
they continually keep some fire, and over it dress their victuals in large flat
iron pots. Great quantities of these pots are made at the iron manufactories in
Russia, and sold to the Step-nations. The remainder of their furniture consists
of wooden dishes, drinking bowls, large and small bottles, vessels made of
leather, a large tea pot, made of wood, but among the better class of people,
hooped with copper or silver. Their bed stands opposite the door, behind the
fireplace, commonly on a small wooden bedstead, the pillow and bolster of
which are made of felt.

Domestic labor falls upon the women only, the men taking no other pains than
to build and repair their tents, the rest of their time being spent in hunting,
attending their flocks, or in idleness or amusement. It is the woman's business
to milk the cattle, mares, cows and ewes, and prepare the hides or skins, to do
the needle work, and every other domestic occupation. They also knead, with
their hands, camel, horse and cow dung, make flat cakes of the composition and
dry them in the wind, which is the only firing they use. The women also take
down the tents, pack them up and erect them afresh. When the master of a house
means to go abroad, it is the duty of his wife to saddle his horse and bring
him to the door. In short, the women have so much to do, that they are seldom
seen idle. They have scarce time to dress themselves.

In summertime, they have abundance of milk, which, indeed, is their chief
nourishment. They have commonly more horses than horned cattle, and mares milk
is what they like best; for, being made sour, it contains such a spirit, that
if a person drinks two or three of their large bowls full, it will almost
intoxicate him. Their cows and mares will give down no milk unless the calf or
colt be present; on this account, colts and calves are kept almost the whole
day, about their tents, staked down to a particular spot of ground, with long
ropes, and are suffered to suck only at night. Their mothers will feed,
naturally, not far from them, of course, they have them always at hand. They
milk the mares every hour, and each yields about the seventh part of a gallon,
or a moderate bottle full of milk; but, the cows are milked only twice or three
times a day. Before milking, the mother is led to it is young one, and as soon
as it begins to suck, some one pushes it away, and the milk flows freely; with
the cows it is sufficient to show them their calf, and should it die in the
birth or afterward, they will stuff the skin and tie it up among the rest, in
order to show it to the cow at milking-time; but the mare is not so simple, and
they are under a necessity of acting cautiously with these, lest it should make
them stubborn and refuse their milk entirely.

Fresh mares milk is much more fluid than the milk of cows, but, on account of
a little alkaline taste, is not so pleasant; yet, if they turn it with
cleanliness, it has a most delicate vinous flavor. It yields hardly any cream,
of course it is not fit for butter, though some writers falsely say it is; but
it is richer in spirituous and fermenting particles. In winter, when they have
but little mares milk, they make shift with cows milk, which is much less
spirituous, and, when turned four, has a more disagreeable taste.

In order to turn the milk, they pour it gradually into large leathern or other
vessels, which, in wintertime, are set near the fire, either above or under
ground. Commonly, unclean vessels alone will turn it, but if not, they forward
it with leven, made of flour and salt. As they distill a spirit from this sour
milk, they sometimes turn it with a little of this spirit, if they have any or
can borrow it from their neighbors, and sometimes with a little of the sour
milk which they find in the stomachs of the lambs they kill. Milk designed for
distilling they take no cream from, but beat it about now and then with a
stick, as they do in making butter; or, as the milk is collected in summer in
leather bottles, they shake it well twice a day, and this will turn it.

When they have collected a sufficient quantity of such milk to make themselves
merry, and the whole has stood to sour, at least one day in summer, but more in
winter, the women distill a spirit from it in the following manner. Having set
over the fire the largest iron boiler they have, being first rinsed with water
or melted snow, after shaking the milk, they pour it into the boiler, and fill
it, within two fingers breadth of the top. This kettle contains about two or
three Russian pails full, or more. It is then covered with a hollow cover that
fits it, made of two pieces of wood, having two square openings; the edges of
this cover and the places where the wood joins are luted with clay, glue and
fresh cow dung. The Kalmucks of Stawropal use in winter, a stiff dough of
coarse flour. Near this boiler is set a smaller one, with a similar top, and
from the opening of one to the other is fixed a curved wooden pipe, forming a
still, and thus, with a slow fire, they will distill, in an hour and a half, a
bad spirit, to the amount of one fourth of the milk if it be cows milk, and one
third, if mares milk. But the spirit distilled from mares milk, is seldom
strong enough to burn, that from cows milk never, unless it be distilled a
second time.

When this liquor is made, and the neighbors are assembled to partake of it,
the master of the tent throws some into the fire, some up the chimney, and
after breaking a point of the clay-cover, pours a little also on them. So done,
he fills a bowl, which contains a moderate bottle full, from the remainder, and
hands it round, according to the age of the persons present, serving the oldest
first, without any respect to sex. The Kalmucks say, that this milk-brandy does
not intoxicate so quick, or in such small quantities as Russian brandy, but
that, if a man gets drunk with it, he will continue so two days, and must sleep
longer to recover himself.

The remainder of this milk, after the spirit is distilled from it, is
exceedingly sour, and they either mix it with fresh cows-milk and drink it
immediately, or save it, to steep their sheep and lamb-skins in; or else they
boil these dregs with some fresh cows milk, till it grows thick, then pour the
curd into bags, and, after squeezing it well, dry it in the sun and eat it as
cheese. They make, also, a kind of cheese from ewes milk, which they eat in
winter with butter. Indeed this is the only use they make of ewes milk, deeming
it unfit for distilling. To make butter from cows milk, they boil it well, turn
it sour in the course of one day, beat it with a butter-staff and pour it into
a bowl, when the oil or butter will swim on the surface, which they skim off
and keep in leather vessels.

They are never at a loss for meat in summer, as they can procure it in
abundance, either by hunting, or from such of their cattle as die a natural or
accidental death. Very rarely do the Kalmucks slaughter their own cattle, but
from necessity, or on some great festival. This is done only by the rich and by
the first class of people. Birds, of all kinds, they are very fond of, if fat.
The badger, the marmot, and the rat, are their peculiar dainties. They account
the beaver, also, to be wholesome food, unless it be too fat. Besides these
animals, they eat wild horses, wild goats, wild boars, and all sorts of birds,
even the largest bird of prey: yet they abhor the flesh of wolves, saying, it
is bitter. They eat, also, the fox and the smaller kinds of thieving animals
with reluctance. When they have plenty of meat, in summer, they will cut it
into narrow slices, dry it in the sun or, in rainy weather, over a smoking fire
within their tents, and lay it up for winter and traveling provisions. Even
the chiefs and first people among them,' says Took, 'will feed upon cattle
that have died of distemper and age, and let the flesh stink ever so much, they
will eat it without disgust. For this reason, in every horde, the flesh-market
has the appearance of a lay-stall of carrion. Bread and groats they purchase
from the Russians; for, as they eat but little, they never cultivate any land
or sow any corn. I have been informed, however, that some of the Ordinzian
Kalmucks have settled about the Caspian sea, in order to establish fisheries
and cultivate the tobacco-plant, of which they are very fond. There are certain
roots, also, which they eat, as the knots of the sage-tree, (phlomis tuberosa)
which they call Bodmon. After drying it and reducing it to powder, they boil it
into a pulp with milk. They eat, also, the chichling vetch, (Lathyrus
tuberosus), which they call Schnok, and boil it with their meat; and also the
roots of a sort of sun-flower (umbellata). Instead of tea, which they boil in
the Mongalian fashion, with milk and butter, the common people gather on the
steps, a kind of small liquorice, which they boil with salt and milk; they are
great lovers of mead and brandy, and both sexes smoke tobacco at an enormous
rate.

I made many enquiries into the manner in which the Kalmuck women tan and
prepare the different sorts of hides and leather, and found it to be as
follows. When they mean to dress their fine lambskins with care, they first
wash them clean in lukewarm water, spread them in the air and let them get a
little dry. They then scrape them, on the inside, with blunt knives, to take
off the flesh-skin that may hang to them and render them more supple: this
done, they spread them out in the air, on a piece of felt, and rub them over
for three days successively, thrice a day, with the dregs of the milk after it
is distilled, or with sour cows milk, in which salt has been dissolved. On the
fourth day they suffer them to get quite dry, and work them between their hands
on their bosom, till they become quite soft and pliant. After this, they are
smoked, to make them resist rain the better and prevent the rain from spoiling
them. For this purpose they kindle a small fire in a little pit, and throw over
it dry, rotten wood, dried dung and other things that will create smoke.
Sheep-dung is considered the best for this purpose. About the pit they stick
poles in such a manner as to form a pyramidical figure, and cover these with
skins, so as to keep in the smoke, sometimes changing their situation, that
every part may be equally smoked. This is continued for an hour, and, as it
renders them stiff again, they are a second time rubbed with the hands, till
they are of a proper softness; they are next rubbed well with bruised chalk,
scraped clean and polished with sharp knives, and, at last, whitened with
pieces of chalk. Nothing then remains but to clean and beat the fleece.

When they mean to bestow less trouble, as is the case with coarse skins, they
lay them over with a paste made of ashes and salt water, to the thickness of
the skin itself, and as the skin absorbs the lie, they do it afresh; next day
they scrape the flesh-side clean and wash it with sour milk, and when dry, the
skin is worked soft, and whitened with chalk. Some wash these skins after they
are smoked, and rub them with half-boiled ox and sheep liver, which have been
laid some days in milk to rot and become a pulp. This makes them soft but gives
them an intolerable, bad smell. All the furs they prepare for their own use,
are sewed by the women with fine, split sinews of horses, bullocks and elks,
drying, beating and tearing them into threads, which surpass all kinds of
thread in solidity. Horse and bullocks hides, of which they make leather
vessels, are prepared by the Kalmucks, in the following manner. They first
scald them in boiling water to get the hair off; (the backs of ox-hides make
the best vessels), but some lay them in ashes to get off the hair; which ever
way it is done, they are next scraped and smoothed with knives, and washed
clean in flowing water. Others prepare them by soaking them a week or more in
sour milk, in which a little salt has been dissolved. Boot-leather is prepared
in this last way. But, in order to make the best kind, the hides are spread, as
they come out from the water, in the sun, and the women, most skilled in this
business, cut out the pieces that are to form the vessel, few it with
sinew-thread and dry it in the smoke. They manufacture in this manner, not only
vessels with wide mouths, giving them their form whilst drying, but all kind of
bottles and vessels with narrow necks. In order to preserve the form, they
continually blow into them whilst drying on the fire, or fill them with sand or
ashes. The outside they embellish with a variety of lines and figures. They
even contrive to make tea-pots of leather, resembling the China ones, and make
them very neatly: as soon as they are dry, they are fit for use; but in order
to keep them firm and not liable to get soft with liquid, and to take away any
bad smell, they smoke them well for some days. And as rotten and dried cow dung
is seldom to be found on the heaths, they collect it by degrees, and do not
begin to make these vessels, till they have got a sufficient quantity to smoke
them with. They are smoked within these pyramids, till they are as transparent
as horn, and equally solid. I have seen some of their bottles, which would hold
as much as five or six pails.

Thus does the women's industry procure the men an easy and an idle life, which,
as, by their constitution, they are all soldiers, is perhaps not reprehensible.
Besides the profession of arms and the care of their flocks, it is the
department of the men to mend and repair their tents, and when they give a
daughter in marriage, to build the young couple a new one. In the manufacturing
of felts, the men take also an active part. Having sheered their sheep in
spring and summer, with sharp knives, they spread the wool out on an old felt
carpet or mat, on which it is well beaten by ten or twelve persons, sitting
round it, till all the dust is out. It is then equally spread upon a felt, the
exact size of the one that is to be made, and in spots where they want to vary
it in color, they place, over the first layer of wool, dyed wool of those
colors, This done. they carefully roll up the whole together, and tie it tight
with hair-cords; then all the people present sit down in two rows, opposite to
each other, take the rolled felt between them and raise it to their knees,
throwing it from their knees again on the ground, with all their strength, and
continuing this for some hours. This unites the wool into a body, and when they
think it is sufficiently matted, they unroll it, and repair, with the hand, any
defects that appear in it.

Kalmuck arms mostly consist of lances, arrows and bows; the latter are made of
different kinds of wood, but chiefly of the plane-tree. They have a variety of
arrows, some short, made wholly with wood, with a knob at the end; with these
they kill small animals and birds; others are light arrows, with small
iron-points, and some, war-arrows with a strong iron-point. All these arrows
are winged with eagle-feathers, taken from the tail of the bird, as the
wing-feathers are apt to carry the arrow out of it is direction. They are
contained in certain divisions in a quiver, and hung on the rightside of the
saddle; the bow, in a scabbard on the leftside. The more opulent Kalmucks have
firearms. Such as are well-armed wear a breast-harness, like those of the
eastern-nations, consisting of network, made of iron and steel rings; getting
these from the Truchmenians. I have seen such breast-harness in Persia, worth
more than fifty horses, consisting wholly of polished steel. There are,
however, cheaper ones, which they get in barter for about seven or eight
horses. Their full-armour consists of a round helmet, with an iron network,
that hangs down, round the neck upon the shoulders, but only as low as the
eyebrows on the face; a coat of mail, with sleeves to the wrist, covering the
back of the hand with a slip, fastened between the fingers; and two
arm-harnesses, extending from the elbow to the wrist, and buckled on the
outside of the arm, to defend it from blows in any engagement.

The iron-work used for their arms, is made among themselves. There are a kind
of petty jewellers also among them, who make ornaments for the women, and
embellish tea-pots with silver figures of animals and hoops. Their tools are
very simple. Their bellows consists of a leather-bag, with a pipe, fixed
between two boards, which they extend and press together.

Their manner of hunting is various, and they are expert in taking wild beasts
with any kind of trap or snare; they also shoot very exactly with arrows and
firearms. Kalmucks of distinction, are very fond of hawking with a kind of
hawk (falco lanarius), which frequents this district, and is much valued. They
keep also dogs, which have long ears, are good house-dogs and expert at the
chase.

The great wealth and substance of a Kalmuck, are his flocks and herds. But
they keep more horses and sheep than horned cattle or camels. Their horses are
not much smaller than those of the Kirguese, are tolerably high, slight, but
are neither handsome nor ugly; they are strong enough for draught, but too
wild; as to swiftness, they are inferior to none; as they have no other feed
than what the steps afford, they will live any where and almost upon any thing.
Indeed, a Kalmuck never accustoms them to regular feed, fearful of increasing
their wildness and ferocity with their strength. Some Kalmucks own a hundred
horses, and other cattle in proportion. They cut their colts at the proper
season, by opening their scrotum, catching hold of the spermatic vessels and
nipping off the testicles with their nails, searing the part with a red-hot
iron. They do the same with sheep and calves. That they may never want mares
milk, they suffer the stallions to run continually with the mares.

Kalmuck sheep, like those of the Kirguese, have very thick and fat tails,
though not quite so large as Kirguisian sheep. Their rams have hanging ears,
seldom any horns, and their wool is less hairy, generally white with spotted
faces. The sheep here are suffered to feed in all seasons, and, as they lick
the snow, require no water. Among the Kalmuck flocks are generally a few goats,
with pendant ears, spotted with several colors, having long hairs hanging down
their legs, but seldom any horns.

As camels multiply but slowly, their property in these is but small, but they
have as many as they want and often some to sell. They have some with one bunch
on their backs and others two. Many are taken to Orenburg market, and there
trucked away to the Bucharians. This animal thrives well on the steps, among
the salt-plants, but requires attention in winter, it being necessary then to
cover their loins with mats or old felts.

Kalmucks pass the winter with their flocks in the most southern district of
the Wolga step and along the Caspian sea, but always at some distance from the
Jaik, where the Kirguese, their most cruel enemies, have fixed their abode.
They find there plenty of reeds to kindle fire with, and as it snows but
little, the cattle have no difficulty in finding food. With the beginning of
spring, they draw, by degrees, to the north and seek the hilly and watery
districts of the milder step, till after the Wolga has entered within it is
bounds, and offers a richer pasture in the lower lands.

The Kalmucks thus emigrating, in order to seek a better pasture, find an
uncommon advantage in their camels. These animals not only carry their tents
and all belonging to them, but also their household furniture, trunks, bags of
clothes and other little matters. They will not employ the one-bunched camel,
particularly white ones, which they call Bucharians, but to transport their
sacred books, their idols, or burchans, and other holy articles. These sacred
things are packed up, loaded on small wagons and drawn by white camels,
decorated with large and small bells; and nothing is pleasanter than to meet
such a suite of Kalmucks. KALMUCKS SEEKING A FRESH ABODE.
The fine herds march foremost, feeding as they go; next follows a large
company of armed herdsmen, next the camels and oxen, with the horses and
furniture, then the women and children on horseback, in their gayest apparel,
driving the cattle, and singing merrily as they pass, whilst a number of the
men rove about the environs of the road, hunting. Indeed, the chief part of
this peoples life, which to us appears wretched, is interwoven with gaiety, and
the more unfortunate we deem them, the happier they find themselves. However
unwholesome their nourishment and habitations may appear, yet many arrive at an
advanced, old age, gay and free from infirmities.

I cannot say much of their diseases, which are not many in number, like those
of civilized nations, on account of their plain way of living: but as their
chief aliment is meat, and that eaten half rotten, it is easily to be conceived
that they must have some inflammatory diseases. The most dreadful and dangerous
disorder among them, is a burning and infective fever, mortal on the eighth
day. Where it seizes families, it will carry off one or more from each tent.
Those who live in the neighborhood of such as are afflicted with this
distemper, fly from their abode and search, at a farther distance, for a safer
one. The itch is also a frequent complaint among the lower sort of Kalmucks,
which arises from their manner of feeding and their indolent state of life,
during the winter. But they are more afflicted with the furor amorosus, arising
from the scald. The biles, indeed, make their appearance but seldom, but when
they do, they rage with virulence. This is also observed among the Kalmucks of
Stawropal, who are more subject to it; so that it is clearly, in a great
measure, owing to the quantity of animal food they eat. Owing to their smoky
tents, the intolerable heat of the sun, and the yellowness of the heaths;
inflammations of the eyes are so frequent that many wear a slip of crape over
them, by way of prevention. The schoolmaster is generally the surgeon; he feels
the pulse, opens a vein, scarifies and clysters.

It is time now to say something of their political and religious constitution.
The Kalmucks were once subject to certain chiefs, whose prerogatives were
hereditary. Even, at present, the nation is divided among little, tributary
princes, who call themselves Nojonn, and pay but little obediance to the Khan,
that overules the whole. The horde subject to such a Nojonn, is called Uluss,
and is subdivided into small fraternities, living not far from each other,
under the name of Aimaks, consisting of from 150 to 300 families, who are
surbordinate to certain nobles, bearing the title of Saissang. Each Aimak is
again divided, on account of the pasture, into companies of ten or twelve
tents, composing what they call a Chatun, which, properly speaking, implies a
boiler, so that Chatun is a is a society which cooks out of the same boiler.
Each Chatun has an overseer, who owes obediance to the Saissang of their Aimak,
as does the Saissang to the Nojonn. A Nojonn receives tithes of cattle from all
his subjects. He has a right ad libitum to inflict corporal punishment for all
misdemeanors, and can sentence them to have their ears, nose and hand cut off,
but not to take away any man's life publicly; though he exercises this power
privately, on those who incur his displeasure. If a Nojonn has not regulated
the succession in his lifetime, or made priests of some of his children, they
will, after his death, divide the ulusses among themselves, and this division
is commonly very unequal. The mode of saluting a Nojonn, among the common
Kalmucks, is by closing the hand, holding it to the forehead, and then touching
the Nojonn's hip therewith, and, if the Nojonn thinks proper to return the
compliment, it is by striking the other on his shoulder.

'The princes,' says Took, are only dependent on the Khan, in matters of
general importance; in every other respect, they are independent. They acquire
their ulusses by hereditary succession. The Khan has a privy council, or sarga,
consisting of Nojonns, Saissangs and Priests, wherein sits an assessor from
every uluss, and an advocate from the government's chancery at Astrachan; and,
here it is, that laws are enacted.

There are several other dignities, or titles, conferred by the Nojonns or
Khan, as the sovereign lord of the uluss, but I am not acquainted with them.
Every uluss has, at least, one chief Saissang, whom they honor with the
appellation of Tarchan. Another title, belonging to those nobles who are about
the Khan and chief princes, is Taischa; these are sent as ambassadors, (Darga),
from one uluss to another, to the Russian cities and governors.

The establishment of the hordes is altogether military. Every subject must, on
the first orders, repair on horseback to the headquarters of his prince, armed
and with a good stock of provisions. The troops are assembled almost as soon as
the order is known. The prince musters them, and sends the feeble and the
wretched home again. This muster lasts some time, and procures the serviceable
men the distinction of Men of war. The headquarters of the prince are known by
the whiteness of the tents, and by being surrounded by other tents in a circle.

The army is composed of regiments of unequal numbers, and every regiment
(Ottok) is divided into hundreds. Each regiment has it is colors painted with
the idol-gods of war, dragons, serpents, tigers, lions, etc. it is colonels
(Tzrigen yassool), captains (Soon yassool), and other officers, but no martial
music. Every regiment is composed of three companies, musquetry, bowmen and
neck-breakers, or lance-breakers. The musquetry first attack, next the bowmen,
and, last of all, the neck-breakers. They fight with courage, and usually
conquer all that fight in their way: but, against the regular troops, I mean
the troops of government, they can make no stand, except when they are vastly
superior in numbers. When they serve the Russian crown, they are equipped and
paid as Cossacks.

It is very remarkable that the Kalmuck princes have long since thought of and
enacted laws, which would put those European civilized nations to the blush,
who, with an affected disdain, presume to call them barbarians. They have a
code of laws written in Mongalian language, which, in the reign of Galdan-Khan,
was improved and ratified by twenty-four Mongalian and Uiratian princes, in the
presence of three Kutuchts, or highpriests; wherein they trifle not with the
life of a man, nor inflict on him ordinary and extraordinary tortures, in order
to force from the weak and innocent a confession of crimes he never thought of:
the penalties in their code of laws, are forfeitures of property, proportioned
to every degree of crime. I will mention some. For treason and hostilities
among princes and ulusses themselves, the penalty is forfeitures of their whole
property, or such a mortification as the wealth and rank of these princes will
admit of. For disertion in general war, for cowardice or ill-conduct in battle,
the forfeiture of a commanding-officer is as heavy as his circumstances will
admit of; their arms are taken from them, they are degraded and led about in
women's clothes. For murder, the punishment is very great, but does not affect
the life, nor wound the body of the criminal, even though he were a parricide.
If men quarrel and fight, and one is killed, every one who was a stander-by and
did not strive to prevent it, is fined a horse. Where a man is kiled in public
games, the party killing is to receive and maintain the wife and children of
the deceased. For assaults and wounds the fines are proportioned to the injury
done; it is enacted how much shall be paid to atone for a tooth, ear, and each
finger of the hand. Parents or parents-in-law, who beat their children, without
a cause, are also liable to fines. There are also fines for insults or
affronts, the principal of which to men, is pulling the hair or beard, tearing
off the fringe from the cap, spitting or throwing sand in the face; and, to
women, pulling their tresses, or touching them wantonly on the bosom or
elsewhere. In this latter case, the punishment is adapted to the age of the
transgressor. For adultery and whoredom, which is often committed with slaves,
and for bestiality, the fines are but small. It would be too extensive to give
a detail of the fines annexed, for interruption of hunting, extinguishing of
lamps, detaining lost cattle, or keeping a lost carcass without giving notice
of it, and other little cases. The severest punishment is inflicted for theft.
Besides the restitution of the stolen goods, and a fine of cattle, it is
enacted, that the robber, even of a trifle, shall lose one finger, unless he
thinks proper to buy off this corporal punishment, by paying five head of
cattle. There are even fines annexed to stealing needles or yarn. And, in an
appendix to this code, Galdan-Khan, himself, added, that an overseer of one
hundred tents, or an amiak, should be responsible for the thefts committed by
his subjects: and that the overseers of a chatun, knowing of a theft and not
giving notice of it, shall lose a hand; but the common people are to be laid in
irons, and he that has been three times convicted of theft, shall lose all the
property he has. The fines are chiefly great and small cattle, in proportion to
the circumstances of the delinquent and the heinousness of the crime or
offense, and are divided between the nojonn, the clergy and the plaintiff. The
fines of persons of rank are a certain number of arrows, helmets and other
warlike acoutrements. The highest fine inflicted on a prince for hostility, is
100 coats of mail, 100 camels and 1000 horses; and, to enforce the payment, the
other princes are to rise in one body against him; and should he have ruined
whole ulusses, or large aimaks, they deprive him of his all, keeping one half
to themselves and dividing the other among the injured party. For some crimes,
the perpetrator is to lose one or more of his children. The smallest fine is a
male or female goat, or a small number of arrows.

'Some of their laws are a kind of proverbs', says Took: for example,

Let him that proves faint-hearted in battle, be carried through the camp in
women's apparel.

Let him that lifts his hand against his commander, or senior, pay a penalty of
twenty-seven head of cattle.

Let him that commits murder, lose his wife and possessions.

If any give a blow in an affray, by which he breaks his antagonist's thumb,
let him forfeit eighteen head of cattle; if the middle finger, nine, etc.

Let a thief, who cannot make good what he has stolen, be beaten, and drag
after him a log; and also be marked with a burning iron. If the theft be great,
he may be sold for a slave.

Rape of a virgin is fined nine head of cattle, and adultery the same.

Among their laws, it is also stipulated, that a betrothed girl cannot be
married under the age of fourteen, and not later than twenty, and then, if he,
to whom she is betrothed, will not take her, she may be given to another,
provided the nojonn has been first made acquainted with it. The number of
cattle, which a father may accept for his daughter, and the reciprocal present
he is to make, are ascertained, according to the rank of the parties, from
fifty camels and four hundred sheep to fifteen horses, as many oxen and twenty
sheep. It is also a law, that every year out of forty kibitks, or habitations,
four persons must marry. Each is to receive from the public fund ten head of
cattle, as a reward or purchase for the bride, and the bridegroom is to have
from the father some old clothes in return.

None dare appear defore the prince otherwise than sitting on his legs, but
without crossing them in their ordinary manner. All heads are uncovered, when
his commands are recited. Common people greet each other with a mendu, which
implies the same as salve or "Save ye," among the Romans. If it be a long time
since they have seen each other, they lay their two hands flatways together. On
the festival Zagan, they kiss each other, but at other times never, not even
between lovers. In conversation, they are not very ceremonious, but are
excessively submissive to superiors, and show an uncommon reverence to the aged.

When taking a solemn oath, they put the muzzle of their firelock to their
mouth and kiss it, or, in want of such a piece, touch their tongue with an
arrow, put it is point to their head and say, God destroy me; I will be born
again in no wild beast, if I say an untruth! In weighty and important cases,
they are proved by fire-ordeal. The head of an ax, or other iron, is heated
till it is red-hot, and the accused is to carry it at the end of his fingers,
to the distance of some fathoms. If he does this, and is not burnt, he is
acquitted of the charge. I was told, that some are so skilful in this business,
that, by moving their fingers quickly, they will receive no injury, which is
considered as a proof of their innocence.

But I must proceed to their religion, and speak of those spiritual and
temporal customs as have any connection with it. Their doctrine is the religion
of Lama, mostly the same with that of their brethren, the Mongols, whom they
copy in language, writing and manner of living. In this religion, we find, as
in that of Brahma, a complete system of the structure of the world; it is past
and future state envelloped in a labyrinth of fables and crafty illusions: it
includes the old doctrine of Metempsychosis or the transmigration of souls, in
so strict a sense, as that all their deities, who formerly were men, had,
before their deification, been rigorously subject to their law, having wandered
through many animal bodies. They pass from the body of one beast into another,
till they have gradually effaced their slight transgressions, by penance and
remorse. Common souls proceed directly to the judgment seat in Paradise,
without any wandering, and receive the decree that disposes of them for ever.
This is their faith, at least as to their principal idols. The Kalmuck
religion, in the externals or ceremonials, has so near an affinity to many
practiced by some sects of christians, I mean in their opinions of the change
of the world, and several other points, that it is probable, to those who give
a scope to conjecture, that the religions of Brahma and Lama, are much
connected with that of the Nestorians. Some few ceremonies in their divine
service, which I will describe, will justify this supposition; but, before I
proceed, I will give my readers some account of the Lama doctrine, which is
contained and dispersed in innumerable writings, part of which I have collected
from several translations of little Mongalian, theological authors, which I was
favored with from the Proto-pope, or high priest of the christian Kalmucks, at
Stawropal, Andrew Tschubofskoi, who is perfectly acquainted with their
language. I shall add, also, what I could gather from conversation, respecting
this extensive, fabulous doctrine, that a better knowledge may be formed of it,
and that it may be seen how far the Brahma faith corresponds with it. I have
been informed, that the Indians, of which there are no small number in
Astrachan, not only acknowledge the Kalmucks to be their brethren, but pay,
also, divine honor to the Kalmuck idols, called Burchan Ajuscha and
Dschakdschimmum, which have a great resemblance to those of the Tangutians. If
this be true, it is an incontestable proof, that the religion of Lama
originated in India, and that the Kalmucks are descendants of the Mongols.

In the beginning, we have the whimsical story of the Lamas, about the system
of the universe. They say, that at first, without any creator, there was an
immense space, or chaos, whose width and depth amounted to 6,160,000 leagues,
or beres, (each league or bear being equal to about six English miles); but,
they fix no time of it is commencement. In this space gathered some
gold-coloured clouds, which shed a rain so abundantly as to form the
unmeasurable ocean. That an immense thick froth grew upon the sea like milk,
(the dimensions of which, is also expressed in their books), and that from this
froth issued all living creatures; and that from men their idols were produced.
That a storm next arose, from certain parts of the heavens, which gave
existence to a column extending from the upper-region, to far below the deepest
bottom of the elementary ocean. They call this column Sjumer Sula, and say,
it is circumference amounts to some thousands of leagues, or beres. About this
column, as an axis, move the habitable worlds. But how the sun, moon and stars
came to exist in the upper-regions, their treatises give no account. They say
the sun consists of glass and fire, and is some hundred leagues in
circumference. And, as they hold glass to be one part of the body of the sun,
and have burning-glasses among them, it is plain that such glasses must have
been known a great while in the east. They deem the moon to be somewhat smaller
than the sun, and make it consist of glass and water. The number of stars they
fix at ten thousand millions, which will lead our astronomers to judge of their
other calculations. The sun, in the Kalmuck system, has an orbicular course
round the middle part of the great column, or Sjumer Sula. This column shows
four sides, each of a different color, one silver, one sky-blue, one golden
and one of a deep-red. When the sun casts it is beams on the silver-side,, the
dawn begins, and if, by degrees, the bright-blue is illuminated, noon makes
it is entrance, but it is not perfect noon till it shines upon the golden side;
and when it throws it is light on the deep-red side, the twilight commences, and
continues till the sun hides itself from our view behind the column, and this
is night.

About the column, they say, roll, in general, four great worlds, and between
these the smaller ones, joined in couples, of which they reckon eight, and all
the stars and worlds are made fast to it with a great iron-ring. Among the
greater worlds stands ours on the right, which they call Sambu-tup, as a great
number of trees grow on it, unknown to them, but called by them,
Jsambu-barachia. Opposite to this, is a world inhabited by giants, (Ulyum
schibiytu-tup). The third world they call Ukir-edlektschi, on which there are
only cows; but, in the fourth world, Mun-do-uto-tup, exist a people without
souls. They live 7000 years without sickness, and when the time of their
dissolution draws near, on the seventh day preceding their end, they hear a
voice calling them by their names, and announcing their dead-warrant. They then
call their relations and friends together, and take a lasting farewell.

They describe all these worlds as very extensive, to which no other creature,
except their idols, can pass, and these can go from one world to another.
Besides these worlds, they reckon seven other abodes, eight little oceans, and
many clouds, on which reside their aerial spirits in the vast vacuum, and say
that the whole system is encompassed and fastened, as it were, together, by an
enormous iron-ring; giving and relating circumstantial stories of all these
brainless chimeras.

In our world, they say, spring four principal rivers, from four mountains, to
which they give the following remarkable names, Ganga, Schilda, Baktschu and
Aipera. Between these four mountains feeds, for four months in a year, an
elephant, of which they relate many wonders, and call him Gasar-Sakikjin Kowen,
or the protector of the earth. This elephant is some miles long and high, and
white as snow, has thirty-three red heads; on each head, six trunks; on each
trunk six fountains, and upon the fountains six stars; each star beset with a
virgin-offspring of their aerial spirits. On the central head of the elephant
rides the great genius of the earth, called Churmustu Tenga, when he goes from
one place to another.

Immediately after the creation of the world, men reached a very distant age,
lived nearly 80,000 years, were fed by invisible gifts of grace, (Kidi-Dianar)
and had the wonderful power of raising themselves to heaven. All this time
transmigration was general, and all men were Chubulgans, or regenerated. This
regeneration in human bodies, according to the doctrine of the Lamas, is a
thorough change from common mortality, (a rare prerogative allowed only to the
clergy, some persons of a holy disposition, and to the nojonns or princes). It
was also in that age, or epoch, when the thousand Burchans, or idols, whom the
Kalmucks worship, went to heaven.

This was followed, say they, by an unlucky epoch. The earth produced a certain
sweet-tasting herb, like honey, which is called, in their books, Schime, and
there was a voracious man who eat thereof, and made it known to all the rest.
Hereby, all the holiness of mankind, and their power of flying to heaven,
ceased, their longevity and gigantic stature decreased, and they lived a great
while in darkness, till the sun and stars took their origin.

After men had fed a certain time upon this plant, it failed, and they were
forced to support life with a ki^^ of earth-butter, that looked ruddy and had a
very sweet taste; but this failing also, they had recourse to a sort of sedge
(sala-semis), and began to store it up and make provision of it; but instead of
it is increasing, it fell entirely away. This is the epoch when virtue took her
flight from the earth, and adultery, murder and injustice made their inroads
among men. They began at this time to cultivate the land, and chose the wisest
among them as their chief. This chief divided the land and other goods among
his people, and is, at last, become the Khan.

In this state, according to their opinion, lives the present age. During the
past golden-age, several of the thousand Burchans or idols of that happy
period, appeared on earth, in order to reform mankind. For example, at that
time, when the life of man had decreased to 40,000 years, appeared in the
empire of Enednai, (which, perhaps is that of the Mogul), Ebdefchi-Burchan,
(the destroyer), and preached religion. At the decline of human life to 30,000,
he was followed by Altan-Dschidakti-Burchan, (the golden unalloyed). When life
fell to 20,000 years, came Gerel-Sakiktschi-Burchan, (the preserver of the
world), One might suppose, that under this and the preceding name, lies some
obscure and deformed tradition of the Savior.
and after him, Mafsuschiri-Burchan, upon this world; and, finally, when the
limits of man's age dropped to one hundred years, the great Burchan, and
founder of the doctrine of Lama, Dschakshimuni came down and preached to the
sixty-one nations of the earth. But it is to be lamented, say they, that each
listened to the doctrine with different ears, it having produced as many
religions and languages as there are nations.

DSCHAKSHIMUNI.


The following are the revelations of Lama, on futurity. The age and also the
form of men, and all created beings, will, from our times, so much decrease,
that horses will not be bigger than hares, and men will be scarce three feet
high, will live but ten years, but will be marriageable at five months old.
After this, sickness and death will come among them, and carry off the greatest
part. Before all people die, the aerial spirits will make themselves heard, and
it will rain mortal shots. A few of the remaining dwarfs, frightened out of
their senses, will take provision for seven days, hide themselves in dark
holes, and the land will be overspread with carcases and blood. After this,
will follow rain, which shall wash away all the dead bodies and every impurity
into the desert ocean; and a fragrant shower will cleanse the earth; then shall
the heavens rain down clothes and food for those whose lives were spared, and
they shall begin to live virtuously, and a vast space of time shall pass,
during which, the limits of human life shall extend to 80,000 years. When this
epoch shall be fulfilled, the age of man shall begin again to decrease, a
regenerated Burchan, bright with holiness, called Maidarin, shall come into the
world, and his greatness and beauty shall be wonderful and ineffable. Men will
be astonished, and enquire of him the cause of his form and beauty, and when
the idol shall have told them, that he has attained such perfection by a
victory over his passions, abstaining from all murder, and practicing all
virtue, men will become converts and attain a similar perfection by the same
means.

This is the Kalmuck system of the universal restoration of all things; but,
from the different epochs and changes which the world, in their opinions, is
still to undergo, they seem to have a very extensive but confused idea of it;
insomuch, that it was with difficulty, I could form any tolerable comprehension
of their system. To the epochs of the world, whose continuation is very
unequal, they give the universal name of Galahp, derived from the word Gal,
fire, as most will end with fire. They reckon seven times seven epochs, which
are thus to terminate. After every seven fiery epochs, one will follow ending
with a flood, and after all these, one ending with a hurricane. All these small
divisions of time are divided into four chief periods, called Achu-Galap,
Ebdereku-Galap, Choasim-Galap and Toktochu-Galap. In the first division, or
period, containing the time wherein the life of man, from an extent of 80,000
years decreases to ten years; are two epochs. In the second all mankind will
die, for this reason, they call it Ebdereku-Galap, the destroying period; after
this, a time will come, when the earth shall lie waste, and this is called
Choasim-Galahp, or the waste period, and then a storm or hurricane, shall bring
departed souls from hell, which is the last period; but the time and place is
not plainly ascertained.

I have mentioned the time when the Burchans or gods of the Kalmucks were
raised from mortality. They are so numerous, and they relate so much of each,
as to fill whole folios; but their tales are so confused and the Kalmuck Clergy
so ignorant, that it is difficult to make out the context, without translating
and comparing many of their writings. So far it is certain, that these Burchans
have originated from holy men, or men pretending to holiness, who have asserted
that they passed through many bodies before they were regenerated, or from
fabulous persons or deformed idols of some other more ancient religion. I could
not absolutely find out whether, besides these Burchans, they admit of some
higher supreme being, or, whether they account for the first operative
principles in the manner of Epicurus; but, from what has been related, I should
rather suppose the latter to be the case. Good and bad events are governed by
Burchans, and good or malignant aerial spirits. There seems to be degrees of
rank among their Burchans, at least they differ much from one another in power
and occupation. I think they look upon Burchan Abida, as the most exalted of
the whole, though the supposed founder of the superstitions of Lama,
Dshakshimuni is more popularly worshipped and known. It Is image is almost always
seen among the Kalmuck idols.

It is remarkable that almost all their idols, except the Dalai-Lama and some
other priestly-looking images, are represented as women, with the flaps of
their ears long and pierced, having Indian ornaments, and their feet turned
underneath themselves, or else in a sitting posture; yet, I saw some standing
images with many arms and faces. The Kalmucks represent, also, their god of
hell, or Erlik-Chan, as standing.

DELAI-LAMA.


Most of their idols are ornamented with a tippet, which is a badge of dignity
worn by the priests of Lama; some with the bell and scepter, which the priest
commonly holds in his hand or lays before him, during service. Propitious
Burchans, seem to be painted with a certain sweetness and beauty of
countenance, but the malignant ones, inspire fright and horror. I was lucky
enough to meet with a great collection of these idols in Jaizkoi-Gorodok, which
were cast hollow in brass, strongly gilt and so neatly executed as to equal, if
not surpass, the engraved figures. The foot of each Burchan is made hollow,
closed with a plate of copper and contains a little cylinder, made of ashes,
wrapped up in a piece of paper, or the upper bast of the birch-tree, with a
Tangutian inscription, or, at least, a ticket with such an inscription. These
cylinders of ashes are, undoubtedly, considered as relics of the holy bodies
which the Burchans once inhabited. I shall have occasion to mention, presently,
that the ashes of such persons, as are supposed to be regenerated, are sent to
the chief pontiff, or high priest of this religion, at Thibet. It is also
certain, that if once the cover of the foot of such an image is opened, the
Kalmucks consider it as profaned, and it is no longer saleable. They purchase
with avidity, and at high rates, from the Russian merchants, those Burchans
which, at the destroying of the Sjungorian, or Dsungorian, power, became the
plunder of the Kirguese, trucking with the Russians for other things; provided
the foot of such idols has not been opened and the inner part has remained
untouched.

Besides their idols cast in metal and silver, they have figures painted or
drawn upon Chinese paper or stuffs, of which I have seen some very fine. I have
met with some, also, impressed in clay, which had the appearance of sigillata,
and were painted red or plated with gold. Such images they keep in
copper-cases, in pyramids, made for that purpose.

I cannot speak more positively of the abodes of their burchans, than that they
reside on the worlds and stars, or in other places of the celestial space of
the Kalmuck-system. Dschakshimmuni is said to dwell upon earth. Erlik-Khan, has
his place in hell, of which he is the mighty prince. Some have given them
abodes in the uppermost parts of the firmament, to which there is a golden-road
over a high mountain. At the top of this mountain rides a cloud, apparently
made of jasper, on which resides the aerial spirit Adabaschi. At the bottom of
this mountain are a great number of foxes, which attack the souls of the
wicked, and thus detain them from the blessed abodes, which are the principal
paradise. Underneath the golden-road is a silver-one, which leads eastward to
that peculiar abode where Abida-Burchan enjoys a perfect rest. Next follows a
copper-road, leading to the abodes of thirty-three propitious spirits, near
which, is a place for the souls of children and those that have not been truly
meritorious. At the lowest bottom of the mountain is an iron-path that leads to
hell.

Before I proceed fatrher, I Will relate two instructive stories of the Kalmuck
Mythology. They report of Burchan Dschakdshimmuni, that whilst his soul
inhabited the body of a hare, seeing a man almost starved with hunger, he ran
voluntarily into his hands, and, that the genius of the earth admired this
noble act so much, that he placed the form of a hare in the moon, as a monument
to after-ages; and the Kalmucks believe now they see a hare in the moon.

The other story is curious, and to the best of my recollection, there is a
similar tale in the life of an Indian idol, told in the letters of a
jesuit-missionary. I must observe first, that the Kalmucks imagine that there
are always certain, evil spirits and agents of their gods of hell; hovering in
the air. I mean the lower class of Kalmucks and their clergy; for there are, as
in other countries, Kalmuck-freethinkers, who laugh at such absurd stories. They
believe, that a miraculous dragon, called Luu-Chan lives, during winter, in the
water, and rises into the air in spring, when some of the infernal agents ride
upon him. When it lightens, they suppose this dragon opens it is jaws, and when
it thunders, that the deputy of hell is whipping him, till he roars again for
pain. Once it happened, that as the three burchans Mafsuschini,
Dschakdshimmuni, and Maidarin, were sitting together praying and in profound
devotion with their eyes shut, according to the Kalmuck custom, a malignant
spirit drew near, and let fall his excrements into the sacred bowl, which
persons of sacerdotal dignity commonly have before them, when praying. As soon
as these holy men saw this, they deliberated together how they should act. If
they threw this venomous matter into the air, all beings there, they thought,
would perish; but if they poured the infected bowl over the earth, every living
creature would instantly be killed, they agreed therefore to swallow the
contents themselves: Mafsuschini and Maidarin drank first, and as
Dschakdshimmuni was to finish the bowl, the sediment was so thick as almost to
strangle him, so that he looked blue in the face. For this reason, he is still
represented in pictures with a blue face, but in cast figures, with a blue,
lacquered cap.

I have, more than once, mentioned those aerial spirits which make the greatest
figure in the fabulous doctrine of Lama, and observed that they were generally
called Tengri. We may compare them to guardian saints and Roman-catholic
angels. Some are propitious, others malignant spirits, and both are very much
inferior to the burchans, neither are they supposed to be immortal. They are
divided into various classes, some of which I am unacquainted with, and have
stated abodes near and in the worlds, and in the great vacuum. They know the
size of every one and how long each will live. Near our earth are four, such
evil spirits called Macharasa, who are only 125 fathoms high. Above these,
dwell the thirty-three spirits already mentioned, who are 150 fathoms in
height, and one, among them, called Tejus-Bijas-Chubilgaksam, is said to be
taller still. Another sort called Chublgaksam-Edlekschi, are near three miles
in height and live 10,206,000 years; there are some others 6,771,000 miles
high, whose tedious, barbarian names I shall omit. A day to these spirits, is
as fifty-years to men, and they live 500 years composed of such days. As
wonderful as are the properties given them, so wonderful is their propagation;
some generate only by kisses, embracing themselves, others by smiling at each
other, by a wink and a glance, and some only by friendly looks. As far as I
could learn, in conversation with some Kalmuck priests, they believe that all
bad weather and unlucky events, among which are numbered the abovementioned,
bad epochs of the world, arise from malignant spirits, who nevertheless, must
yield and submit to the power of Tangutian prayers and exorcisms. But the
propitious spirits, whose faces are bright, and white as snow, and burchans are
interested in the good of the world and mankind.

An essential, indeed the chief article, in the religion of Lama, and which
must have the greatest influence upon morality, is their doctrine of the state
of the soul after death, respecting hell and rewards. I collected many accounts
on this subject, and shall communicate the most probable.

Hell is situated in the middle region between heaven and earth. Here the
matter is very indefinite, but the following is more circumstantial. In a large
city, encompassed with white walls, wherein there is a continual beating of
kettle-drums, the mighty burchan, Erlik Khan, unlimited governor of hell and
judge of departed souls, holds his residence in a spacious palace.

ERLIK-KHAN.


On one side of the city, is a large ocean of urine and excrement, which
constitutes the first abode of the damned. Over this sea passes the above
mentioned iron-path, which has this admirable quality, that, if wicked souls,
who have treated the principles of their religion, or the Gurban Erdeni
Gurban-Erdeni frequently occurs in books of the religion of Lama, and means
literally the holy Trinity, but they mean by it, the three principles of their
religion, namely Lama, the burchans and pure faith.
with contempt and have not respected the clergy, wander through it, the path
underneath their feet will become so thin as to break under them and
precipitate them into the place of punishment. Farther on is a sea of blood, in
which many human heads are swimming. These are they, who, during their life,
had sowed discord and occasioned bloodshed among friends and relations.
Farther on still, is a remote, white land, where many of the damned endeavor
to dig for water and food, without being able to find it, and whose hands and
arms are so much wounded in digging, that they drop from their shoulders with
exquisite pain, but grow again, to renew their torments. These are people who
gave, whilst they lived, neither meat, drink nor clothing to the priests. The
other divisions of hell, which are, in number, eighteen, are situated round the
palace of Erlik-Khan. In every division, the wretched souls suffer a degree of
punishment proportioned to their offenses, each division having an infernal,
(Esed) and devils to torment the damned. Their devils are represented with all
sorts of frightful forms, black, with the heads of goats,, lions and unicorns.
In one division of this place, many run about without feet, for having despised
the doctrines of the priesthood. In another are sitting those rich persons
who, though living in abundance, never administered to the wants of the poor.
These are in an un-heard-of condition; are transformed into monsters whose
heads and bodies are each as big as a mountain, and their neck as small as a
thread. In other places, dreadful pits of unremitted yells, the cruel are
tormented, those who have either killed their parent, elders or other men,
cattle or even insects; for, according to the tenets of Lamaism, it is sinful
to kill, purposely, even the smallest vermin that infect and plague mankind,
and they are of opinion, that the souls of all animals, so destroyed, will,
when in transmigration they inherit other bodies, seek revenge. In other
divisions, are multitudes of mockers of religion, whose ears some little devils
are always filling with burning soot, that, eager as they may be, they may not
hear each other. Wretches, who have robbed the the sacred shrines of burchans,
burnt spiritual books, or have proudly lived, are, in a particular place,
thrown into boiling caldrons filled with serpents. In other places, the damned
are continually roasting upon gridirons, or spitted with a lance. There is,
also, a place where there are one hundred and eight hooks fastened in a cloud
of ordure, on which sinners are hung, and when the wind blows them down, they
fall on sharp points, which lie underneath, and tear their bodies to pieces.
Yet still a voice is heard, that calls them back to life, and their punishment
continues some hundred millions of years, constantly torn to pieces, and their
limbs beat and pounded in mortars. There are, also, dark, yet red-hot, infernal
dungeons, and here and there a cold hell, where sinful men are frozen to death,
before the rising or the sun, and are dragged about by furies till they are
thawed to life again, in order to renew their torments. Farther on, is a place,
where those who spent their life in dress and lived luxuriously are punished. A
pack of little devils are here employed in forging curry-combs; and, when
redhot, tearing therewith the backs of sinners. Lastly, there is another place,
where delinquents are squeezed between iron blocks, in form of millstones, and
always brought back to life, to be squeezed to death again. There is a place
where cattle, inhabited by human souls, have sinned, and also suffer the
punishment of eating and drinking, without ever being satisfied. It is not to
be wondered at, that they should fix an abode in hell for cattle, for,
according to the Lama faith, they have the high prerogative of entering into
the paradise of burchans and aerial spirits. But this well-policed hell, has no
place of punishment for lust, which is very little thought of, wherever this
religion prevails.

Great and holy Lamas, who have been zealous in their office and obtained a
victory over all their passions, pass, when they die, by the aid of their
prayers only, (of which the words om ma wie pad, me chum have the greatest
influence), immediately into heaven, to the abode of the burchans, where they
enjoy perfect rest with other godly souls, and exercise themselves in divine
service, till the time of their regeneration comes.

Common souls, are received by the infernal agent, who brings them before
Erlik-Khan, where they they must account for their past actions and justify
themselves: if they can do this, so as to leave no doubt of their
righteousness, they are sent with honor to the blessed abodes, he ordering a
flying cloud, with a golden throne, to transport such a soul. Those who, living
on earth, did much good and much evil, have a good burchan for their advocate,
to plead their cause with the infernal deputy, Erlik-Khan, who orders the large
book to be brought, where all the actions of men are registered, and examines
it; and should the cause be doubtful, he takes a balance, writes the good
against the evil, and pronounces sentence accordingly; and the soul, so
sentenced, is delivered to the burchans, or good, aerial spirits, or to the
keeper of that division, where they are to suffer punishment; or they may,
possibly, obtain a pass to the world again; for Erlik-Khan, has a power to send
some departed souls back to their bodies, and uses this means to preach
repentance, through them, to the living part of men. And it is from these
returned sinners, that they receive all their accounts of hell and a future
life.

Infernal punishments, according to the opinion of Lamas, are not eternal. For
each a time is fixed, but, by it is astonishing duration, it is almost equal to
eternity. However, it often happens, that the omniscient burchan
Chomschin-Bodi-Sada, who is represented nearly like Dsshakdschimmuni, has mercy
on departed souls, or that some holy, deceased Lama, being mislead to hell, by
mistake, shall, by some Tangutian prayers, release part of the tormented souls,
and bring them back to happier abodes. But, it may be easily conceived that
such as have offended, either the clergy or the burchans, cannot be partakers
of this fortunate delivery, as their punishment is never to be shortened.

There are also some books wonderfully endowed with the power of freeing wicked
souls from their merited punishment, provided they have, in the course of their
lives, diligently read them, copied them or or carried them about with them.
Among these, may be numbered, one containing certain unintelligible
revelations, entiltled the mystery of Dshodbo, the contents of which, I am
unacquainted with; yet, I have had accounts of the miraculousness of this book,
in expelling diseases, lengthening of life, banishing malignant spirits and
delivering sinners from the severest, infernal punishment.

It is evident, from the accounts here set forth, on which, perhaps, I have
rather dwelt too long, and which contain all the principal points of the
tedious religion of the Lamas, that, like other superstitions, they are the
fabric of priests, and illusions by which they contrive to awe the ignorant
multitude. Thanks to superstition, so common to ignorant men, for the great
success of the sacerdotal tribe, in establishing this religion, whereby they
multiply their number, by increasing the advantages of their clerical supremacy
over the disciples of Lama, and enslave even nobles and princes!

The order of this idolatrous priesthood, which is honored with the general
title of Churbrak, cannot be better compared than to that of the
Roman Catholics. Their head, or Delai-Lama, may be considered as the Pope,
except that his soul is continually wandering from one human body to another,
and is deified. The residence of this famous man, whom the infatuated Kalmucks
adore as a burchan, living upon earth, is called, by the vulgar, Baraun-Tala;
by others, Pontal, or, Batalai-Lassau. According to the reports of some
Pilgrims, dispached from the Kalmuck horde to this court, in matters of
religious concern, or who travel hereby their own, holy zeal, the cloisters of
Delai-Lama, into which no woman is suffered to enter, are situated on a high
mountain, which has been dug through in such a manner, that a stream issues
from it is center. It is said to contain 700 pagod, or temples. The reader may
form a better idea of the dress of the Delai-Lama from the representation in
the plate, taken from a brazen figure of this burchan, than by any description
I can give. The pointed cap is like a monk's hood, on the outer robe, and can
be let down. The color of this holy man's garment is always yellow, and they
consider this, and red, as the most sacred of all colors.

This deity they suppose to be immortal, because the soul of the living
Delai-Lama, when dead, passes into the body of his successor. Sometimes they
have two of equal eminence and power, into both of whom the soul of the
deceased Delai-Lama has passed. Hence arose the Chutuchta at the head of the
Lamaism of China, and the Delai-Lama of Thibet. The Delai-Lama, which implies a
deity at an immense distance, is honored as a God, all his words are
considered as oracles, he appoints the chief priests and nominates princes, he
lives in a pagoda, on the mountain Potata under 29 degrees. 6 min. N. latitude and
25 degrees. 58 min. W. longitude from Peking; he eats no flesh, sits always
cross-legged on an altar, answers questions, and blesses supplicants. 'His
followers,' says Took, assert, that his soul, after the death of his body,
passes into another human body, born exactly at that time, and this man is the
new Delai-Lama; others say, that they keep a young man in the pagoda, during
the the life of the Delai-Lama, who is to succeed him.

This religion seems not of very ancient date, it is a mixture of the
superstition of the old Schamans with the christian religion, as taught by the
Nestorians, the first Delai-Lama, being no other than Prester John, the
catholicus, or Nestorian patriarch, who traveled into this country to convert
the savages. The Schaman religion is the oldest in India, the god of which, the
Mongols call by the name Dshakschimuni, and can be no other than the well-known
Schaka or Schekia, who was born 1017 years before our Savior, and was called,
after his apotheosis, Fo: as christianity then became more and more corrupted,
it at last vanished away, and was here absorbed in the religion of Lama.

Every prince has, in his horde, a Vice-Lama, subordinate to the Delai-Lama,
and appointed by the court at Petersburgh. This person performs in his
district, what the Delai-Lama does over all the church. He ordains priests,
forgives sins, bestows blessing and gives amulets to the dying.

Among the Turgout Kalmucks is a Lama, or substitute of Delai-Lama, whose place
is always filled by one of the present, highest order of the clergy. When the
Sjungor ulusses arrived, they had also a Lama; but I could not learn, with
certainty, whether there are two such patriarchs, at present, in this horde,
now united under the Russian scepter. The garments of these Lamas differ in
nothing from the former, except that the upper-robe has sleeves, which they put
on in cold weather. They are, also, considered by the silly Kalmucks as
burchans, and are worshipped with outstretched arms as burchans are. The
benediction a Lama gives, consists only in laying his hands upon the person he
blesses; but I have seen many brazen images of Dalai-Lama himself, represented
with that display of the hands wherewith the Zordshi, or Bishops, give their
benediction.

The following is a representation of one.



The Lama has a uluss to himself, consisting of one hundred tents of priests,
and receives, besides an annual tribute, horses and camels from the lower
clergy.

The higher order of the clergy, next the Lama, are the Zordshi, which may be
translated Bishop. Their garments used to be yellow or red, and they have
sleeves in the under-garment; yet like the Lama, they wear the red order
continually, and go like the latter, without breeches, that they may not defile
themselves, by touching any part of their body, upon certain, necessary
occasions.

Common priests, who compose the lower class of regular clergy, are called
Gellung, and live dispersed throughout the whole horde; so that to every 150 or
200 tents, may be reckoned one who performs divine service for his aimak. A
gellung has nothing to live on but the little presents his people make him on
festival and prayer-days. These priests, and all those that belong to them, are
exempt from secular offices, and import-duties. A gellung salutes his prince
only by turning up his whiskers. Every gellung has many schosars, (Mandshi),
whom he instructs in theology and the Tangutian language, and who sing with him
in idol-worship, and learn to use the sacred instruments. He has, also, a
deacon or assistant, called Gadsul, to which office he may appoint any of his
scholars, but a man cannot be ordained a priest, but by a particular form, and
at the residence of the Lama.

They have another ecclesiastical officer, corresponding with our sexton or
vestry-keeper. He attends only on the higher order of the clergy, and takes
care of a magnificent tent, erected for the assembling of the burchans. This
lower order of priests, does not differ from the Kalmucks in dress, except that
their heads are shaved all over, not wearing that tuft of hair behind, which
the lay Kalmucks do. The heads of all their scholars are so shaven at their
admission, and with a degree of ceremony. Neither have they any fringed
appendage to their caps. Like the superior order of clergy, they take a vow of
celibacy and continence, but a Mandshi, or scholar, before he is ordained, may,
with special commission of his priest, quit the sacred profession and marry.

As divine service, among the Kalmucks, is performed throughout in the
Tangutian language, every priest must, at least, be able to read it, and be
provided with those prayers and songs, requisite for every hour and day and
occasional solemnity; and in every priest's habitation is found a variety of
Mongalian writings, in which are described the idolatrous ceremonies. Besides
the offices used in sickness, funerals and the like, they have certain
ceremonies of exorcism, called Tarni, by which they pretend to cure diseases.
Medicine they know little of; their chief remedies are prayers and certain
amulets. Each Kalmuck wears an amulet, hanging on his bare bosom, sewed up in a
piece of leather, which he receives from his priest. I have seen large pieces
of cotton-stuff, on which was printed all kind of insignificant, colored
figures, to each of which was added a Tangutian exorcism, with an inscription
in Mongalian, for what purposes it it may be used. The prints that make these
figures are kept by the priests.

No priest can be without the astrological books of of his religion, from which
he ascertains auspicious days and hours for certain acts and events, which
every Kalmuck applys to his priest for information in, before he undertakes any
thing of consequence. It is confidently said, that the flight of a certain,
white owl (strix nyctea) which inhabits the steps, foretells good or ill
fortune, according as it flies, to the right or left. If, when they see him, he
directs his flight to the left, they endeavor to turn him to the right, and
fancy this will give a change to fate.

The largest and most important book, in the possession of the Kalmuck priests,
and which is said to contain an accurate and full account of their idols, is
entitled Bodimer: but, I heard of an abridgment of the whole mythology of Lama,
called Ertjunzjun-Toali.

The common priests, have their idols with them, in their tents, which are
generally made of white felts, it being ordained, that a burchan shall inhabit
no other; they are kept, with their religious books, in small trunks and are
put under the bedsted; but the best burchans are set up in cases above. Before
the trunks, in which these idols are, stands a little table, or altar, on which
are always eight or nine little, silver bowls, and a lamp or lanthorn. On the
fire-hearth is another bowl made of iron, fastened on an iron bar stuck into
the ground. Into this bowl, the gellung pours some drops of all the liquor he
intends to use in sacrifice and never drinks any from any bowl, but his own,
without pronouncing these words, Om a chum. That is may all be pure; God give
abundance, and prosper this drink. They have several other laconic forms of
prayer. In this burchan's tent sleeps the gellung and his gadful, or some of
his scholars.

The Kalmucks keep three days in each month sacred. As these days are regulated
by the moon, and they begin the month with the new moon, their first, general
supplication-day, is the eighth after the new moon; the second is on the
fifteenth, and the third on the thirtieth. On such day no zealous Kalmuck eats
or drinks any thing but what is made of milk, and spends best part of the day
near the tent of his priest, to which they are called to worship in the
morning, by the beating of a kettle-drum, and a kind of wooden or copper
trumpet. None dare come near the tent, but the nobles and the learned. A
multitude, of both sexes, sits round about, and drops from rosaries, which they
hold in their hands, one bead after another, pronouncing at each, Om ma wie
pad, me chum, with their eyes shut, or rehearsing, with a low voice, another
short form of prayer, which they have by heart, without knowing it is meaning.
The more quiet the people are, the more noisy is the priest in worship, and,
with his red robe and crown of roses, he cuts no small figure. Long strips of
cotton, on which are written Tangutian prayers and fastened at the end of high
poles, are stuck up before the tent, by way of flag; from an opinion, that the
waving motion of such prayers in the wind, are as efficacious as a recital of
them. (See a representation of a tomb so adorned in the plate Kalmucks). Before
the burchans burns a light, and the abovementioned little bowls are filled
with dried meat, cheese or other victuals; there are also some large bowls
filled with the same. They also lay down before the altar of the burchans,
grits, milk etc. It is a crime among the Kalmucks, to pass by such a bowl, and
I saw they were displeased with me, for so doing. Rich priests place small,
frankincense candles upon their altars, before the burchans, but poor ones are
content to strew, at the commencement of their prayers, which last the whole
day, some frankincense on burning cowdung, supported by an iron trivet. On
these days the burchans, in splendid dress, are exposed to the people, by
placing them on the trunk before the altar, and some small rags of green, red,
or yellow silk, are hung over their shoulders, by way of cloak; add to this,
all the paper-paintings which the priest possesses, are hung up within the
tent, as banners of their saints.

The priest himself, who performs the service or the gods, sits in his usual
place bare-headed, his breast uncovered, the red, sacerdotal tippet over his
shoulders, and a rosary about his neck. Before the priest stands a little
bench, on which is another bowl with water, an elegant metal bell, with a
handle, a small scepter, which represents the burchans, and two plates; near it
sit, or stand in a row, his gedsul and his scholars, choristers, all
bare-headed, with red bands over their shoulders. These bawl out the hymn as
loud as possible, from written sheets before them, or play on instruments, to
increase the noise of the singers. The instruments consist of great
kettle-drums; a kind of hautboy, made of a human shin-bone, with a copper
vent-hole and a mouth-piece which gives a shrilling sound; and an instrument in
the form of plates, used by the Janissaries, which the priest himself,
sometimes takes in hand. It may easily be conceived what an odious noise these
must make, especially at the court of Lama, where there is a vast many of them,
joined in chorus by a multitude of priests, holding their little bells in their
left-hands and the sacerdotal sceptres between the two middle-fingers and thumb
of the right hand. I saw some metal bells used on similar occasion, the
clappers of which were leather bags filled with sand, but which gave a strong
sound. The Lama, is said to sit motionless surrounded by his bishops during the
service. The bishops give the blessing, with such a gesture as is represented
in the idol. See p. 263.

These noisy songs are, sometimes, interrupted by still prayers, muttered by
the priest, with open, outstretched arms, closed eyes and frequent bowing. They
have some variations in their ceremonies for public festivals, which are
probably enjoined and for particular reasons, but to become acquainted with all
the minutiae, would require the study of many years and a knowledge of the
Tangutian and Mongol language.

The melody of these people, particularly their soft and tender music, has such
a long-drawn, mournful tone, and, at the same time, so dissonant, that a good
ear is nearly as much hurt with it, as with old French music. Besides the
votive, amorous and plaintive songs produced every day by their poets, they
have likewise a great number, recording the romantic achievements of their
heroes, with monstrous, legendary songs of chivalry and acts of wizzard
prowess; dragons with 10,000 heads and gigantic animals without a name; which
they sing in a loud voice, with very little cadence, and frequently interrupted
by a sudden, dead sound. The time is, now and then, varied, but they are
chiefly a monotony, sung by rote and divided into strophes.

The following is an elegy, sung in the person of a new married woman to her
husband, Chasaartaechaen chaarraani,
Chabschoolchodu jaachodok bui?
Chairladak innakgien tellaeaedub
Sobochu du jaachodok bui?
Damchan egae schettekzaen darki tschin baelae by?
Damchan egae innackliksaen innak tschinni baelae by?
Aemaeaeltaechan raehraetschin atsaehkoni jaachodok bui?
Aebaernaenae kekzen elaedu sobochu duh jaachodok bui?
Ittaem barridski, umschiksaen ittaegaellichtschin baelae by?
Innakladshi sannaksaen innaktschin baelae by?
Golduch tschin unguksaen gollien chargaei?
Uichan golschikladshi innaklaksaen innaktschin baelae by?
Thy well-bitted, jetty steed
How did thou ride in the battle?
In love with thy dearest mistress,
How anxious were thou for her?
Was I not the subject of thy prayers, without an equal?
Was I not thy darling love without an equal?
How fared thy brown horse which thou ridest till he was lean?
How were thou humbled with once riding him?
True lovers we are, and will thou not hear me?
Was I not once thine only and best beloved?
At yonder river, the river of pines, thou were brisk and active!
And did you not find me lovely and pliant?


The following expresses the passion of a Kalmuck maiden, for her lover;
translated from their language.

As early in the matin, as the larks raise their notes,
So early do I listen to their song;
And so early do I muse on my beloved.
Ah Father, excelling at the bow;
Ah, Mother, of a temper most benign;
Can I only enjoy a lover in my thoughts?
The deepest thoughts are but deceitful:
Sensual perceptions alone are real.
Let this my soul's darling be told to you.
How powerful are the calls of nature!
How unknown is the time of our meeting!
But to return to the Kalmuck religion. Besides the three days of supplication
mentioned, the Kalmucks have three, great festivals, celebrated with all those
amusements the reader will be more acquainted with. The first, and most
important, is that on which they begin their new year. They call it Zachan-Sara
(the white day), or Chaburun-Turn-Sara (the first day of spring) and it
commences with the first new moon in April; the next important begins with the
first new moon in June, and is called Ssaga-ssara or Suni-Turun-Sara, (the
beginning of summer). At this time, for a fortnight, the Kalmucks take as much
flour to their priest as they can afford, of which they get round cakes made in
the form of a cone. I saw, in the tents of some gellungs, brazen moulds of
them, ornamented with some insignificant characters, and fastened on
wooden-handles. When they are baked and have stood some time before the
burchans, they are thrown into water. When a man is sick, even at other times
of the year, he gets a figure made in dough, either a man, an ox, a dog, etc.
agreeable to the advice of his gellung, or some holy book, which, having stood
some time before the burchan, is to be thrown either into the fire or water, in
order to appease the malignant spirit who has caused the sickness. These
figures are called Zaza.

The third feast is in November, or begins with the new moon in December, and
is called Uwilin-Turun-Sara (the commencement of winter) or Sulain-Sara, as
they burn at this solemnity a kind of holy candles, brought from Thibet by the
pilgrims, which candles thev call Sula. I was not made acquainted with all the
particular ceremonies, used at these feasts, but I will mention a few.

There is nothing more peculiar in the Kalmuck worship, than the use of a
little vessel, similar to our coffee-pots, called Bumba, which on every day of
public service, is wound round with a white band, ornamented with pheasants and
peacocks feathers, and set upon the altar of the burchans near the lanthorn.
This little pot is filled with sweet water to which the Kalmucks attribute a
miraculous virtue. On such feast and prayer-days, every faithful Kalmuck has a
few drops of this water poured on the palm of his hand, which he devoutly and
confidently licks up, as a preservative against many evils. Gellungs generally
give a cup of this sweet water to the sick, and one, for a trifling piece of
money, which I laid upon the altar, would fain have persuaded me to drink some
of it, saying it would do me good. Every thing that is placed upon the altars
is sacred, and must not be touched, especially on festivals. When I attempted
to take hold of a burchan, to inspect it closer, the gellung spread his silk
rag, in which he used to wrap up his idol, over my hands, and if he had either
eat or drank, he would have washed his hands and turned up his beard, before he
touched the burchan.

Still more remarkable are a sort of sacred pills, brought from Thibet. It is
the noble only and the rich, who can obtain them from the priests, in cases of
sickness, and when death seems almost unavoidable. They are taken to alienate
the soul from this world and sanctify it. These pills are black and about the
size of a pea. I thought they might have contained some opiate, but was told
they were of a purgative kind.

At the tents of some old priests I saw a kind of prayer-wheel, representing a
parti-colored cylinder, with iron axles, containing written prayers; it is
fixed on a wooden frame, and turned quickly round with a string wound about it,
each motion of a written prayer being considered as efficacious as a rehearsal
of it.

Little, cylindrical boxes, or wheels, full of written prayers, wound round a
stick, are distributed by priests to such enthusiastic persons, as through a
holy rage have determined to go on some pilgrimage, or lead a holy and solitary
life. Such hermits and pilgrims must not eat any thing but meat, grits or
roots. After this pilgrimage, they conclude their life in sanctity, placing
over their tents a blue flag, on which are written some Tangutian prayer, and
as often as they mean to pray, they turn about their cylinder. After every turn
of the wheel, they pronounce the six words, om ma wie pad, me chum.

It is also frequent among the Torgouts, that husbands, weary of life or crazed
with holiness, shall forsake their wives, their children and estates, in order
to be priests. In this case, they pass through a kind of noviceship, that is,
their hair must be cut and they must be consecrated gedsulls. All the
Dsjungorians I asked, told me, there was no such thing among them; but many of
the Torgouts, with a holy zeal, assured me such an action was pleasing to God.

There are also among the Kalmucks, certain magicians or Schamans, not
belonging to the priests or or holy people, but rather abhorred than revered;
and their arts, which are prohibited, are often dreaded. These are men and
women of the lower class of people. The former are called Uduguhn, and the
latter Boh. They exercise their sorcery once a month, the night when the moon
is new. They steep a particular plant in a bowl of water, with which they first
sprinkle their tents; next they take certain, dried roots in each hand, kindle
them, and, with extended arms, make all kind of gestures and violent
contortions of the body, repeating the following syllables, Dschi Eje, Jo jo,
till they fall into an apparent phrenzy, when they begin to answer questions,
respecting things lost and future events.

I shall now proceed to those profane customs, connected with their religion.
When a woman is in labor, they send for a priest, who attends near the tent
and reads some Tangutian prayers. During this time, and till the child is born,
the husband of the woman is to spread a net round his tent, and continually
fight the air with a cudgel, crying Gart tschetkirr! (avaunt devil!) in order
to keep off the internal agent. Among the rich, they place such a number of
praying priests, on guard round the tent, as are sufficient to drive off the
malignant spirits. During the birth, they have not only women but men-midwives,
who take the child and wash it. The women are so strong that they are often
seen to ride out the second day after they are brought to bed, and to follow
their business; but, they cannot appear, otherwise than with their heads
veiled, or be present at divine worship, till after forty days.

The common class of Kalmucks give their children the first remarkable name
they hear, or the name of the first man, or animal, which the father meets
after the birth. But the wealthy get the priest to study for a name from some
holy book, which, if the father is not pleased with, he alters. When a boy has
reached four years of age, he undergoes a kind of confirmation. He is brought
before the gellung, who reads some prayers over him and cuts off some of his
hair, which the mother is to pick carefully up and carry home, wrapped up with an
amulet, hanging on her back. I could never find out the meaning of this
ceremony.

Not having had an opportunity of being present at any of the marriages of the
Kalmucks, I can speak only from hearsay. Many betroth their children, not only
in their earliest infancy, but in the womb; this betrothing is, however,
sacredly performed and conditional, that such a one has a boy and such a one a
girl. The young couple are joined at fourteen years of age, or later. Two years
before marriage, a bridegroom is allowed to take many little liberties with his
bride, but should pregnancy happen before the day of marriage, an atonement is
made to the bride's parents, by presents. Prior to the wedding, the bridegroom
agrees with the girl's father, as to the portion he is to have with her, which
consists in a certain number of horses and cattle; and the father of the young
man, in return, presents the bride with a new, white felt-tent, some household
furniture, bed-cloaths and ornamented feet-pillows, covered with cotton or
silk, and laced. The gellung is consulted, with respect to the day of marriage,
and he searches, by astronomical calculations, for a propitious one. The new
tent is then erected; the bride, with her parents and relations, goes to the
bridegroom, who, with the gellung or priest, accompanies them to the tent,
where he reads some few prayers and orders the bride's tresses to be undone and
braided in the manner of married women, into two tails. He next takes the caps
of the married couple, retires with them and his gadful without the tent,
smokes them with frankincense, says a prayer, then returns to the couple,
blesses them, gives the caps to some of the persons present, to put them on the
bride and bridegroom's head, and the ceremony concludes with a feast. For a
certain time the bride is not permitted to leave her tent, and no one is
suffered to see her, but her mother and the married women of her acquaintance.

At the nuptials of princes, great entertainments are given. A large banquet is
prepared, and those who carry the eatables to table, which are served up in
large, wooden vessels, are preceded by a herald or carver, riding on a
fox-coloured horse, splendidly dressed, having over his shoulders a long tippet
of fine, white linen, and his cap trimmed with black fox or otterfur. On the
wedding day, all the priests of the uluss read prayers, and the day is
concluded with a variety of amusements, as horse-racing, wrestling, shooting
with the bow, etc.

The customary diversions of this careless and blithsome people, consist in
horse-racing, in which the girls bear a part; shooting with the bow for wagers;
wrestling, in which they strip themselves to their trowsers; (indeed, the men
and boys, among the common people, in summertime, go about naked, except a
pair of trowsers); hearing the maidens sing; pantomimic dances, and music
performed by the girls, who almost all of them play on the lute, the kit and
the viol, a kind of hurdy-gurdy and the pipe. The subjects of their songs are
the fabulous stories of gigantic chivalry, heroic tales, and amorous ditties;
but their melody is harsh and dismal. The Kalmucks also play at chess, cards
and tocadillo, much as we do.

The nobles eat upon a carpet spread on the ground. One cuts all the meat and
the rest seize on it with their bare hands; when it is swallowed, they drink
the liquor it was boiled in. It would seem that cleanliness with them was a
sin, being forbidden to wash any vessel in river-water, of course they wipe
them only with a piece of old sheep-skin, on which they wipe their hands when
dirty. As they dare not put any living creature to death, their habitations
abound in all kinds of small vermin.

According to the principles of the Kalmuck religion, polygamy is prohibited,
but this law is not so rigorously observed by nobles and commanders, who,
sometimes, will have two or three wives. Such examples, however, rarely occur.
Divorces are likewise unlawful, yet they happen frequently among their people
of distinction. If a Kalmuck has any reason to be dissatisfied with his wife,
or if she is herself desirous of a divorce, the husband has only to strip her
of her clothes and the divorce takes place; but he, sometimes, even whips her
away. If he wishes to acquit himself honorably, he invites her relations to a
banquet, gives his wife a saddle-horse and as much cattle as he pleases or can
afford, and she quits him, with her friends, taking this property with her.

When a Kalmuck dies, the gellung is made acquainted with the moment in which
the deceased gave up his spirit. He then judges in which of the twelve hours,
wherein they divide their day and night, the deceased left the world and
ordains accordingly, from a book, the manner in which the corpse is to be
carried and to what district of heaven, and the relations carry it accordingly.
There are six different modes of burial, one is to lay the corpse, naked, in
the open step, with the head toward the east and the body in a sleeping
position, supporting the head with the right arm. At the head, on both sides,
and also at the feet, they stick poles into the ground, on the top of which are
fastened square pieces of stuff, scribbled over full with Tangutian prayers,
which resemble flags and are called prayer-flags. The second mode is to carry
the corpse to some adjacent wood, dressed in the dress of the country. In both
the above cases, the body is left to be devoured by wild beasts, by which
process, they suppose the soul continues it is transmigration. The third way is
to throw the body into the water, this they do with children; the fourth, to
bury it; the fifth, to cover it with a heap of stones; and, the sixth, to burn
it. In the first five modes, in which they bury the common people and lower
order of priests, they stick one flag as near the body as they can, burying
with them the weapons of the deceased and some few presents. Besides these
prayers of the dead, a kind of soul-mass is read by the priest for the
deceased, by order of the parents, agreeable to the hour in which he gave up
his spirit. These masses continue forty-nine days, at the expiration of which,
three prayer-flags are given to the parents by the gellung, which they also
stick near the corpse and then leave it to itself, without any farther notice.
Some, however, will continue the masses a while longer. From the hour of
departure, they judge whether the deceased was a good or a wicked man, and if
the body remains unmolested by the beasts of the forest, they consider it as an
ill omen.

Burning the dead, is only practiced for the superior ranks of clergy or lamas,
the nojons or princes, and a few holy people, whom they believe in the
regeneration of. The ashes of such bodies are carefully collected, mixed with
frankincense and sent to the Delai-Lama, at Thibet, who sends word back into
which paradise the newborn soul is arrived through the fire, without being
metamorphosed into an animal. In order to burn them, a vaulted oven is built
with holes, in one of which the body, full-dressed, is laid upon a bench with
three feet. The fire blazes out of the oven and is fed with the fat of the body
till it is entirely consumed. The following mode of interring a Kalmuck lady, I
learnt from one of their own people. Prince Ondou, who is still living, had a
Truckmenian wife, who begged the favor, when dying, to be buried in the ground
according to the custom of her ancestors. In conformity with her request, she
was buried up to her shoulders, but over her bare head a felttent was erected,
and the corpse so left.

August 12, 1769. Collecting these accounts and committing them to paper,
detained me till the 12th of August, when, leaving all my heavy baggage behind
me, I left Jaizkoi-Gorodok for Gurjef, one of the most southern districts of
the Russian empire, and abounding with natural curiosities.

It is remarkable, that as I traveled southward, I met, among the
meadow-plants of the low-lands, several I had not seen before, and which are
only to be looked for in the warmer districts of Europe and Asia. On so varied
a scene, I could not but recollect the opinion of Strahlenberg, who, with great
reason, considers the cross-mountains, which rise from the Glacial-sea to the
farthest arms of the Ural, as the natural boundary between Europe and northern
Asia. The step-mountains, as an immediate continuation of the decreasing and
dividing Ural, which extends itself between the Jaik and the Samara, south-west
toward the Wolga, naturally separate here the more northern districts,
exhibiting a hilly and fertile land, overspread with European plants, from the
Asiatic steps.

About five miles from Jaizkoi-Gorodok, is a very extensive and bushy valley,
where, among other shrubs, I found the wild-rose, the false acacia and the
greater meadow-sweet, which shot forth rods six feet long, and which, in this
country, are used for switches, on account of their toughness and flexibility.
This place abounded with the curious insect called the stinking beetle,
(tenebrio variabilis) and a kind of earth-moss that covers the loamy surface of
the step, in whole tracts, as with a white-grey bark, which breaks where the
ground is particularly dry. The Cossacks call it Semljanoi chleb,
(earth-bread), and say that many a person, out a hunting, has lost his life, by
being obliged to feed upon this moss. About the Jaik, they use it as a
medicine, but here they are ignorant of it is use.

Continuing my journey to the next guard-station, I there changed horses and
had time to look about me, where I found the Awrag, a water-arm, full of all
forts of wild-fowl, and abounding with the bee-eater (merops). Water-tortoises
are here uncommonly large, I saw one half an ell across the back, and this size
is said to be the least. The common people believe that the bite of this animal
is venomous, and that it generally bites people while bathing, in their private
parts. It is often found caught in fishing nets and basket-work. I found here,
also, a particular kind of shells, which grow together in bunches, and which,
to my knowledge, are found no where but in the Wolga, the Jaik and the Caspian
sea, (Mytulus polymorphus).

We saw now, for the first time, upon the Jaik, upwards of twenty of the
spoon-bill (pelecanus onocrotalus), which the natives call baba, (old woman).
They were very busy, fishing. It is well known, yet deserves to be repeated,
that these enormous fowls assemble in lakes and bays, form a long row, and
spreading out their wings all at once, drive the fish together, which they
swallow up in great quantities. Their time of fishing is about dawn and noon,
and it is easily to be conceived how much a flock of such fowls will thin a
water of fish. They weigh here from eighteen to twenty-five pounds each,
measure from the point of the bill to the top of the tail about five feet, and
from the extremity of one wing to the other, when spread, about nine feet and a
half. If these fowls are disturbed, they soar high in the air, and fly in long,
cross-waving lines; and, even when shot at, show not the least confusion. From
their whiteness they glitter as they fly, and though they live on fish their
flesh is not indelicate. I enquired here about the wandering grass-hoppers,
which are natives of the deserts of Asia, and was told that they did not come
regularly every year, nor did they always make their way from the same quarter;
sometimes they come from the Kirguisian, sometimes from the western, Kalmuck
district, and sometimes from the north, up the river Jaik, and return the same
way. They arrive in the time of hay-harvest, and destroy many a fine crop.

To the next guard-station, I rode all night, and it was very sultry, owing to
the burning of a Kirguese step, which had continued ten days, and though very
distant, had heated the air all round; before the moon rose, we saw the light
of this fire at east, and, in the daytime, it could be perceived by a column
of smoke, on which seemed to rest an oblong cloud.

In this district, on a salt-step, especially where the liquorice grows, is
found a useful plant, (serratula amara), a kind of bitterwort, which contains
so strong a bitter, that it is preferable in medicine to the centaury. The
Cossacks assured me, that they had rapidly and radically cured cold fevers with
it, and that it would cure in cattle the dangerous bites of badgers, wolves and
mad dogs, by screwing it powdered upon the wound. Buxbaum seems to have
described this plant by the name gacea erecta, minor latioribus folus. As there
is plenty of waterfowl in the river Jaik, the inhabitants are pestered with
birds of prey; the common sea-eagle (skopa), the large, black eagle (aquila
ossifraga) and another little species, with a spotted head, hitherto
undescribed, (aquila leucorypha), have nests almost in every high tree.

About noon, on the 15th of August, I reached Kalmykowa, a sort or
guard-station, at the distance of about 209 miles from Jaizkoi-Gorodok, where I
staid a few days, to make some little excursions in the neighborhood. Here
have been found, in the Jaik, elephant and buffalo-skeletons, proofs of some
old change in the globe, of which I shall speak further hereafter. They have
preserved in Kalmykowa, a piece of elephant's tooth calcined, a monstrous
elephant hip-bone, which weighed fifty-four pounds, and the upper part of an
extraordinary, great buffalo's skull, with both horns, which measured, between
the bottom-part of the horns, one foot three inches, Parisian measure.

On the steps here grow abundantly, the stinking ground pine, (camphorosma
monspeliaca), which had not the least smell, and some small pieces of wormwood,
on which the numerous flocks of the Kirguese feed in winter; these plants
continue green under the snow, which falls but lightly in this district and is
soon gone. The sheep dig them readily from under the snow, and the Kirguese
look out for winter quarters, where this plant abounds; for the sheep will not
touch it in summer. Here grows, also, the rhapontic, of which the Cossacks make
an excellent medicine, by steeping it in baandy, to which it gives a pale,
yellow color. In Gurjef, they collect the young leaves in spring and eat them,
as a cure for the scurvy, which there reigns. A decoction of it, is a wholesome
purgative, and they apply it in a variety of disorders. The Kirguese use it to
dye yellow with, and I am persuaded it would supercede the use of the foreign
turmerick.

There is here, the scorpion-spider, (phalangium araneoides), known by all the
Kalmucks, by the name of bychorcho or mandschi-bychorcho, and dreaded by them
exceedingly, it is bite not only occasioning extraordinary pain, but a great
tumor, which, though slow in operation, is certain death. This insect lives in
holes under ground, but creeps about in the reeds and often awakes, with a
bite, those imprudent people who lie down to sleep where they are. The Kalmucks
and all those who have seen it alive say, that it will, in the twinkling of an
eye, run up a stick, held before it, and bite the hand. It Is common antidote
and cure is sweet oil, but the Kalmucks use some superstitious remedies against
it. They say, the wound should be first bathed with the milk of a young woman,
suckling her first child, and who lived chastely before marriage; that then the
heart and lungs of some black animal, either a dog, a sheep, etc. should be
applied warm as taken from the body, to the wound. I saw an old Kalmuck, who
had two marks on his breast, made by the bites of these animals, and who said,
he was waked from his sleep by the violence of the pain. Nay, the Kalmucks
dread this insect so much, that they will desert a district where they have
seen them. I had once an opportunity of getting one from the cape of Good-Hope,
but never knew it is violent effects till now. The Kalmucks say, that there is
another such black insect, living under ground and spinning large and extensive
webs, but I could never learn further particulars about it.

Upon the height of Kalmykowa, two good journeys on horseback from the Jaik, is
an extensive salt-lake, forming many little bays and marshes, but has no flux.
It is called Kamysch-Samara. It Is borders are full of bull-rushes, on whose
roots the wild boars feed. On this lake are eight or ten floating islands, the
texture of which is composed of all sorts of roots, rushes and willows, and
inhabited by wild boars, swans and diverse sorts of waterfowl.

August 17. I returned to the fort, and the next day took a ride to see the
Kirguese, who were quartered in the neighborhood, and, at sunset, took notice
of the race-hare, or flying-hare (mus laculus). This animal appears rather
flying than running. The fleetest horses of our Cossack escort, could not keep
up with them. With a single leap they will jump over twelve feet of ground, and
they scarce touch the ground but we see them again in the air, till they rush
into their holes.

Day was just declining, when we reached the Kirguese, who were quartered on a
step or waste, under large, felt tents, on a delightful spot. The step-nations
show, commonly, a great deal of taste in choosing their abodes and in this
respect, enjoy a pleasure that, in some measure, atones for their unsettled,
vagrant way of life. These people seemed more alarmed at us, than we at them.
We saw no one about the tents, but a few old women and some naked children,
running about a kitchen-fire; the young women had abscodned, and the men were
busy in collecting their dispersed flocks. As soon as their business was done,
both masters and slaves gathered themselves about us, and finding us peaceably
inclined and of an agreeable disposition, received us with a smiling
countenance and treated us with a delicious, though sourish, drink, made of
mares-milk This drink, if prepared in clean vessels, as the Kirguese do it, is
not in the least disagreeable, but has that vinous, sourish taste, which milk
has, when turned to curds with cream of tartar. The kumyss of cows-milk is much
inferior to that made with the milk of mares; though when fresh, it is rather
saltish, something like the milk of a cow, who has eaten some alkali or dame's
violet, (alliaria).
, and called by them, kumyss, of which no one could drink a bottle without
being intoxicated; a proof of this I saw in one of my attendants.
Notwithstanding the good reception we met with and the hospitality they showed,
we did not think it proper to take up our night's lodging among them,
therefore, about dusk, having inspected into what was most remarkable in their
families, we took our leave and returned from whence we came; where, for the
first time this year, I saw the unexpected comet, which the Cossacks, with
their lynx eyes, had discovered three nights before, and on the 15th instant,
(Aug. 1769), a little below the hyades.

As I owe my readers every account I could collect about the Kirguese, I now
take the opportunity of relating to them all I could learn.

This nation of people calls itself Kergis Chasak, by which name it is known
among the Russians and Kalmucks. They, themselves, gave me the following
account of their origin. They formerly lived among the Turks alone, and
propagated and extended themselves as far as the river Euphrates, where they
had their own particular governors; the last of whom, Sasyd-Khan, had been in
this district. This prince designed to make himself master of the Turkish
throne, and, with this view, murdered two of Mahomet's cousins, by his daughter
Fatima, called Chasan and Chussan. I am not much versed in Turkish history, but
was I ever so much, and whether the story be found true or false, I should
relate it, as I heard it: it is a piece of Kirguisian antiquity. When the deed
had transpired, the Turks rose in arms, and drove him and all the Kirguese from
their settlements. After this, they sat down in the neighborhood of the
Nogayan Tartars, but having also fallen out with these people, they were again
driven from the step or desert which they now occupy. This horde, afterward,
threw itself under the protection of Kergis-Khan, whose subjects were
neighbors to the Sungarians and Chinese, (probably the Mongols), and this
prince employed them in wars and military expeditions; but they forsook him
also, and retired to their present abode, with the name of Kergis-Chasak, which
implies a warrior of Kergis-Khan. They believe, indeed, that all the Russian
Cossacks derive their name and military discipline from them.

These Kirguese, like all other Asiatic nomades, live in felt-tents, not at all
different from those of the Kalmucks, but in being cleanlier and so spacious
that often above twenty persons may sit commodiously in such a tent. In hot
weather, both Kirguese and Kalmucks remove the side-covering of the tent, in
which situation it represents an alcove. The Kirguese, with respect to their
persons and dress, are much cleaner than the Kalmucks. As they are mostly
people of property, they keep a great quantity of cattle, live well, in their
way, and are well attired. Whatever is requisite for their clothing and
consists of manufactured stuffs, they procure from Russian merchants, Asiatic
caravans, or else by robbery, though, to do them justice, they become daily
more and more honest, and trade now, by way of barter. The articles they make
for themselves, are fur-dresses, leather, a kind of coarse camblet, felt-covers
of sheeps' wool, which they neatly mix with wool of various colors, all sorts
of leather and some trifling things. They chiefly tan their hides as do the
Kalmucks, with sour milk, and this leather, so tanned, composes most of their
mens' dress. In summertime, they wear different kinds of small, upper
garments, made of hides, the hair of which is outward, and such a coat they
call jirgak. Something more distinguishing, yet frequently worn, is what they
call daka, which consists of the skins of unborn colts of different colors, so
sown together that on the middle of the back and both shoulders, the manes fall
as an ornament in the seams. Some, also, wear summer-cloaths of well-tanned
goat skins, without the hair, these they call kaskan and are much worn by the
Jaikian Cossacks, being soft and impenetrable by the rain. Their method of
preparing them is as follows. Having cut off the hair from the skin, they
moisten it with water and lay it, rolled up, in some warm spot, till it begins
to be offensive and the hair loosens at the roots; they then scrape the skin
with a blunt knife and afterward dry it to a certain degree. If the skin be
thin, they lay it in sweet milk; if thick, in sour or turned milk, tanning it
therein for four days, but scraping it every day, in order to make it more
supple. It is then dried in the shade and worked with the hands and feet till
it becomes very soft. After this it is smoked, dried again and finally dyed
with a yellow-brown color, made from the roots of rhapontic, or the thrift
(statice Tartarica), called, by the Kalmucks, tuschutt, and, by the Russians,
sheltoi koren, that is, yellow-root, which are boiled in allum-water; some are
said to mix a little sheep-fat among the boiling roots, in order to fix the
color faster. When the dye is cold, it is said to be of the consistency of a
soft pulp, which they spread over each side of the skin twice or more, letting
them dry each time, and then work and render them soft again. Such skins may be
washed very often, and not lose their pretty, yellow-brown color. They use the
same root for dying wool, but for a red color they use genuine cochineal,
which grows in some part of the step, in some low-lands, about the Jaik, and is
called by them kysil-bujaf. They have, among them, some few silver-smiths and
black-smiths, but they are such inexpert workmen, as to be able to make only
some, rough, trifling things. They are at a loss to conceive to what perfection
those Europeans have arrived, who are able to manufacture needles and thimbles:
all fine trifles of this denomination, are bartered for by them at Orenberg and
some other places on the frontiers. Having no coin among them, they estimate
every thing by the value of a horse or sheep, and their customary, small coin
are wolves-skins and lamb-skins.

The man's dress, besides the upper-garment, consists in a cotton under-one,
and a shirt of blue linen or kitaika, which is open, like a bed-gown, from top
to bottom, but lapped over before, and, with other cotton clothes, tied fast
about the body. They gird their upper-garments with a leather belt, on which
hangs, usually, a vessel with gunpowder and a bag full of shot and balls, most
of the Kirguese of property carrying firearms with them. Some make their own
powder, digging saltpeter from the old tumuli, and it is said to be so good,
that they need only wash the ground from it and may then mix it with sulphur
and coals. The sulphur, and indeed the chief of their gunpowder, they purchase
from the Asiatic caravans.

The mens' summer-caps are commonly made of felt and covered with stuff. They
are worked with the needle with threads of various colors, and lined with
velvet. The top is conical, and the cap has two broad flaps that hang down on
the cheeks, or turn back or up occasionally. Their winter-caps are lined with
fur. Besides these, they wear, as do the Tartars, upon their shorn heads, for
they shave their heads clean, leaving whiskers on the upper-lip and a pointed
beard on the chin or at the corners of their mouths, a kind of black cap worked
with various colored needle work. The boots which the rich wear, are made by
the Bucharians, and sold very dear. They are made of ass's skin, very clumsy,
and after a peculiar model; the soles are full of large points, are encompassed
with iron, and are generally so badly made, that no European would be able to
walk in them, without falling down at every step. The Kirguese, however, seldom
walk, but are almost always on horseback; so that most of them are bandy-legged
and very bad walkers. They are of middling stature, rather handsome featured
when young, but among the old, their faces are jewish and frightful, and, owing
to their indolence, their bodies are thick. 'Being well clad,' says Took, in
furs and two or three garments at a time, they are seldom hurt by the frequent
falls they get from their horses.

The trappings of their fine horses employ their thoughts almost as much as
that of their persons; having always elegant saddles, handsome housings and
ornamented bridles. They are generally armed when on horseback, and carry a
short, twisted whip, about an inch thick, like that of an English postilion.
When they go a hunting, they wear schalvars, or long trowsers, which reach up
to the armpits, into which they cram all their clothes; and a Kirguese, in
this dress, may be taken, at a distance, for a monstrous pair of breeches on
horseback.

The common dress of the women, is a blue shift, not open before, which is the
only covering they wear at home, a pair of long breeches, bands, with which
they wrap up their feet and legs, flat-bottomed socks, and a white or
parti-colored piece of linen, with which they veil their heads. The following
is their usual head-dress, which they call dshaulok. They first lay a kind of
stuff, three or four else in length, over the head, bringing the ends of it
down the sides of the face, about which they braid their hair in two tresses.
The ends of this stuff they cross under the chin and carry them up over the
head again, so that the ends hang down on the ears on each side. This put on,
they wind a slip of some stuff, four or five else long and about two hands
broad in the middle, round the head, so as to form a kind of cylindrical
turban. When they are better dressed, this dshaulok is of finer stuff, and
striped; over the blue shift, they wear another of silk or some rich, Bucharian
stuff, ornamented with artificial flowers; they next put on a tippet of the
same color as the dshaulok, about the shoulders, and, over the whole, a wide
Bucharian bed-gown, or chalat. They carefully cover their bosom with a thick
handkerchief, worked with the needle in various colors, within their
under-shift. They have, also, another ornamental dress, called dschadshbau,
consisting of a full and long train, or tail, fastened to the hind part of the
head, under the dshaulok. Above this flows to half way the leg a double tail,
the size of a man's thumb, covered with velvet and ornamented at the end with a
thick fringe of black silk. Married women divide this tail, bringing it over
the shoulders on each side, but girls suffer it to hang down the back. Round
this tail hangs, down to the knee, a kind of string, with all sorts of
varicoloured fringes, corals,, beads and other things which make a jingling
noise. They also wear a cap under the dshaulok, which, round the face, is
ornamented and hung full with little, silver coins or medals. 'Sultanas or
princesses,' says Took, and daughters of illustrious persons, distinguish
themselves by the necks of the heron put into the hair, raised into an ornament
upon the head, in the shape of a horn, and the plumage is very beautiful.
These, also, wear silk clothes, or rich stuffs, or fine cloth set off with gold
lace and loops, or faced with fur; and even velvets are very common with this
class of ladies.

The Kirguese are Mahomedans, which religion, they say, they brought with them
from Turkestan; they, therefore, take as many wives as they can rob or pay for;
'and many,' says Took, keep concubines, who are treated, in every respect,
like wives, their children also, being reputed legitimate. The moderate price
for a marriageable girl, to be taken as a first wife, is about fifty horses,
twenty or twenty-five cows, a hundred sheep, a few camels, or else a slave,
with a cuirass, or coat of mail. The poorer sort find wives at a cheaper rate,
and the rich pay much dearer. The second wife of a married man costs much more
than the first, the third and following still more. Common people, of course,
are obliged to be contented with one wife, and think themselves very well off,
if they can get that one, as they are often under the necessity of stealing her
from some of the neighboring nations. The Kalmuck women are the most sought
after by the Kirguese, conceiving that nature has endowed them with singular
advantages for pleasure, and that they preserve the marks of youth longer than
the women of other nations; insomuch that the rich, are very willing to marry
them, if they can be prevailed on to embrace Mahomedanism; on the contrary,
they hold the Persian women in so little estimation, that they give such as
they take in marriage to their slaves. The espousals consist in a public
declaration of the agreement made between the contracting parties and then a
priest repeats a prayer. The evening before a woman is sent for to shave off
all her hair but that of her head, and on the day of marriage she is carried in
a carpet to the bridegroom's tent, and the wedding celebrated in a hut built on
purpose by the bride's father. Previous to consummation also, the girl is
carried about on a carpet to her companions, to take leave of them, in which
ceremony, she is attended by several others singing all the way. If,
unfortunately, it is discovered that she was not a maid when married, the
guests, the day after, kill the bridegroom's saddle-horse, tear his
wedding garment in pieces and ill-treat the bride. In this case, the
father-in-law is obliged to give satisfaction to the offended husband; but, on
the contrary, if all is right, the rejoicings continue for several days,
nothing is thought of but eating and drinking, dancing, singing, chatting,
wrestling, horse-racing and shooting at a mark. At the two last-mentioned
diversions, considerable bets are made, and the new-married couple give prizes
to the conquerors, of shewy apparel, trinkets and sometimes horses. On breaking
up the festivities, the guests make presents of cattle and other things to the
married pair.

Such as have more than one wife, give each a separate jourt, or tent, where
she brings up her children after her own liking. The more children they have,
the happier they esteem themselves, and are the more honored by their
husbands; whilst such as prove barren, are so little thought of, that the
husband often makes them the servants of those who increase his family. The
rich and great give pompous names to their children; such as Nour Hali, or the
great light; Ir Hali, or Erali, the exalted man; Do Hali, the powerful
friend; Batyr or Bagatyr, the hero; Temir Ir, the man of iron; Beg-Hali, the
powerful prince, etc.

According to Mahomedan custom, it is difficult to see their women; the richer
Kirguese have a separate tent for their wives and one for themselves. They are
zealous enough in their faith, yet very ignorant, having but few Mahomedan
priests among them. Their horde, however, has now an achan or chief priest, who
generally goes about with the khan.

In their way of living, they observe strictly the law of Mahomet, of course,
they eat no impure cattle. Of wild animals they eat only the antilope, the
step-horse and the different kinds of deer. This meat composes their chief
food, though they, now, accustom themselves to food made of flour and groats,
which they procure from the Russians by bartar. In eating such things, they mix
them with sour milk or the spirituous extraction from mares milk, called kumyss.

Took, who frequently speaks from the authority of Gmelin, who traveled into
Siberia some years before Dr. Pallas, and as such, I shall often quote him,
says, that mutton is their ordinary winter-food, and they will live on it for
many months together. At times, they will eat other food, but it is only at
occasional festivals and for the sake of variety. In winter, they drink broth,
to quench their thirst, and from the quantity of boiled meat they use, have
plenty of this liquor; they are fond of fat, regaling themselves often on suet
or butter, which they eat without bread or any dressing. They are, in general,
extravagant eaters, or, more properly, devourers; four men, returned from
hunting, often consuming, at one meal, a whole sheep and leaveing nothing but
the bones.

They smoke tobacco to excess, as do all the Tartars. Men, women and children,
all smoke and take snuff, which latter, they keep in little horns, fastened to
their girdle. Excepting kumyss and arrack, they have no inebriating liquor; for
this reason, they smoke till they grow giddy, swallowing the smoke, that they
may attain that end the sooner. They use Chinese pipes when they can get them,
but at other times, and for common use, have a contrivance of their own; they
take the tibia or leg-bone of a sheep, and cutting off the knob at one end,
take out the marrow, and make a hole in the side at the other end, near the
knob, like to that which the lips are are applied to in a german-flute. When
they would smoke, they introduce a wad of wool into the tube and thrust it up
to the abovementioned hole; the design of this is, to prevent the tobacco,
with which the tube is filled, from choking up the hole, which is the
mouth-piece to this extraordinary pipe. At the end, where the knob was cut off,
they light the tobacco with touchwood, drawing the smoke into their mouths, by
the little lateral hole through the wool, and they suck with so much force,
that a great quantity of smoke comes out at their nostrils: the rest they
swallow. Each person takes three or four whiffs of this kind, and then passes
the pipe to his next neighbor, who does the same and sends it round; but they
have an invention still more ingenious for a smoking party. Having found a
place convenient for lying down upon the ground, one of the company makes water
in the center of this spot, to settle the earth and make it soft and fit to
receive a hole, which they make with the handle of a whip; in this hole they
put the tobacco, lighting it with touchwood, and lying all round it flat on
their bellies; A KALMUCK SMOKING PARTY.
every smoker then thrusts, obliquely, a hollow cabbage-stalk into the
moistened earth, in such a manner, that the extremity may touch the tobacco at
the bottom of the hole, and in this attitude they smoke at their ease, without
any inconvenience to each other. By this means, all their heads are in a cloud
of tobacco-smoke, which; to them, is a great luxury and intoxicates them all in
a short time.

The habitations of the Kirguese are portable tents, made of felt, like those
of the Kalmucks, only larger and more neat; the fire is made in the center,
directly under the opening left in the roof. Round the fire, they spread pieces
of felt, Persian carpets, or fur-cushions. The wealthy, have the inside of
their tents hung with different colored stuffs, and not unfrequently with
silk. The leather bottles and the several chests and boxes, are ranged round
the side of the tent, and their arms, saddles, bridles, bed-cloaths, etc. hung
up over them.

As the Aimaks, or principal families of this nation, love to keep together,
their camps contain a great number of huts or tents and consequently take up a
large space of ground. The residence of the khan is surrounded by near a
thousand tents; but, on the other hand, one may travel fifty or sixty miles,
without seeing a single habitation. They are commonly changing their situation,
both in summer and winter, for the sake of pasturage; but, the aimaks first
agree with one another not to settle too near together. Their tents are very
cold in winter, as their fire consists of nothing but the dung of cattle,
dried.

The rarer priests are among the Kirguese, the more numerous are the sorcerers.
They have, as I learnt, five different sorts, one sort prophesies from books
and from the stars, which they do in a scientific way, without any private show
of pecuniary motives; these are called Fal^scha. There is, also, a sort of
fortune tellers among them, called Jauruntschi, who, from the shoulder blade of
a sheep, foretell future events and answer all questions. They say, this
shoulder blade should be cleared from the skin and flesh, not with the teeth,
but with the mouth, otherwise it is unfit for the black-art. When a question is
put to one of these fortune tellers, he directs his mind to some thought and
lays the blade-bone on the fire, till the flat-side gets several rents and
chops with the heat, and foretells from the marks and lines so left. They are
said to be able to tell at what distance an absent person is. They tell you,
that a party of Kalmucks, who had once such a fortune tellers among them,
committed a considerable robbery on the Kirguese, and that a party of the
latter, who had also a fortune tellers among them too, was exhorted by him to
pursue the enemy; but the Kalmuck fortune tellers was so experienced in his art,
that he gave seasonable notice to his countrymen of the approach of the
Kirguese, and urged them to fly. When the Kirguisian fortune tellers thus found
he could not compass his design, he is said to have made use of the following
stratagem. He ordered his party to saddle their horses, with the front of the
saddle backwards, and set on them in this manner with their backs to the horses
heads; by this means, the Kalmucks were lead into an error, for their
fortune tellers advised them to go on steadily and gently, as there was no
danger, the Kirguese having their backs turned toward them. Thus were they
overtaken by the Kirguese and made prisoners. I heard this tale from a Kirguese
himself, but am not accountable for it is credibility.

A third kind of sorcerers is called Bakscha, and great confidence is placed in
them. When their advice is asked, they demand a selected horse, sheep or buck,
as a sacrificial victim. The bakscha then begins his magic hymns and to beat
(as do the Laplanders) a kind of magic drum (kobig) hung with gingling rings,
jumping and making many violent motions with his body, for half an hour. He
then orders the victim to be brought forth and slain, catches the blood in a
particular vessel, takes the skin for himself, and, the flesh being eaten by
those who are present, gathers the bones, paints them red and blue, and throws
them from him toward the west, where he also pours the blood of the animal.
After this, he jumps about again, for some time longer, and then gives the
desired answer.

Another kind of magicians, Ramtscha, are those who pour fat or butter in the
fire and prophesy by the color of the flame. On such occasions, they also
immolate a victim and make use of conjurations: but this sort of witchcraft is
in very little repute. There are, likewise, wizzards and witches (Dshaadugar)
who enchant the slaves and prisoners, so that they commonly lose their way,
upon their flight, and fall into the hands of their proprietors again; or, if
they should escape, fall, soon after, into Kirguisian slavery. These pull out
some of the hair from the captiv's head, ask his name and set him in the middle
of a tent over the out-spread cinders of the hearth, which are strewed with
salt. This done, the witch begins her spell, during which, the prisoner is
thrice to go backwards; the witch then spits on each of his footsteps and,
every time, runs out at the door; at last, she strews a little of the ashes, on
which the prisoner stands, upon his tongue, and thus ends the enchantment. The
Jaikian Cossacks firmly believe, that, if a prisoner tells his true name, the
witchcraft takes an infallible effect.

The numerous Kirguese live far more unconstrained than the Kalmucks, who
acknowledge so many little despots among them. Every Kirguese lives like a free
lord, and, on this account, they are less dangerous as foes; yet, every aimak,
or family, has it is chief, to whom all the relations and dependants pay a
voluntary obedience. Those who have most subjects and dependants, take the
title of Khans and Sultans. They have, also, other degrees of rank. Certain
nobles they call Bu, some other honorable persons of ancient extraction,
Chodsha, and some others, Murses. The khan, elected and placed over a small
Kirguisian horde, has but little power, unless he can acquire it by his wealth
and liberality. It is not he that can decide disputes and contentions among his
people, these are determined by a certain, annual assembly of the elders and
chiefs of families. If they divide into parties or are threatened by some war,
they call together a democratic council and elect one of the elders or chiefs,
for their general. 'The great and wealthy,' says Took, live perfectly in the
same manner as the rest of the people and are remarkable only for the numerous
train, that accompanies them in their cavalcades, and the quantity of huts
which surround their quarters, inhabited by their wives, their children or
their slaves. The great men treat the common people as brethren, and as all the
Kirguese are equally free, these latter show no great marks of respect to them;
since every one, immediately on becoming rich, is as great as the best of them.
In all the tents, the common people place themselves by the side of the nobles,
without the least ceremony, eat with them, and say what they please before
them. When a superior bids them do any thing, they execute his orders, if they
like those orders. Although the commands of the Khan are not executed with the
most scrupulous exactness, they treat him with the profoundest veneration,
looking on his person as sacred. Nour Hali, the reigning khan of one of the
hordes, is confirmed in his sovereignty by the court of Petersburg; he is an
equitable, discreet prince and strictly devoted to Russia. His property
consists in about a thousand horses, four hundred cows, two hundred camels,
four thousand sheep and several hundred goats, so that in respect to riches
alone he holds a rank but little distinguished, and as he is obliged to form
tabounes, or herds of cattle for a number of princes, to enable them to make
some figure, and his numerous family and slaves, and the frequent visits he
receives, occasions a great consumption of cattle, and as he enjoys no revenue
at all, it will be ever imposible for him to a mass a large fortune;
notwithstanding this, he makes a much greater figure than any one of his horde,
and the presents he obtains from the court of Russia contribute greatly to the
support of his dignity. His residence is composed of a vast number of huts;
those of state are very richly adorned. His family, as well as himself, are
always dressed in cloth of gold or silver, or velvets, and his person is
constantly surrounded by the elders of the nation. The title of the khan is
Taghsir Ghanim, or Taghsir Padschaim; his wives are called simply Ghanim; the
princes, his sons, bear the title of Taghsir Saltan, and the princesses that of
Ghanim Kai, daughters of the khan. The present khan has four wives and eight
concubines; the former are sprung from rich and ancient families of the
Kirguese, but the concubines are either taken from the common people or slaves,
bought from the Kalmucks, on account of their beauty. Beg Hali, one of his
sons, is khan of the Airaklian Troughmenians, and Saltan Pri Hali, another of
them, is chief of the other Troughmenians; excepting the two youngest, all the
princes are married to daughters of the principal Kirguese, being already in
the rank of elders, in the different ulusses of both hordes, a uluss being a
society of several families, who keep carefully together for the sake of
preserving their descent pure and unmixed. These alliances and the dignities of
his sons, contribute much to the power of Nour Hali. As the princesses, by the
laws of the koran are forbidden to marry any relation, they are all yet single,
and some of them begin to grow old, yet the khan, through pride, will not
dispose of them, at even a handsome price to any suitor that is not descended
of illustrious blood. The people are not permitted to see the wives and
daughters of their khan; they never appear in public but when changing their
residence, and then they go on horses and camels, in their richest dress and
ornaments. Whenever a Kirguese, on horseback, happens to meet the khan in the
step or desert, he dismounts, and advancing in an oblique direction toward
him, says aloud Alla arbaschou! i. e. God give thee prosperity! After this
salutation, the khan strikes him gently on the shoulder with his hand or whip,
and this passes for a sort of benediction.

Though they are forbidden to steal, or carry off men or cattle, they are so
far from thinking these depredations shameful in any way, that they glory in
them, boasting to one another of the exploit and the extraordinary adventures
accompanying it, as if it were some courageous act of heroism, or some
honorable and glorious feat of chivalry. The circumjacent nations are most
frequently exposed to their incursions, but the Kalmucks are their most
favorite objects, though the risk is the greatest: as for the Russians, they
are seldom molested.

They commit their petty robberies in small gangs, and if, upon the Russian
frontiers, they drive away a stock of horses and seize some single men and
women, it is commonly about the time when they quit that district with their
flocks; for as long as they feed their cattle in their vicinity, they take care
that no disorders are committed, least the innocent and guiltless, who cannot
get off as expeditiously with their flocks, should suffer for the misdemeanors
of the perpetrators. They commonly suit their periods of robbing so well, as
never to be caught. It has been remarked, that their neighborhood is most
dangerous in those places where the step, on the Russian frontiers, is flat and
open; not in their mountainous and woody steps, where they conceal themselves
and lie in wait for opportunities. The Asiatic caravans who pass through the
insecure steps, inhabited by these plunderers, to the Russian trading towns,
gain over the aimaks of the district they pass through, to their favor, by
presents of goods; in which case they appoint them an escort, for which they
are paid from ten to twelve rubles, or about forty-eight shillings English, per
camel.

'Besides the captures,' says Took, which accident throws in their way, they
go out sometimes singly in search of adventures, and at other times in small
parties, having at their head, but too often, some great lord of their nation.
When they have a mind to pillage any caravan, in their own territories or
beyond them, several ulusses join together for that purpose, entering into
negotiations and making conventions in form, that they may be more certain of
the predatory project. In this sort of skirmish, it often happens, that a great
number of the Kirguese are made prisoners and carried away captive by the
caravans, and if any are killed in the fight, not the smallest enquiry is ever
made of what is become of them. In trifling seizures, every one keeps what he
gets, but considerable and important spoils are divided, according to previous
contract, or as the exigencies of the case may require. Each adventurer keeps
the cattle that fall to his share and, generally, the women he has taken, as
the buying off a woman does great honor to the ravisher. They yield up the
slaves and merchandise to the more wealthy, who give them cattle in exchange.
It is no uncommon thing to sell their slaves to a neighboring nation,
especially if these slaves are Russians, for as they are known to be laborious
and accustomed to agriculture, they fetch a great price, and it is the interest
of the Kirguese to get rid of them as soon as possible, knowing what they are
to expect, if any Russians are found among their captives.

The court of Russia has taken various measures to put a check to these
terrible disorders. A line of intrenchments and redoubts has been built along
their frontiers. Wherever the river does not prevent their excursions, they fix
a number of sticks, with both ends in the earth, bent in the same manner as
those in some countries for catching thrushes; these sticks, or wands, are
placed from one redoubt to another, so that the patrole can see, at once, by
such as are wanting or deranged, whether any Kirguese, (who come always on
horseback), have passed the frontiers, and, on such discovery, mount and pursue
them immediately. The Russian shepherds are armed and always on horseback, to
be on their guard and defend themselves, when necessary. If, notwithstanding
all these precautions, a robbery is committed, or a caravan bound to Russia is
pillaged on the desert of the Kirguese, the Russian commandants demand
restitution from the khan; and if neither he nor the lords of the nation, can
bring the people to consent to it, a troop of Baschirians is dispatched
immediately into the horde, and the first Kirguisian uluss they come to, is
obliged to conduct them to that which committed the robbery, or be answerable
for the damage. The Baschirians then take with them a certain number of
Kirguese and cattle, and bring them to Orenberg, where they are detained, till
a state of the loss can be ascertained. This being done, the overplus is sent
back again, as soon as the Russian prisoners, taken in the engagement, are
restored. When any single robbers are caught, or a small party together, they
are first punished and then shut up in Ostrogs of the fortresses, where
prisoners condemned to public works are confined.

Was it not for their depredations, the Kirguese, would not be so formidable.
So little sanguinary are they, that they would rather make a slave of a man
than put him to death. Whilst their slaves are faithful, they never treat them
cruelly. As they are all passionately fond,' continues Took, 'of uncontrouled
liberty, and as every man can acquire a stock sufficient for his own support,
not one of them can bear the idea of being a servant to any of his countrymen;
they are all brethren and have the resolution to preserve their condition as
such, which is the reason that the rich are obliged to have yasowres, or
slaves, from other nations. The more of these a Kirguisian lord possesses, the
greater figure he makes, and the more care is taken of his flocks. Even the
courtiers and domestics of the great are all slaves; the khan keeps about
fifty. Slavery, among this people, is no great hardship, to such as are once
accustomed to their way of life; for the masters treat their slaves as if they
were their relations, supplying them with all the necessaries of life, and
giving them the same provisions they eat themselves. A prisoner, on the
contrary, who cannot bring himself to adopt their method of living, fares but
ill among them. Attempts made to escape, never fail to draw on the delinquents
such cruel treatment, as often costs them their lives; involving in their
calamity such unfortunate women, as, calculated by sentiments of humanity, have
contributed to favor their desertion.

As all of them are not in a condition to afford so many slaves as are
necessary to look after their flocks, the rich give their superfluous sheep and
cattle to the poor; who, in return, tend the herds and flocks of their
benefactors. If the cattle of a Kirguese multiply rapidly, he considers it as a
secret suggestion to beneficence, and distributes them largely to his more
indigent neighbors. So long as his benefactor remains in good circumstances,
the other is never expected to make any return; but if his cattle should be
stolen, or diminished by contagious distempers, the person whom his bounty set
up, in the time of his prosperity, restores him what he received, and often
adds to them some of the young produced by the animals whilst he was the
depository of his neighbor's beneficence; even though, by so doing, he should
reduce himself to the state of indigence he was in before. This courteous and
honorable manner of disposing of their property, puts numbers of them above
the fear of want; rendering, at the same time, their flocks and herds, as it
were, immortal; for the more they give away in the time of affluence, the more
abundantly they receive on a change of fortune.

For the homage of the Kirguese to the crown of Russia, that court protects
them against all invaders, and, in commerce and social life, affords them the
same advantages as to the Russians, gives them the quiet possession of their
country, disturbing neither their constitution, their laws, their religion nor
the trade they carry on with their neighbors. They pay no kind of tax or
tribute; in short, they are under no restriction or constraint whatever; but
they are bound to be friendly to all Russians and all nations in alliance with
the crown, and consider the enemies of Russia as their own. To guarantee their
obligations, they send certain principal people (Amanati) to Orenburg, as
hostages, who receive an allowance, stipulated by themselves, of fifteen
kopeeks, or seven-pence halfpenny, English, per day, for every hostage, and
five kopeeks for each domestic, living very well for this small sum. If the
Khan goes to Orenburg, he must first ask permission of the governor, and is
then received like a sovereign prince, a body-guard is appointed him, and the
physicians of Orenburg, are obliged to furnish remedies, gratis, to such of
their sick as apply for them; but, notwithstanding all this, and in defiance of
their homage and their treaties, they cannot but give way to their
characteristic passion for plunder and rapine; if any thing restrains them, it
is either the armed force, which Russia, at times, is obliged to employ against
them, the personal interest and advantage they draw from commerce, or the
influence of their chiefs, who have a juster sense of decency and decorum.

We find no school among them, so that a few only know how to write their
language, which is said to be a dialect of the Tartarian, pretty pure. The
Kirguese have a frank and prepossessing air. In their conduct toward
strangers, says Pallas, they are affable, yet always interested and crafty;
even when they visit any Russian trading town, they will make trifling presents
to people, in order to ask them for more important ones. They have a sharp but
not a fierce look and smaller eyes than the Tartars; they do not want good,
natural sense, are greedy of danger and high-spirited; but, at the same time,
fond of their ease and voluptuous. Their women have the reputation of being
good economists, tender and compassionate toward their slaves, whose escape
they strive to favor, even by exposing themselves to various inconveniences
and the rude treatment of their husbands.

Armed as the Kirguese always are, they are but inexpert warriors; they are,
however, good bowmen, their muskets have no locks, but are fired with a match;
they cannot discharge them on horseback, but dismount, lie on the ground and
rest the barrel of the gun on a fork fastened to it. It is easy to imagine that
they, sometimes, meet with an enemy that has not patience enough to wait for
all these maneuvres. The instant they perceive that nothing is to be done, or
that they are beaten; in spite of commanders or military law, every man takes
the shortest way home; but, when they have to engage with an enemy as little
practiced as themselves in the art of war, they are almost always victorious.

Their laws are few, but founded on the koran and the usages of their
ancestors. Starchans or elders are set over the ulusses, and the Khan's
decision is the last appeal. A murderer, for two years after the commission of
the crime, is at the mercy of the relations of the person slain; who, if they
can lay hold of him in that time, may put him to death; if he escapes and is
inclined to return home, he may purchase that permission, by paying 100 horses,
a slave and two camels, to the family of the deceased. In lieu of horses, he
may give sheep, five sheep being equivalent to one horse. He that kills a
woman, an infant, or a slave, pays half the foregoing fine, as, also, any one
that makes a woman miscarry; but in all these cases the relations and friends
of the culprit endeavor to make as good a bargain as they can with the injured
party, who generally remit a part of the penalty. Maiming a man is reckoned as
half-murder. For a thumb cut off, the criminal pays a hundred sheep, the little
finger is valued at twenty. The loss of the ears is such an abomination, that a
man without them, though he should have lost them in the most innocent manner,
is not even tolerated among them. Whoever commits a robbery on his countrymen,
restores nine times the value. None are allowed to take an oath in their own
cause, and if the accused can get no brother or friend to swear for him, he is
proceeded against as guilty.

Their manner of salutation is like that of the Tartars, in squeezing each
others right hand between both hands, and saying, Salom malikom, peace be with
thee! to which the other replies, Malikom salom, with thee be peace! They do
not uncover their heads. Old acquaintance, however, says Pallas, embrace each
KIRGUISIAN HOSPITALITY.
other with great warmth and cordiality. After the first salutations, they
present their guests, with the choicest viands they have. To do the honors of
their house, when they have much company, they commonly kill a sheep, for
making bischbarmak, or the five-finger dish, which is a sort of hash, made of
fat meat chopped and stewed, and is eaten with the fingers. This stew, they
present to their friends by cramming handfulls of it into their mouths, and the
person whose mouth they so fill, eats it as greedily, as if he wished to devour
the hand that crams him. When the mouthful, thus given, is too large, the eater
empties half of it into his hands, till he has gorged the other half, and,
after this, swallows the rest. This honor is done to all the great men of the
nation, when they eat in state, and the same politeness is shown, by them, to
their inferiors, as often as they treat them; even the Khan himself condescends
so far as to stuff bischmark into the mouth of such as are admitted to the
honor of dining with him. If a stranger has for his friend any great man of
the nation, or any private person known to be rich, he may traverse all the
hordes, in full security, with him, and may trust to his protection better than
to a military escort. Numbers of Russians avail themselves of this disposition
of the Kirguese and carry on very lucrative branches of traffic, under the
protection of some distinguished man.

The property or wealth of the Kirguese consists in breeding of cattle, of
which horses and sheep are the most numerous; they have a much smaller number
of camels and very badly are they stocked with great cattle, as they cannot
live on the steps in wintertime, without being fed. They make use of cows to
transport their tents, etc. from one place to another. They have no other
camels but those of two bunches. As much as I could learn of the breeding of
these animals I did; they bring the male to the female in wintertime, when she
is most disposed to receive him. The male being brought, she falls down on her
knees, and the male dropping upon his hind-legs and raising his forelegs quite
upright, is above an hour engaged. Like other animals, when with young, the
female camel shuns the male, and, if pursued, sets up a roar. They carry their
young a whole year, and fuckle them for two years; on this account the
propagation of camels is exceedingly slow. Wealthy Kirguese keep camels for
milk, which is rich, bluish, thick and very pleasant in taste. It is considered
as salubrious, never yields any cream and, if sour, is said to ferment better
and make a better spirit, than mare's milk. In winter, camels require more
attendance and care than any other cattle. They cloth them with felt and
rushmats, and, if the cold is severe, stretch felts and mats between the tents,
to shelter them from the weather.

Kirguisian horses are but little different from those of the Kalmucks, except
that they are higher. In wildness and swiftness, they are equal to the former
and are accustomed to scrape out their food, in winter, from underneath the
snow. They divide their horses into certain stocks; each stock has one
stallion; and, such male-colts as are not kept for this purpose, are made
geldings. This stallion is as a shepherd to the stock or brood of mares, and
keeps them together.

Their sheep are, without exception, the largest and most monstrous of all
wool-cattle, they are higher than a newborn calf and so strong and heavy, that
such as are full-grown, in a proper season, will weigh between four and five
puds, that is, about 180 lb. English. In their form, they resemble Indian
sheep, have crooked ram-heads, pouching under-lips, large, hanging ears, and
often single or double warts about their necks. Instead of a tall, they have,
on the rump, a great lump of sat, which will weigh from thirty to forty pounds,
and yield from twenty to thirty pounds of tallow. Their wool is coarse, long
and mixed with hair behind. Their color chiefly brown, or spotted with brown,
and some are white. The rams are all horned, so are the wether; some have from
four to six horns, like those of Iceland. The rams are left with the stock
during the whole summer, but, from the month of April to October, they bind a
felt round their body, to prevent their coupling. During winter, they seek
their food underneath the snow, and eat the snow instead of drinking. The ewes
generally bring forth two lambs at a time, and as there is no disease among
them, they are left to the care of nature. The flesh is sweeter,' says Took,
'than that of the common, European sheep, and men of distinguishing palates,
perceive in it an aromatic flavor of different, odoriferous kinds of wormwood.
The lambs are esteemed so delicate, that a certain number are sent yearly from
Orenburg to Petersburg, for the court-kitchen. This sheep is the ovis laticauda
of Linneus.

Lambskins, in this country, are in the highest estimation and make an
important article in Kirguisian commerce; they are of various colors, white,
black, blue, gray, spotted and fox-colour; the best are waved, slain, as if
varnished, and resemble a piece of flowered damask. To increase the quantity of
these skins and, at the same time, to render them larger, the Kirguess few
linen about the new-fallen lambs, which preserves the wool sleek and renders it
waving. When the lamb is grown so large as to burst the linen, they kill it for
the skin.

They have, also, many goats among their sheep, whom they rear only for their
milk. These animals, also, have an odd appearance, being mostly without horns,
with long hair hanging neatly about the limbs: their ears hang down and their
coats are spotted with various colors.

Besides a shepherd-life, the Kirguese employ themselves much in hunting and
have, thus, an opportunity of extirpating both foxes and wolves, that are such
enemies to their flocks. I have already mentioned, I think, that they train up
eagles for this purpose. On the extensive steps, they hunt on horseback. In
order to catch antelopes, who, in winter, chiefly frequent reedy districts,
they shorten the reeds in particular places, which, as the animal leeps
through, wounds him in the belly and renders him easily to be caught.

This nation generally reaches an old age and are, till the last year of life,
sprightly and without infirmities. Their most common complaints, are colds,
fevers, shortness of breath and the venereal disease, which they call
kowrousaslan. I could not learn that they were ever afflicted, with those
burning fevers so dangerous among the Kalmucks, but the tschitschak, or
smallpox, has shown itself among them at times, yet without committing any
great ravages. They are, however, so afraid of this disorder, that as soon as
the eruption shows itself, they forsake the patient, putting down his food at a
distance and leaving him to fetch it; and was a person, in this disorder, to go
near any of their tents, they would think themselves justifiable in shooting
him.

They bury their dead as do the Mahomedans. The grave is but shallow, in which
they lay the corpse full-dressed, cover it with branches and then with earth.
At the head, which is always to the north, they put in a stick which is kept
perpendicular till the tumulus is raised, beaten solid and completed; this
stick is then drawn out and an opening thus left into the grave. In stoney
districts, they lay a pile of stones over it. Where is the wonder then that we
should meet with so many tumuli in all the steps, which must continually
increase, especially as they like to bury their friends in such places where
some holy men are said to have been buried before, near some metsched, or house
of prayer, and generally where there are many old graves.

'When a man dies,' says Took, they cut his best garment to pieces and
distribute the fragments among his friends, who lay them up as memorials of him.

Circumcision, they never omit. The Abdals, or circumcisers go up and down
through the hordes, to perform this operation on the children of the faithful,
and as every one, receiving this professional character, i^ obliged to give the
abdal a sheep for his trouble, these people have always considerable stocks.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

