THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE.

VOL. II.

THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE: OR, The New System Illustrated. INSCRIBED To Mrs.
EUGENIA STANHOPE, EDITOR OF LORD CHESTERFIELD's LETTERS. By COURTNEY MELMOTH.
Versatile ingenium.

VOL. II.

LONDON, Printed for G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW, in Paternoster Row. 1776.

THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE, etc.
LETTER LIX. Mrs. LA MOTTE to Mrs. HOMESPUN.
Madam,
I AM sorry to refuse to the worthy Mr. HOMESPUN (who has, I perceive, been
obliged to return without his wife) a request, which I very plainly see was
made to me in the tenderness of his heart.

You do me but justice in supposing that I will keep your unhappy secret, as
you very properly call it; for it is no small infelicity to make a secret of
any sort necessary to the fame of a woman, and the peace of a whole family,
whose connections would all be dishonored by a disclosure of it.

As far, therefore, as my silence can contribute to your domestic tranquillity,
you may depend upon me; though I cannot but think, she who has confidence
enough to abuse her husband, should have policy enough to conceal the
particulars of her crime from a confident; since I know not whether the very
knowledge of such circumstances is not an insult to her virtue.

Your poor husband gave us, yesterday, as usual, an admirable discourse, but
there was in it some softening sentiments relating to the pure pleasures of
married felicity, which I could not but imagine were suggested by his own
situation: he loves you, HARRIET, most fondly, and I could not avoid giving to
sentiments, which I connected with certain others, the tribute of a tender
tear. -- All the parishioners, and especially the talkative part of them,
express their astonishment, some by whispers, others by winks, and all by
looks, that Mrs. HOMESPUN should continue, where she has neither relations nor
acquaintances; and it is easy to see that Mr. HOMESPUN is the only unsuspicious
person in the village; while he, wrapped up in the integrity of his soul, and
guarded by his good opinion of you, supposes you will soon regret his absence,
and return to him.

After service he drank tea with me, and with tears in his eyes first urged my
going to BUXTON, and then, (finding my refusal established,) that I should at
least try the effect of my entreaties to invite you back: he even went so far
as to hint, with all a father's glow upon his cheek, at the little necessary
preparations against the day in which you are expected to present him with a
testimony of your tenderness. There are various maternal cautions, said he, you
know, my dear Mrs. LA MOTTE, to be taken in such interesting situations; and,
perhaps, the constant bustles of that watering-place, may for awhile, lull to
sleep, or rather agitate her into forgetfulness of those cares that generally
alarm the provident apprehension of her, who is, in a very few weeks, to be a
mother.

This was too powerful a painting: I rose to conceal my sympathy: he pressed me
by the hand, in visible disorder, and, protesting that he left his fate to my
management, saluted me, in his honest way, and went to perform the last offices
to a poor woman (ALICE WELDON) who died last Wednesday in childbed of the
babe, whose father is not yet acknowledged. I told your husband, HARRIET, I
would exert my power, without telling him that I had long lost my influence
over you.

As you were not touched by my former letters -- particularly one of them -- I
despair of moving you by the present, having no new arguments to offer: nor
should I, indeed, have troubled you at all, but that I did it in compliance to
your much-injured, and my ever-esteemed friend, Mr. HOMESPUN, whom I admire,
chiefly, for the very simplicity, to which you have made objection. By the
ardour with which he speaks of that Mr. SEDLEY, upon all occasions, I perceive
that you have not been seduced by a novice, and yet I cannot possibly imagine
how he has contrived to make the husband his friend, at the very time that he
has betrayed the wife into the thorny paths of personal impurity. Be this as it
may, he must be a very artful creature, and, exclusively of my not going into
the same lodging with the polluted HARRIET, I would not choose to lay myself
liable, even to the insult of being the ridicule of a man, who, doubtless,
asperses, even more than he destroys.

It may not, however, be amiss to observe, in the conclusion of this letter,
that, if your return to this place is not speedy, it will probably be attended
with consequences, which no after-penitence can possibly atone for.

I am, Madam, Your humble servant, C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER LX. From the Same to the Same.
Dear Madam,
MR. HOMESPUN is extremely ill, and much distressed by your refusal to return.
I have revolved the affair over in my mind, and I see, that, if you come on the
receipt of this letter, very probable excuses may yet be made, and all may be
happy again.

You are still dear to me, HARRIET, and I wish for nothing so warmly as to
embrace you, to go with you to our accustomed walk in the meadow, opposite your
paradise of a cottage. I miss you more and more every day -- every hour. Come
then, my dear, name the time, and Mr. HOMESPUN and I will both meet you at the
halfway hut, where we were so happy in a party last summer; he desires you
will take a chaise (after you have acquainted us) to that place.

I can no longer be without you; I want you to sit by my side, near your
favorite window, round which the jessamine clambers -- and it is now in full
blow -- to work with me, while HORACE reads, as he used to do, some agreeable
author. We have made alterations in my garden: there is a new summer house,
actually surrounded with roses, sweet-briar, and eglantine; and I want you to
approve of this. In short, I wish for you, on all accounts, both moral and
entertaining. Hasten then, dear HARRIET, to your

C. LA MOTTE,

LETTER LXI. From the Same to the Same.
Mrs. HOMESPUN,
YOUR husband is in his bed, brought thither by the evident indifference of a
wife, on whom he doats. What course this illness may take, or where it may end,
I know not: the people here, however, do not scruple to attribute it to the
absence and strange conduct of Mrs. HOMESPUN. Since his sickness, which I do
assure you is real, I have considered well the part I am to take in this
affair; and, in the hope of restoring a worthy member to the community, by
opening his eyes to the demerit of the object for which he sighs, I am not
certain whether I shall not be justified in disclosing to him that which will
induce him to change his anxiety into contempt.

I beg you will think of this, and (as I shall wait your answer before I
resolve) allow yourself to prevent what must make your infamy public. As to
your equivocations, they have no weight with me, and are really too transparent
to cheat a child. It is evident you dote on your seducer.

Farewell. C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER LXII. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
FANNY is not worse, and therefore my spirits (which always rise and fall with
the pains and pleasures of my friends) are equal to the delightful task of
corresponding with my very dear Lady LUCY.

In my last I only slightly, and in general terms, mentioned the patrons of my
happiness: let me now become particular. My father has formed himself by such a
standard, that his excellencies have a dignity peculiar to the dignity of his
manners. He has ever thought proper to include the friendly in the paternal
character; and he inculcates, even to the lowest domestics, a certain sense of
independency; a principle, he says, necessary to be maintained even in
servitude, and from which branches forth a thousand virtues. In society, says
Sir HENRY, subordination is certainly indispensible, according to the present
system; but then it should be considered, that the balance of human affairs is
oftener, much more level than we imagine. If we feed the poor, it is their
labor that accommodates us: if we pay them for their toil, it is that very
toil to which we are indebted for all the softnesses of prosperity: and if we
provide them with a defense against the severity of seasons, and a chamber for
the convenience of their repose, (after they have wearied out their vigor in
our service,) it may be remembered, that, in gratitude for our attention, it is
to them we are indebted for every thing that distinguishes riches from poverty:
to their hands we owe the delicacies of the garden -- the treasures of the
field -- the decorations of the mansion -- the table of plenty -- the robe of
luxury -- and the bed of down.

Acting upon such singularly-noble motives, Sir HENRY, at a proper crisis,
makes each of his children, in some sort, independent -- that is, my dear, he
allots to each of us such a share of fortune in our own hands as is sufficient
to the display and shew-off of the natural disposition. He esteems it necessary
to know the operation of the temper, when it has power to play; this -- says he
-- is not to be known by the common mode of contracting, but of extending: it
is impossible to discover any natural propensity, until opportunity gives
liberty to all the little passions of the stripling, and indulgence gives way
to unshackled inclination.

Educated under such advantages, and the finer polishes of the school given by
a father so venerable and superior; the youthful independent will not turn his
honors, and the precious deposit entrusted to him, to abuse: and, if he does,
even then there are many ways which Sir HENRY has discovered to turn his
deviating conduct into the proper channel. From kindness like this, Lady LUCY,
we are enabled to do nameless occasional little services for the unfortunate;
and by such means learn early to form ourselves into habits of sympathy and
tenderheartedness. I do not put gold into your purses, children, like some
parents, who promise to double the sum if you show it unbroken, and
undiminished at a future period: I do not give it you to hoard up like misers,
nor dissipate like little spendthrifts; but I give it you on purpose to change
into small silver: it is my desire that you should taste early the first of
pleasures: look about you: it is a world of misery, as well as imposition: mark
your objects to the best of your abilities -- be deceived as little as
possible, and double your treasure by decreasing it: for six-penny worth of
silver, gain sixty moments of fair reflection: for the banquet at so cheap a
rate provided to another -- the bread and water of gratitude -- take in
exchange the richer feast of a kind heart: and in this case, my dear children,
which is the greatest gainer? If you must be usurers, put your money out to
such interest; be ambitious of laying it wisely out in the purchase of virtue,
and I will supply you cheerfully with the means.

We were all walking, LUCY, the other morning, by the side of the bath, when a
short, bold, sturdy-looking fellow accosted us for charity. We looked at Sir
HENRY for our cue: Come along, children, said he, that man is both impudent and
able. As we passed by, the fellow drew up his mouth, and shaking a little dirty
bag that he took from his pouch, gingled it over his head, and snapt his
fingers. When we were at some distance -- Take care, dear children, of such
impostors: bestow not the moment you are supplicated: try the temper of the
petitioner: he whom indigence, and the strokes of ill-fortune have not at least
humiliated, is not yet an object of your generosity. As we were going to our
carriage, a decayed veteran, in tattered regimentals, reduced to the knees by
the perils of his profession, was endeavoring to sweep our way with his hat:
little CHARLES ran, without the least hesitation, and gave his bounty. Yes,
said Sir HENRY, there, my dear lad, you could not be deceived: by whatever
means brought about, such a poor wretch must be the mark of liberality.

Opposite, LUCY, to the maxims of the present age, thus do our parents
encourage us in proportion, as we have conduced to the happiness of others; and
for every trifle well-bestowed, we are rewarded with a present fourfold its
value, and that, again, enriched by a smile that shows how strongly the
goodness of the child vibrates on the sensibility of the relation.

It is another happiness peculiar to the retreat of Sir HENRY DELMORE, that
none of its residents are fired by the envy of opposition, or the meannesses of
jealousy: so far the reverse of this, that one is studious to compliment the
other on some excellence fresh acquired, or more perfected: some display of the
heart, newly discovered, or some additional grace of the person that blooms in
the blush, sparkles in the eye, or dimples in the smile.

What, my dear Lucy, can we say to those whose hearts, repugnant to such
principles, turn a deaf ear to the music of domestic concord? Earthly,
grovelling creatures, how I pity them! Warm, however, and alive to this sweetest
harmony, is my elegant Lady SAXBY; she feels the soft impression that is made
in every finer bosom by the hand of a divinity. Long, very long, may this
charming sensation continue! As long may we remain, in serious principle, the
friends -- the admirers -- the improvers of one another!

I am my dear LUCY'S inviolable DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER LXIII. Lady LUCY SAXBY to Miss DELIA DELMORE.
I SHOULD ill deserve the kindnesses you have been pleased to confer upon me,
did I refuse the earliest acknowledgment. I am truly glad to hear Mrs. MORTIMER
is likely to recover, and that you have found such a retreat as is agreeable to
your family, contiguous to the bath.

Ah! Miss DELMORE, what pictures have you drawn -- happy friend -- enviable
DELIA! and yet still, methinks, is there wanting one article -- one principal
figure, to complete your fine and high-colored family-piece. Why, my dear
girl, so forgetful of yourself? Great, as are your present felicities, I am
persuaded they admit addition. There is a passion, my DELIA, that gives the
last fine finish to the bliss of an innocent life: it is the animator of every
other happiness; and I am surprised that a heart so gentle as Miss DELMORE'S
should so long remain unpossessed of it. The pleasures of a pure and mutual
passion would not be unworthy her attention.

Amongst the various characters in your train of slaves, DELIA, is there not
one that can attract you? Hard-hearted girl, how shall we contrive to captivate
you? Surely you terrify the tribe of humble servants! A modern lover, who has
studied only his rotine of rhapsody, and who depends on the repetition, and
arrangement of a certain number of warm words -- his flames and fires, hearts
and darts, thrills and hills, groves and loves, Cupids and stupids -- has no
sort of chance; but when he has rung the changes and chimes till he can do
nothing but ring them over again, he is quite at a stand, can go no farther,
and is lost in his own absurdity, feels his own insignificance, and makes his
ridiculous exit. Will you, however, never be caught?

If the rocks of BUXTON are too barren, pray hasten to your Worcestershire
paradise: your gardens there -- the ancient seat of the DELMORE'S -- contain
every thing auspicious to the belle passion. -- You have thickets of roses,
which may furnish your sighers with similies, and abundance of bowers, where
Cupid may repose on violets: you have beds of primroses to entertain the
Silphids, velvet verdure for the dancing fairies, and lucid water, wherein
Venus may bathe herself in brooks -- But -- I am mistaken, if you now need this
poetical Arcadia. BUXTON rocks have their beauties -- pray, my dear, let me
hear more of this gentleman of birth, rank, and character -- this distinguished
he, whose conversation is so pleasing, instructive, and various; who, at first
sight, has all the ease, firmness, and unembarrassed air of an old
acquaintance, and who presents himself so engaging to a company? Ah! DELIA --
DELIA! my prophecy will yet come to pass; and, if he proves as valuable as you
wish to find him -- I know you wish it, and so don't deny it, DELIA -- the most
animated prayer of my heart is, that it may be speedily necessary to alter my
superscription, whenever I address my fair, and at present, unestablished
correspondent. I am a very happy wife myself, and therefore have the better
right and reason to desire you may be in the same situation. However, be this
as it may, in all states, changes, and transitions,

I am, truly, Your real friend, LUCY SAXBY.

LETTER LXIV. Mrs. LA MOTTE to Mrs. HOMESPUN.
Madam,
YOUR attachment to Mr. SEDLEY is only an aggravation. Your declaring that you
love him, and could sooner die than leave him, is really the cant of a runaway
romp of fifteen, who deserves whipping for her naughtiness. I have done both
writing to, and arguing with you, and have only to give you notice, that, as
Mr. HOMESPUN is now really incapable of his duty, through actual, undissembled
grief, I have come to a resolution (since neither entreaties, nor any humanity
can weigh with you) to acquaint him with every circumstance, nay, to make him a
present of all your letters to me, if you do not arrive at the Parsonage by
Thursday next, which is four days from the date of this. I have hitherto fondly
attempted to soothe your husband's impatience by making apologies: he desires
me to put a letter, written with his own weak hand, into the post: he gave it
me sealed, and I enclose it.

I am, Madam, Your most obedient servant, C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER LXV. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. HOMESPUN. (Enclosed in the
above.)
My dear Wife,
BY some means or other I have caught, as I think it is, a cold, and that has
produced a fever; so that I am obliged (and that must excuse the badness of it)
to write this as I sit up in my bed -- that bed, my dear, of which an equal
part is your property. Though I am not, God be thanked, ill enough to alarm
you, yet I cannot but believe your valuable society would materially accelerate
my return to health, and contribute to my re-establishment. Mrs. LA MOTTE, who
always speaks of you with inconceivable tenderness, has been prevented, as she
says, on account of a sore throat, from being with you; and therefore, as your
company here would be quite a cordial, and as BUXTON is not, perhaps, the
proper place to be in, without a relation, (even though that tie is almost
supplied by the civilities of Mr. SEDLEY, to which worthy gentleman pray tender
my hearty respects,) I could wish you would set off as early after your receipt
of this, as can be made convenient. But I conjure you, nevertheless, not to put
yourself into any hurries, and by all means come in a post-chaise, and by easy
stages; and charge the driver to go easily, and pray reward him for his care.
Never mind the cost of the journey: consider your present delicate situation,
and all the charming hopes -- (part of which now bring the water into my eyes)
-- depending upon it. Therefore come leisurely, and it is very likely, as I
don't indulge fretting under every slight affliction, you may find me
considerably amended on your arrival at our little retreat, which, though I am
just at present not able to enjoy it, is, methinks, prettier this summer than I
imagined it would be: for all the woodbines I planted have thriven wonderfully;
the laylocks, particularly the purple ones, are leafy and blossomed most
luxuriantly; and, what I esteem an addition, an innocent little wren has, even
in this, the first season of my residence, built her nest in the very center of
my arbor between two honeysuckles. I declare I would protect the poor thing,
and preserve to it all the rights of hospitality and good faith, even at the
hazard of my life.

But where am I wandering? You will smile, when I tell you, that, though I
began in great pain, I now feel little or nothing, except a weariness, from the
uncouthness of my posture. Surely the very reflection upon a beloved object is
a charm against misery! What then, and how powerful, must be the reality? I
need not pursue the hint: my best HARRIET is not destitute of sensibility.

I am, her very faithful and affectionate husband, HORACE HOMESPUN.
P. S.
I have a melancholy postscript for my dear HARRIET. Poor Doctor DIGGORY has
been long confined to his bed, and employed by the last post an amanuensis to
acquaint me that he is incapable of using a pen. Poor, good man, how I love and
pity him!



LETTER LXVI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
OH! THORNTON, I wished for difficulties, and they are come pouring upon me
with a vengeance. I am absolutely hemmed in by embarassments: at this moment I
am between a SCYLLA and a CHARYBDIS, and uncommonly skilful must be my
pilotism, or I must split upon the rocks and be wrecked for ever, Never was I,
since I set out a knight errant to fight the world behind my more than
seven-folded shield of dissimulation, so truly in danger of being discovered;
and thou know it is with me, as with what the world calls a much better man,
He that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes Me poor indeed.
But, to come to the point, THORNTON, I am almost at the end of my wits. HORACE
HOMESPUN pines for his absent mate. Mrs. LA MOTTE refuses to come down; and
urges HARRIET to return upon peril of instant discovery. This very hour did I
see such a packet as astonished even me, who am not startled at trifles, LA
MOTTE has written with the pen of a SAPPHO dipped in the ink of JUVENAL -- Such
asperity -- such acumen -- such a sting in the tail of every sentence! HORACE,
too, has written -- written, THORNTON, though bed-ridden -- full of endearment
-- full of care -- full of the husband. I called in upon HARRIET in the very
crisis of my fate; she had the whole packet spread upon the table before her,
and had just put the finishing to an epistle that would have completely ruined
me for ever, had it been sent. I caught it from her with the eagerness of a
lion, and I enclose it for thy inspection, that thou may judge of my
situation; which is not at all mended by HARRIET'S violent declaration of
ungovernable passion and wish to live with me for ever. Oh! that women could
learn, like me, to gratify the passion of the hour, and think no more of it:
but there is no seducing a woman into pleasure, but she is so cursedly
grateful, as to hug the seducer for ever after, without any regard to time or
to place. I have dined, too, at DELMORE'S, and thrice caught the eye of FANNY.
By my soul, the old fire is yet alive in her. I can see it will only be
necessary to nurse the embers, and add fresh fuel. How the duce came she to
marry? and how is it that, being married, she does not admire her husband, who
is one of the finest figures in the creation! -- As for HARRIET -- she must be
sent home to the pedant: there is no enduring either her fondness, or the
perils arising from it. That damned LA MOTTE -- forgive my ill-breeding,
THORNTON; but that confounded woman will be my destruction. Adieu! Adieu! I
must cast about for an expedient.

Yours, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXVII. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE. (Enclosed by SEDLEY in the
above.)
BY all the agonies of an injured and desperate woman, driven to the extreme by
the pangs of conscience, and the violences of love, if you dare to betray me, I
will make you rue the consequence, though I were to expire in the moment
succeeding my revenge. You know my spirit -- then fear it -- dread it --
tremble before it. I will not be discovered without making the discoverer pay
for her treachery, even with the blood of her heart. I have not closed my eyes
since the beginning of the week; I am in a fever: I twice fell against the
wainscoat this afternoon. SEDLEY looks colder than he did, but I love him
better than either fame, fortune, food, or existence: his manner -- his address
-- his figure -- his obligingness, even yet charm me. I pity HORACE -- I love
you -- indeed I do -- I could do any thing for either of you, but leave the
sight of Mr. SEDLEY -- I own -- I own it. Take care then -- do not sport with
me; do not abuse the trust I have put in you; for once again I do most solemnly
vow a resentment that shall exchange your life for the loss of my fame.

Farewell. HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER LXVIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
CHESTERFIELD is a cheat; I am now sure of it, Mr. SEDLEY. His system is not
productive of bosom-felicity: it cannot procure the best of all applauses, or
the approbation that results from a congratulating conscience, however it may
deceive the world into encomium. Alas! Sir, what are the successes of
hypocrisy, or policy, or whatever else you please to call it, when, after all,
the incense and enjoyment you receive from the public is paid to our conduct,
not as it really is, but as it appears to be; and when even after the luckiest
efforts of our delusions -- when we have put the happiest of his precepts in
practice -- we are condemned to that reflecting hour, which, at some time or
another will seize us, and which, in despite of manner and pretense, will have
its full measure of recriminating asperity. In the shame of my heart, SEDLEY,
let me own to thee, that I have been laboring to throw even the guarded virtue
of Mrs. VERNON, off its bias. I startled her for the moment, but she
recollected herself time enough to prevent her misfortune, and I have had
address enough to turn the accident to my advantage: she believes me honest,
and she shall find me so. I have not now time to relate the particulars of this
-- nor is it, perhaps, necessary -- but I seriously wish I could inspire you
with any degree of those feelings I at this moment enjoy from having totally
discarded STANHOPE, and listened to the voice of VIRTUE.

Farewell. JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER LXIX. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
Sir,
YOUR eternal reverberation of musty maxims becomes troublesome. I did not
adopt the plan of DORMER STANHOPE, without sufficiently considering every part
of it; and if you can find no other subject of discussion than the old, ragged,
threadbare, commonplace topics of Vice and Virtue, I must beg that our
correspondence may be brought to a period. As to what has past -- if I did not
know your sense of friendship, it would be necessary to cut your throat: as it
is, I wish you happy in your pursuits.

I am yours, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXX. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
I WILL at all events be with you tomorrow: the torment that sat brooding over
my pillow last night -- the horrors of my dream -- the situation and trembling
that seizes me as I write this -- the poor little wretch that seems troubled
within me -- all -- all conjoin to draw me home -- I can stay no longer here --
Tell HORACE of my design, and depend on its being put into execution, by

Your HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER LXXI. PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire to the Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN.
Dear and Reverend Sir,
I HAVE with infinite pleasure obeyed the injunctions suggested by Mrs. LA
MOTTE, in hinting to Mrs. HOMESPUN your anxiety for her return. She heard me
with great patience, and very readily consented to go to a husband whom she so
tenderly esteems. I design to see her properly provided with a chaise, and
every thing necessary to the delicacy of her situation; and I most heartily
pray for your returning health. I hope you will forgive my having sent your
lady, my fair charge, home, without my attending her; but you will reflect on
the world's aptitude to asperse and censure, and on that account, forgive: for
the same reason, I have advised Mrs. HOMESPUN to go in the middle of the day,
that even a color might not be given to the ready tongue of detraction. Though
Mrs. HOMESPUN will be with you a few hours after this, yet I could not forbear
anticipating your felicity, though it should even be but for a moment.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient servant, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXXII. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire
Sir,
THOUGH I am every minute looking out for HARRIET, and have sent my servant to
the corner of the town to welcome her, and tell her I am made better by the
expectation, yet I cannot, in duty, refuse dispatching to you my thanks for
your most generous and affectionate arguments and care. No words are equal to
such subjects. I can only say to you, that you have made a sick man well, and a
husband, happy, and that I pay you the acknowledgment of a tear. As to your
reward -- that, Sir, is placed beyond me; it is above, and it must be given to
you only by the Father of all recompense.

I am, Sir, With a grateful heart, Your most humble servant, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER LXXIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
CRUEL SEDLEY -- how could thou treat me so harshly? But I will neither quit
urging to thee the subject of Virtue, and painting to thee the horrors of Vice;
nor will I bring my epistolary correspondence to a period. What! have I myself
escaped from the snare, and shall I see the foot of a friend ready to be
entrapped, yet not endeavor to rescue him? Forbid it, fidelity; forbid it,
honor! Yes, SEDLEY, I must continue to love, and will persevere in admonishing
thee: for, in earnest repetition, I declare to thee, that I am certain, all the
finesse of thy CHESTERFIELD is unable to purchase the delightful and soothing
pleasures resulting from my present and new-adopted system, which I am not
ashamed to tell thee (although it is repugnant to thine) is borrowed from the
Scriptures: it runs thus, SEDLEY -- "Do, as thou would wish others should do
unto thee." This is most palpably the sentiment of true policy as well as true
honesty; and I am every day more and more persuaded, that nothing but this
will, in the end, prevail. There is a moment, my dear, dissipated SEDLEY, in
which, though thou were to wear the mask of a forty years success, thou must
perforce lay it aside, and appear in all the nakedness of Nature. And can
there, I ask thee, can there possibly be a more hideous sight than a hypocrite
unveiled, when every deformity can no longer hide itself from observation, when
fraud shall be traversed through all its meandering intricacies even to its
foul and polluted source, and when the very heart shall be displayed, without
subterfuge, without concealments, and without a possibility of either being on
its own guard, or throwing others off theirs. By the by, SEDLEY, that
sentiment, borrowed (as I perceive many of thine are) from the pernicious
volumes of thy darling theorist, is subversive of all fair-dealing in business,
true affection in the sacred connections with the other sex, and ingenuousness
of manners in all human situations.

The Lieutenant is not yet returned, but he has sent two letters, of which,
for certain reasons, I have procured the favor of copies, to enclose you. If
thou have a single minute to spare from the prosecution of thy ruinous system,
read them; and if, after that, thou art not made better -- if they want
efficiency to check thee in the pursuit of pleasure, through the bounds both of
law and humanity -- farewell to every hope of feeling, farewell to all that
ornaments the real gentleman, farewell to manhood. The first is addressed to me,
the second to Mrs. VERNON. On the receipt of mine, which was the very day of my
trial to ruin the fair subject of it, judge what I felt: you know my
sensibility, and can imagine thy THORNTON'S situation when it is poignantly
wounded.

LETTER LXXIV. Lieutenant VERNON to Mr. THORNTON.
My dear Benefactor,
GUESS how easily your former favor sat upon my heart, by my readiness to
receive from you another! I had more reasons than you yet know of for inviting
you to my villa, and it was those reasons that prevented me from inviting my
SOPHIA to partake of the excursion. To tell you the plain truth, my friend, I
have more policy than business in this excursion. I have lately had offers of
preferment -- To speak openly, I can have the command of a company, upon
joining General -- in AMERICA. The half-pay of a Lieutenant, you know, Sir, is
not sufficient to, even a man of moderation: my wife's private fortune I have
very strictly settled upon herself, as a sort of comfortable security against
unfortunate contingencies: I think myself no more entitled to touch the
interest of this, than I would infringe upon a property in trust, which, after
my decease, was to be the only certain resource of the person under my
guardianship. Another point is, my own thirst of glory. I was trained very
early to the exercise of arms, and although I continued to starve upon my
ensigncy for near twenty years -- (I weep with joy, Sir, when I think upon the
generous means by which I became a Lieutenant) -- yet the ardours of military
ambition are by no means extinguished. I declare to you, Mr. THORNTON, even
blessed as I now am in a competent income, presented to me with the hand of
SOPHIA -- in the full possession, too, of SOPHIA herself -- I cannot, even at
this time, hear the beat of a drum without feeling my heart bound at the alarm.
In a word, I design to go to the field, and accept the promotion. I am one of
those who side with that party which considers the dignity of Britain insulted
by America. I was bred a soldier, and taught even from my cradle (for my father
had won his laurels) to feel all the delicacies of martial majesty. In my
opinion, Sir, the Sovereign of these realms is injured: his injuries are mine:
it is enough for a soldier to believe his cause is just. I perceive many of my
old comrades have voluntarily drawn the sword, while mine is gathering rust in
its sheath. I drew it, Mr. THORNTON, last night, out of the scabbard, and upon
examining the blade I saw a spot, a lazy spot of inactivity, destroying the
noble keenness of its edge. By my soul I felt myself blush at it, nor can I be
ever easy -- ever forgive myself -- till I have at once wiped away the shame,
and the spot, as it becomes my station. Now, then, Mr. THORNTON, we are come to
the point -- a point of all others in the world the most delicate. -- SOPHIA,
my poor SOPHIA, must, must -- Excuse me, dear THORNTON -- excuse a blot which
my weakness has, I see, made upon the paper -- A tender woman will at any time
unsoldier the boldest of us. But, fie upon it! fie upon it! 'twas the infirmity
but of a moment: "I am a man again." In short, Sir, my wife knows nothing of my
intention, and I do not know how to break the matter to her. She has peculiar
gentleness of heart, and will, I am convinced, feel the severest pangs at
parting. This is the first time since our marriage that I have slept from her
side, and I wish much to know how the has supported it: if tolerably well, she
may, perhaps, be brought to bear the thoughts of a longer absence; and, in that
case, I would have you gradually open the design to her, of which, indeed, I
distantly hint in my letter to her. The worst of it is, Mr. THORNTON, women are
so apt to associate, with the duty of a soldier, such horrid ideas of death,
broken bones, groans, and cannon-balls, that they give a man over the moment he
marches from their embraces to front the enemies of their country: however, let
us not blame the softness that was designed to soothe us, to polish our
ruggedness, and harmonise our natures. The drift of my letter is evident to
you. SOPHIA must know it: the summer is advancing: many of our troops are
midway betwixt the contending countries: some of them are arrived at the
theater of the war. I have but a few days to spare. Dalliances must in no wise
be indulged: they are too effeminating: I dare not trust myself with them. My
absence is propitious to the disclosure. You are not unskilled in argument: you
want not the advantages of persuasive eloquence: to you, therefore, I trust the
tranquillity of a wife's bosom -- Inspire her, if possible, my worthy Mr.
THORNTON, with the duty she owes to my character, which longer idleness would
utterly obliviate. Awake in her those sparks which I hope even a female nature
sometimes experiences -- the sparks of patriotism. But if you find this
impracticable -- at least obtain her consent to my departure, and support her
sinking spirits with the hopes of my return, and with the expectation of the
honors, rewards, and various distinctions which will thew attend me. These are
the points I leave to my good THORNTON -- and I am his

Most faithful servant, CAESAR VERNON.

LETTER LXXV. Lieutenant VERNON to Mrs. VERNON.
Dear SOPHY,
I FIND business will engage me from pleasure (that is, from your society)
longer than I at first believed: but you are, I know, too well established in
the moral duties, to repine at what is necessary to be done, even though your
acquiescence is to be attended with some inconveniences. Nay, I am not sure,
whether, if at any time my country should require me in the way of my
profession, you are not heroine enough to lend those arms to your King, which,
were they in such an exigence reluctant, would be wholly unworthy to incircle
yours. -- I shall never forget the glorious week we passed together soon after
our union, when we made a purchase of Mr. POPE'S Version of HOMER, and employed
our long delightful evenings in reading him through. Do you recollect with what
earnestness we attended every hero in his progress? How we joined in the
resentment of ACHILLES, detested the injustice of AGAMEMNON, and pleaded the
cause of the good old father of the fair CHRISEIS? Pray call to mind with how
much ardour we followed HECTOR to the field; how we despised the pusillanimous,
hare-hearted PARIS; and though we pitied the drooping ANDROMACHE -- though we
wept over her woes -- yet we should have felt for her still more, had she not
endeavored to detain the warrior from his duty. Nor can you help recollecting
with how much pleasure -- a pleasure that was radiant in your dear eyes, SOPHIA
-- you heard of the various victories achieved and related by the narrative
NESTOR: of his triumphant returns to his native country after the laurels of
conquest were waving in his helmet, while the patriotic virgins were scattering
in his path the incense of the Spring, and the emulous youths bowed to the
victor, and sang the song of success before him. Before we had reached the
Twelfth Book, you was half a hero, and, with the shield and buckler of MINERVA
(her wisdom is already in your possession), you would now be fit to take the
field, arrange the file, and inspirit at once by your courage and beauty, the
soldiers of your own CAESAR. Do you know, SOPHY, that I am child enough to be
vain of the name that was given me by my godfathers and godmothers. There is
conquest in the sound, and I have a soul that pants, I must confess, to be
ranked amongst the ROMAN CAESAR'S. But, ah! SOPHIA, I am only a disbanded,
unemployed Lieutenant, and the little glory that I gained in the field in the
days of my youth, is now entirely faded; and, without one mark of the sword --
without one apologizing scar, by which might be seen the necessity of retreat,
I am withering in the eye of my King and country, and shall after a few years
fall into an inglorious grave, and be no more remembered.

At a villa in SUSSEX, through which I passed, and where I stopped to dine, I was
told of a mansion, which strangers usually went to survey, the property of a
veteran officer, whom I fought with, side by side, in the first battle that
fleshed my arm: I have a thousand times mentioned him to you, under the
well-known name of FRASER. The old man has left two of his limbs in different
parts of the globe: FRANCE has the honor of his arm, and his right leg adorns
the plains of MINDEN: but the trunk is whole, and seems to have acquired fresh
vigor from lopping the branches. Hardihood has settled the rose of high
health in his cheek; the sun has seasoned his complexion to the heat of the
Torrid Zone; and the hair of his head is like the whiteness of a hermit's
beard, that spreads itself beyond the girdle. He knew me at the first sight,
and pressed my hand with an honest roughness that denoted sincerity: -- but on
seeing me still able, and in the force of youth, at least of middle age, he
contracted his brow, and seemed to ask me, by his look, what I did basking here
at home? In the enthusiasm of his martial veneration, which rises to every
thing but idolatry, he has at his own expense erected in his garden little
monumental ornaments to the memory of his favorite heroes. BRITANNIA was on
one side, weeping over WOLF; and on the other, the figure of PUBLIC
TRANQUILLITY offering the olive branch to CUMBERLAND. Not a warrior of any
celebrity but had at least a bust, a pedestal, or an inscription. And upon my
taking notice of a vacant nich in the center of the garden, the Major struck it
with his cane, and exclaimed, In the name of Honor, VERNON, why will thou not
give an old friend the opportunity to fill this gap of glory with another of
the CAESAR'S? I felt at this instant, SOPHY, a flush in my cheeks, and, as we
returned together into his house (which is in the taste of fortifications), to
drink his Majesty's health, I perceived the tear of repressed ambition
descending, and my old friend pronounced it a drop of promise.

I am, my dear SOPHY, Your own CAESAR VERNON.

Mr. THORNTON, in Continuation.
I WILL now suppose, SEDLEY, that thou have read these letters. Are they not
indications of a mind busied in schemes superior to thine? While Mr. VERNON is
anxious to serve his country, thou art exerting thyself to disgrace it: while
he is desirous to obtain the consent of a beloved and beautiful wife, to suffer
his absence in consideration of his glory, thou art CHESTERFIELDING it how thou
may dishonor beauty, without admitting the very ideas of love. What measures
are taken, in consequence of these epistles, thou shall know in my next. In the
interim, may CAESAR'S example fire thy imitation; and, if thou will copy, may
thou copy so worthy an original, at least in the nobleness of his sentiments.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXVI. SEDLEY to THORNTON, (Before the Receipt of the above.)
I FIND it impossible to conquer the habits of loving, and communicating to
thee my sentiments. There is a philtre in an old friendship that cannot easily
be destroyed. Pardon my rash sayings therefore. Preach till thou art weary; and
only allow me the liberty of reposing with thee all my enterprises.

What course I am to take in the present crisis, Heaven only can tell. Such an
accident has happened as totally confounds me. In conformity to my promise, I
dispatched HARRIET to the languishing pedant; but she had scarce got, as I
understand, five miles on her way, when the cursed postilion, willing to show
his dexterity (according to their villainous custom) by driving like a devil
through the village, at a short turn, or rather angle in the road, overturned
the chaise, fell himself from the saddle, and set the horses a-going, while the
poor HARRIET was dragged along the earth, with her body half out of the
chaise-window, till a countryman caught the off horse by the bridle, and put a
stop to the career. She was carried into a little dirty-looking inn, almost
speechless; and, as she informs me, with an arm torn by the glass, which was
unfortunately drawn up, scribbled an almost unintelligible line to request I
would hasten to see her before she died. The postboy brought me the note,
trembling like a leaf, and white as a shirt, protesting most fervently that he
could not help the accident. I knew not what to do: I hesitated -- dreaded the
consequence -- wrote a hurried line to poor HORACE, without feeling either the
pen or paper -- called for a taper without thinking that I wanted wax -- sent
it to the post by the boy -- and then ordered my horses. The cursed landlord,
who is ever alarmed at the sound of a hoof, in the expectation of fresh prey,
now detected my disorder, and set every wheel at work to find out the cause:
"He was sorely sorry to see me uneasy; would do any thing in his power; hoped
nothing material was the matter -- Could he do any thing? -- he was concerned
to see me in such confusion -- would do a great deal to serve so worthy a
gentleman -- mahap I was taken ill -- mahap my friends was sick in LONDON -- my
wife -- my aunt -- my uncle -- Some lawsuit, may be, had gone wrong, or sommut
or other was most sartinly the matter." My servant came with my horses to the
door, and the persecutor began again: -- "Good lack, good lack, what can be the
'casion of this! Was I going away? -- Was I obliged to leave BUXTON? -- MARTHA,
where is the gentleman's little account? -- How sorry he was again!

In short, THORNTON, I was obliged to escape him and my rising rage by rushing
into a little slip of ground behind his house, where, under pretense of picking
a few pinks that straggled poverty-struck about the beds, I cast about what was
to be done. In this manner I argued with myself: If I go to HARRIET, the affair
will certainly be suspected: for how came I so interested in this lady's
misfortune! If I do not go, it will be barbarous -- but then I have sent to her
husband, and home is the best and fittest place for a sick woman. -- Upon the
whole, I thought it not proper or political to go; and, as to writing, I dare
not give way to my sentiments, for a discovered letter is irrecoverable
perdition. Upon my return into the house, I found the rascally landlord
tampering for intelligence with the postboy, who had come upon the
saddle-horse, with the tangled traces still about his back -- I had well nigh
broke out again. THOMAS, who stays with me, although married, till I can suit
myself, looked as if he suspected the matter -- the landlord muttered forth a
million pities, and talked of our being all mortal, and liable to accidents --
the postboy said his horses were out, as I saw, all to pieces, and his chaise
shattered in the pannels.

I could STANHOPE it no longer: Curse your horses, chaise, and pannels, all
together! said I -- get out of my sight, and leave me to myself: a lady is
dying, and you are prating about your damned pannels -- TOM, take away the
horses -- You, postboy, stop till I write a note to the lady, to let her know
that I have written to her husband.

I would have gone in to write.

The landlord again struck up: "Had not the lady better come back to my house,
Sir? The journey to Mr. HOMESPUN'S will be too far in her present condition."
-- Pray, Mr. WYNGOOD, said I, suffer me to do as I please. The man was piqued
at the Sea CHESTERFIELD.
slight, and I verily believe will never forgive me. However, I wrote a note to
HARRIET to the following purport, and ordered the postboy to carry it as fast
as possible.

To Mrs. HOMESPUN.
Madam,
I AM unfeignedly sorry at your misfortune: the moment I became acquainted with
it, I sent to Mr. HOMESPUN, who will be with you, no doubt, the moment he is
able to ride there. I hope most sincerely no ill effects will ensue from this
distressing accident; and I have some little consolation in understanding, by
the messenger, that an apothecary resides in the village where it happened, and
that the art of a surgeon is not necessary. With the warmest wishes for your
speedy recovery, I am,

Madam, Your most humble servant, PHILIP SEDLEY.


I had two reasons, THORNTON, for showing this, prior to my sending it, to the
landlord: in the first place, I wanted to regain his friendship, that is, you
know, according to my system, his good word, by an act of confidence; and, in
the next, as this was, upon the whole, a mysterious affair, and I could not
tell the issue of it, such a letter (written, as thou perceivest it is, even in
the midst of hurry, with a pen of policy) might do me good, should the matter
be hereafter canvassed at the bath; WYNGOOD being, as I before told thee, the
greatest gossip of the country.

By this time, I conjecture, my messenger has delivered the note. Unluckily I
have to sup this evening at the DELMORE'S, Sir HENRY being never happy without
me. Very, very unfit am I at present to figure or sustain myself in company;
for, not to disguise matters with you, I am not insensible to this misfortune
of poor HARRIET, nor could I see the injury done to her bewitching form,
without a sigh. But, however, I am equal to all events, and must carry on with
vigor what I have begun with spirit: otherwise, I should retreat with
disgrace; and for aught I can tell, take refuge from the horrors of despair by
the aid of a trigger. Pray, my dear THORNTON, against these horrible resources.

I am Yours, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXXVII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
IF thou were surprised at the contents of my last, prepare, ere thou perusest
the present, for fresh wonders. I was just set down to the card-table at the
DELMORE'S, to pass the interval betwixt the tea and the supper, when THOMAS,
upon the full gallop, and with tokens of terror in his countenance, delivered
me the enclosed billet, which, had it been delivered in the presence of the
company, would have betrayed me for ever to the eyes of this piercing family:
but luckily the footman came to say that my servant waited my orders. Pray read
the billet before thou go any farther.

The enclosed Billet. To Mr. SEDLEY.
Most inhuman SEDLEY,
I HAVE ordered myself, on the receipt of your letter, to be taken out of my
bed, and brought hither, in defiance of the Doctor, and at the risque of my
life, chiefly indeed because I would see, before the last event, and once more
kiss the hand of the still dear, but most barbarous PHILIP SEDLEY. I write in
agony, but am still

Your HARRIET HOMESPUN.


It was with a difficulty equal to the struggles betwixt life and death, that I
supported myself from sinking under this intelligence: I had, however,
sufficient presence of mind to return to the company, and make excuses with
some degree of coherence; after which I mounted the reeking horse, and,
ordering TOM to follow me, went upon the full-stretch to my lodgings. At my
entrance into the parlour I found HARRIET in a strong hysteric: and upon her
recovery we had her put into a warm bed. She is perfectly mangled, THORNTON:
her fine face is gashed with wounds; and the landlady tells me that other parts
of her person have sustained their share of bruises. To mend the matter, I have
received a long epistle from FANNY MORTIMER, which was delivered with as much
peculiarity as thou will find in the sentiments. After dinner the whole family
rambled into the garden, and as I was passing near Mrs. MORTIMER, along the
shade of a small shrubbery that affected to serpentine, she, with her own hand,
bade me look at that paper: I folded it in my bosom, and bowed; and, just as
she desired, no one perceived it. I have not attempted to answer it, nor can I
show myself decently till I have the reply in my pocket. This cursed affair of
HARRIET unfits me for adventure: however, I send you the letter, and must think
what is to be done. HARRIET is, I find by the landlady, in a doze -- I rather
think agony closes the eye, and that she is unable to speak. The Doctor is
preparing his plasters, and a Physician who attends the bath is sent for. What
measure can I possibly take with respect to HORACE? and I am not without fears
for myself. 'Sdeath, THORNTON, is there never a case in point? I must consult
my AUTHOR, Adieu!

LETTER LXXVIII. Mrs. MORTIMER to Mr. SEDLEY.
Sir,
AN address from me, under my peculiar situation, will no doubt alarm you: but
forms and ceremonies must all yield to irresistible exigences. I find it
necessary to the peace of my mind to write to you. The accident, Sir, that
brought us together at SCARBOROUGH, when your visits to me were very frequent,
and, as a single woman, I confess not disagreeable, is recollected with some
anxiety. You were then at some pains to convince me I had made an impression on
your sensibility, and certain sentiments were interchanged, which it would be,
at this period, highly improper to repeat. It may not be amiss, however, to
observe that, prior to your quitting SCARBOROUGH, you did not omit exerting
your utmost talents (and they are not inconsiderable, Mr. SEDLEY) to engage my
heart. How far you succeeded, it is not now material to enquire. Be that as it
may, my health has been gradually upon the decline from that hour to this. It
is now some months since I gave my hand to Mr. MORTIMER, than whom there never
lived a better character, or a tenderer husband. He was educated under the eye
of my father, who seemed so wrapped up in the ideas of making him still nearer to
his family, that, as he thought proper to address me, I could not deny to duty,
what possibly I should have refused to every thing else. In a word, Sir, my
worthy father's heart was in the match, and it is impossible for a child to
disappoint the wishes of such a parent. The softness, delicacy, and gentleness
of Mr. MORTIMER'S behavior has ever been uniform and exact: and although it
has pleased Heaven to continue my indisposition, and indeed rather to increase
than abate it, yet he has not suffered my languor to relax his animated
assiduities, but has acted, both by day and by night, the double part of nurse
and husband. Peculiarly unlucky do I account the destiny by which you and I,
Sir, meet again: not that I have the least traces of affection for your person,
being really attached to Mr. MORTIMER by duty, and upon principle. At the same
time, Sir, I cannot but own, your presence gives me uneasiness, and uneasiness
of any kind I am not now equal to. You have, I see, recommended yourself to my
father more warmly than ever; my sister thinks very highly of you; Mr. MORTIMER
is loud in your praises; and even my mother, who is not easily attracted,
speaks of you with ardour. As my situation is sufficiently sacred to exclude
every possible hope, nay, as I dare presume your own connexions have, by this
time, led your inclinations into a more proper channel, I will venture to talk
to you with the freedom of a friend. To speak plainly then, Mr. SEDLEY, there
is a point in which you may still oblige me -- it is this: that you would enter
as seldom into this house as is consistent with a resolution, which I earnestly
beg you will take, of withdrawing yourself from this family. -- Do it
leisurely, but at all events let it be done. Ah! Mr. SEDLEY, pity the
perturbation of an uneasy mind. Before you came, I could at least conceal
agitation, and submit to the silent depredations of my distemper. Every tear I
then shed -- every sigh that then stole from me -- was attributed to the
unavoidable risings and sinkings of a consumptive habit. But within these few
days I have had some conflicts, and every one of them adds to my weakness, to
hide -- a something that preys upon my heart. To account to you for this is
needless. If you have the least suggestion that it is occasioned by your
appearance, let it interest your humanity -- your honor -- your compassion --
in my cause; and do not, Mr. SEDLEY, render more exquisitely wretched the last
hours of a fate at the best unenviable, and not sustained without a sorrow that
is hastening its object to the tomb. Go, then, I conjure you. Leave me to the
protection of a generous family -- of a dear sister -- of a fond husband. It is
not -- I feel it is not possible that I should long live amongst them. Let me
not show Mr. MORTIMER that I gave myself to him as to the friend and darling
youth of my father -- Let not -- Alas! Mr. SEDLEY -- what have I said! Pardon
me -- pity me -- oblige me -- leave me. As your stay at the bath cannot be of
consequence; as the floridness of your complexion -- the luster of your eyes --
the ease in your air -- all assure me, your pursuit is mere amusement, I
entreat you to change your route -- fix it at SCARBOROUGH -- BATH -- MARGATE --
any where, so as you will but leave this place. I look at you with anguish -- I
know your rap at the door -- I distinguish your step -- and, though I feel the
impropriety -- the crime -- the shame -- of being disturbed, I cannot bear it.
-- Contrive, therefore, and that instantly, to begin your task. of dissolving
the connection here. Permit me to enjoy the little serenity that a wastin^
sickness admits. The poor pittance of ease which that allows, do not you
destroy. As I saw the intimacy betwixt you and my family daily increasing, nay,
as you have been almost constantly at this house for the last week, I could
contrive no other way of addressing you but by writing an honest explicit
letter, which, I have now done, with many interruptions both from pain,
fatigue, and the fear of being seen -- but chance has favored me, and I have
unbosomed the secret of my soul undiscovered. Think not, however, that I mean
to enter into a correspondence. Take a week to withdraw with the elegance
becoming your character: during which time I will, as hitherto, endeavor to
support myself as an acquaintance, although it is sufficiently shocking that I
should be reduced, even to a moment's disguise. If you are not disengaged from
us by that period, I have no other refuge than a constant retreat to my sick
chamber, whenever you visit us: and if this should, in the end, occasion
suspicion, and the cruel, unconquerable prepossession I entertain be ever
discovered, you will remember that, to your injustice must be imputed the
consequences, even though the best of parents should be made miserable, the
worthiest sister partake their anxiety, and the kindest of husbands fall a
victim to the apparent ingratitude of

FRANCES MORTIMER.

LETTER LXXIX. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
GOD of Heaven, SEDLEY! what a wretch of adamant art thou! The disaster of the
poor HARRIET, and the pleadings of the pathetic FANNY, have almost exhausted
the source of my tears. Consult thy Author, indeed! Consult thy heart --
consult thy conscience -- If thou have the least touch of Nature in thee -- of
Nature yet undebauched by the treacherous DORMER -- consult that -- listen to
it -- admit its oratory, -- obey it. What shall thou do? -- Art thou at a loss
what to do? -- Do what is right. Quit this instant any farther invasions of
FANNY'S quiet -- search the wide earth for medicine and medicinal people for
the hapless HARRIET -- comfort the sad soul of the agonized HORACE -- watch the
dawn of his wife's recovery -- throw CHESTERFIELD and all his works into the
fire -- execrate the name of EUGENIA -- and return, return upon the spur of
speed, to LONDON and thy THORNTON. But as I shall probably touch thee more by
example than precept, take the continuation of my transactions in the worthy
Lieutenant's family, and consider well a scene which may be held up in blessed
contrast to thine.

Scarce had SOPHIA read her husband's letter, but she wrote an answer, of which
I present you a faithful copy.

To Lieutenant VERNON.
My dear, ambitious CAESAR,
THOUGH I am no friend to the devastations of war, I am warmly so to the
dignity of my husband's character; nor can I bear to see his laurels withered,
by the childish and emasculating fears and delays of a wife. Yes, my dear
CAESAR, you are -- I feel that you are -- only a disbanded Lieutenant. I am not
insensible to the reproach in that observation. But why -- cruel VERNON -- why
is our little fortune locked up so, as to deny us the pleasure of making a
purchase so infinitely to our credit. May Heaven long keep you from the perils
of battle! but you are mistaken, if you think there are not some women who can
be tender, without being weak. Our sex is disgraced by the general affectation
of it. We are flattered into the notion that we are prettiest in our delicate
pretenses, and most lovely in distress. But our minds are not all formed or
cultured alike; and, for my part, I had not married a soldier, if I had not
designed that he should sustain the duties of his station: and you will
recollect, that Capt. BLESSINGTON, my father, in point of martial prowess,
yields not the palm even to yours. Mr. THORNTON and I, both wish your business
may soon permit your return to the pleasures of SURRY; and we both also concur
to venerate the name of FRASER: but, whatever honors may be in store for my
CEASAR, may the nich of the Major be many, many years unoccupied, if it is kept
sacred to the memory of my ever-dear Lieutenant VERNON. Thus prays zealously

His affectionate wife, SOPHIA VERNON.


There, SEDLEY -- there is a woman! -- the intrepidity of a man, blended with
all the virtues and elegances of her sex, and yet may I perish if I ever again
attempt her destruction! On the contrary, I derive joy, real joy, from hearing
her sing forth the praises of CAESAR: I join in the panegyric. I improve by her
superior capacity, and though all the Graces are in her train, and she seems
formed to every purpose of extacy -- has black eyes -- an inviting shape -- an
air of breeding, and features perfectly symmetrical -- yet I can now be
contented to admire her beauty, and hear the sallies of her wit, without a
single endeavor to make her pay for pleasing me, at the expense of her
chastity.

Adieu. P. S.
Act like a man, and God prosper thee!



LETTER LXXX. SEDLEY to THORNTON,
HORROR upon horrors, THORNTON! HORACE is come! He arrived at midnight. My
letter found him in bed. He hurried on his clothes, took his pad from the
stable, and has traveled thirty miles through the rain to see his HARRIET. I
was up and musing in my chamber as he came -- I unbarred the door -- he hugged
me -- thanked me, -- kissed me -- kneeled down to me, and with an air and look
of distraction, desired to be directed to his wife. I showed him her chamber,
and, let the consequence be what it will, I must stand it out.

As to FANNY MORTIMER, not the whole congregated world should save her from my
embraces. Oh, earth and heaven! THORNTON, she is the most attracting form that
ever died a death of gentleness. Then she is such a contrast to the full-formed
HARRIET -- so slim -- so soft of spirit -- an eye so borne down by modesty to
the earth -- her eye-lashes so silken, so curved -- the bow of the heavens
cannot match the archings of her brow -- her hair is so glossy -- so abundant
-- such a luxury in its various folds -- her very languors are delicious -- and
as she put the letter into my hand, her palm struck mine upon the tremble --
the murmur of love was in the sigh that then broke from her bosom, and the
teeth through which it passed were purer than snow.

Away then with melancholy ideas! I pity HARRIET, but I must -- I will possess
FANNY MORTIMER, though I were to die in the effort.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXXXI. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
My dear Madam,
OUR poor HARRIET is sorely hurt -- but she received me kindly: the tear that
she let fall upon my hand, I have suffered to dry, without wiping it away. The
physician is to be here tomorrow, and then you shall know more. HARRIET asked
me several times if I was well -- I told her, I was; and yet Heaven knows, I am
in a fever at this moment, for I have not been able to close my eyes, and I was
wetted through the shirt in my journey. My wife seems to have chiefly suffered
in the face and arms, I therefore hope the less danger.

Adieu. I am your real friend, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER LXXXII. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
EVERY moment in the day affords some fresh and beautiful instance of my noble
father's wisdom and affection. About an hour after tea this evening, while Sir
HENRY was enjoying his serene summer-walk, as he calls it, WILLIAM brought a
pencil'd card, and delivered it to me. It was to advise with him (Sir HENRY)
about some concerns essential to the general welfare. Even my little brother
and sister, Charles and Caroline, (who are down with us,) were mentioned in
this invitation: the card requested the company of all the family, adding,
that, as the evening was delightful, his mind composed, and nobody but
ourselves, at present, in the house, he much desired that we might all have our
share in the general serenity. How prettily, my dear LUCY, how persuasively
this exalted parent proposes, as a pleasure, what his authority might command
as a duty? But it is among the number of his excellent maxims, that none but
froward spirits do well with compulsion, and that a frank and ingenuous
tenderness has in it equal weight and satisfaction.

The conversation past in the garden, under the shade of hawthorns, laurels,
and filberts: there is a white bench under it; and a sort of natural arching,
bower-fashion, made by the mixture of thick leaves and branches interwoven
above. Hither we came in obedience to the summons: a group of relations loving
and beloved. FANNY, who had been amusing herself with the pen, (not having had
strength for the pleasures of writing for some time,) came forward, delicate as
angel meekness, with her young brother in one hand, and her little sister in
the other. VENUS, with two of her attendant Graces, could not be more lovely,
even though the distress of ill-heath threw somewhat of languor into her air;
but then it was a languor so soft, and a distress so gentle, that it only
served the more to feminize (if you will allow the word), and to recommend her to
the spectator as a more pathetic, interesting figure.

Sir HENRY was at first sitting somewhat pensively, with an opened letter in
his hand -- my mother by his side, leaning her arm on one of the corners of the
bench, and reposing her cheek within her hand -- the true posture of
meditation. They both rose at our approach. Mr. MORTIMER and I went up first;
then FANNY, and her twin cherubs: we were a little alarmed, but this was soon
dissipated by Sir HENRY, who, seating us all on the bench, drew a green
garden-chair from an adjoining shade, placing himself opposite to us, and, with
a smile of ineffable benignity, in which the parent and the friend shone
beautifully blended, he paid each of us a varied compliment, on our obedience
to his wishes, and addressed us to this effect:

"I have requested your company, my dear and worthy children, to engage your
filial attention on several of the most important events of human life: I have,
indeed, for some time, had a design to summon you together on this subject, but
care, company, and amusement, have thrown their attractions or interruptions
hitherto in the way of my wishes. I have, however, fixed upon this evening of
leisure to deliver to you the secrets of my heart, and in mine are included
those of the best of wives, and tenderest of mothers."

Lady DELMORE drew her spread fingers across her face, and Sir HENRY repeating
his panegyric, went on:

"I am happy, my dear relatives, to tell you in the first place -- and let that
serve as an encouragement to you -- that I can look back upon a life of more
than threescore years, with a tranquillity of retrospect, at the same time
sincere, christian, and philosophic. The serenity of my soul is in no degree
wounded by the criticism with which I review its conduct through the perilous
voyage of my life, in which, by the care of Heaven, I have escaped those
quicksands that endanger our youth, and those rocks which alarm us in age. But
that which I account far the richest indulgence of Providence, is that dear
prospect which I now behold in the persons of this beauteous circle -- a circle
filled with the pledges of this generous creature's invariable fidelity, and
the testimonies of my continent attachment to excellence so distinguished."

My mother rose, LUCY, gave her hand to Sir HENRY, looked at him a moment --
looked at him blooming even in age -- sighed softly, and returned to her seat.

Sir HENRY proceeded:

"The season of infancy is past with most of you; and its pleasures are
succeeded by reflections of a higher nature. Even this sweet pair -- (here he
pointed to my young brother and sister) -- are at the age of distinguishing,
and the rest are mature. The blossoms of youth promise a generous fruitage.
You, DELIA, have not yet been rewarded by the tenderness of such a man as my
MORTIMER: yet the color of your life will depend on the exchange of your name.
Your mother's expectations, like mine, are sanguine, and extensive: our eyes
are turned on your every action -- We hope to see you all the supports of our
declining age: our sun is about to set, and we wish its departure may be gilded
by your virtues and indulgences.

"The father of a family is at once a sublime and venerable character. My full
heart dilates as I see myself encompassed by these charming portraits of
ourselves."

Here Lady DELMORE melted into tears of transport, but endeavored to conceal
them.

"I can form to myself (continued my father) no ideas beyond it, nor many
equal. Our family is at present the seat of integrity, unanimity, and mutual
confidence. Our pleasures are reflected upon each other, and we reciprocally
give and receive inimitable complacence. Yet we must be alarmed for those we
love. Though the tenor of your conduct, and the gratitude of your tempers,
make us less fearful of deviation, and though the maxims we have ever been
industrious to inculcate make us more secure and inapprehensive, yet certain
tremors will inevitably touch the bosom of a parent: be not displeased,
therefore, my children, if I give you a few general precepts, for your
establishment and adoption. They come sanctified to you with the venerable
imprimatur of more than fifty years experience. The maxims which are necessary
to regulate an ingenuous mind are neither multiplied nor intricate. The very
cornerstone of a great character is a clear conscience: if you feel well, you
will act well: and if you do not, all the talents in the world will only serve
to torment you. Never wear a mask before your motives, but when it is
absolutely necessary to the felicity of life, such as deceiving, or rather
bewitching, the unprincipled into virtue: some tempers cannot bear the plain
Truth; she is too aweful for them: be it then, in such particular cases, your
parts, to lead them to her sacred temple by the most pleasing paths --
Alleviate the apparent ruggedness, and length of the way, by such meanders as,
though they seem to deviate, may assuredly bring you by the fairest prospects
to the shrine of the Goddess. -- I have no objection to your adorning
yourselves with all the attractions of exterior, such I mean as are reflected
upon the character from dignity of manner, persuasion of voice, splendour of
address, and elegance of air: Where virtue is, these are most virtuous. They
will act like magic, and make the innocence both of your sentiment, and
example, perfectly irresistible; and I beseech you to exert them in the cause
of that truth and sobriety of heart I have recommended. -- Make use of them to
conciliate differences, to inspirit society, to embellish conversation, to
soften the harshness of dispute, to animate attention; to please, to instruct,
to entertain. To all these purposes they will be excellent, and ornamental. But
beware of what a licentious and artful indulgence of them may possibly lead to
-- beware of DUPLICITY; of that duplicity, which, so accoutered, -- its
destructive sword sheathed in politeness -- its heart shielded by the
impenetrable mail of gilded hypocrisy, -- is equal to the siege of a city, and
might do more real mischief than all the efforts of a legion of avowed
villainies. Of all earthly things, therefore, most detest, what is most to be
dreaded, the system of a well-bred, high-polished, elegant deceiver: no eye can
see him: no understanding detect him: no policy escape him. He comes in the
form of a Seraph, and those who are themselves honest, cannot imagine that he
is a Siren.

"At your time of life it is hard, extremely hard, to master the predominant
inclination; yet virtuous exercise will habituate the soul to the practice of
uniform honor. To you, DELIA, I am now going to speak more particularly: --
There is a passion, which, rightly directed, is the source of every noble and
genuine greatness. FANNY and Mr. MORTIMER, I trust, are not insensible to it.
May it affect you, DELIA, in the manner it has affected your mother -- this
excellent woman, whose regard for me was founded on principles that sustain the
first of connections in its due elevation, and adorn the heart by the dictate
of which, the hand is presented, with all that can give either spirit,
elegance, or real transport, to conjugal engagements.

"Unadulterated as yet by the smallest commerce with dexterous dissimulation,
pardon my alarms lest your innocence and simplicity should be the means of your
misfortune. -- That DISSIMULATION, which, under the fair disguise of attracting
elegance, led forward by the Graces, cannot be detected, even at noonday, is
for ever on the watch; and I know nothing so dangerous as yielding too easily
to the tenderness of a newborn passion. Do not, however, mistake me: my system
is not rigid: it is not inconsistent with the natural feelings of a delicate
disposition. I have given FANNY to one, in whose education and culture, I
myself had a share; and that may show you, DELIA, that I am no foe to the
feelings of Love."

Here a sigh heaved gently the bosom of FANNY -- I dare presume, it was the
sigh of love, Lady LUCY.

"I wish, continued Sir HENRY, to see each of my children, a wife, or a
husband, or a parent, and at the head of an infant society. I wish DELIA to
have the man of her heart -- Perhaps she has lately seen that man -- Perhaps
the accomplished Mr. SEDLEY -- "

In this place FANNY began to complain she sat too long -- and I was glad of
the interruption, for you cannot imagine how my cheek began to crimson:
certainly you was talking of me, or -- or -- or -- what was it, LUCY?

Sir HENRY went on:

"I will not, DELIA, distress you. I see nothing at present objectible. I will
not enquire into this matter, till you judge it for your happiness to consult
me; and till then, particular enquiries would be premature -- perhaps improper.
-- Only, be circumspect: look well at the ground before you build on it the
foundation of your happiness or misery. To adopt the language of SHAKESPEARE,
"Wear your eye thus," neither vacant, nor suspicious. In any case of emergency,
while we live (though that cannot in common course of terrestrial decays be now
long), honor me, or your mother, with your confidence: and when we are no
more, I beg all of you will trust to the affection of this worthy young man,
our dear MORTIMER, who, having seen more of life, and the transactions of men,
is the better able to promote happiness, and avert misery. -- With these
sentiments I trust you to your understandings, virtues, and tempers: with these
precepts (which I have a particular reason now to urge) I trust you to
discretion, economy, and fair-dealing. If I have been tedious, consider I am
an old man: if I have dealt in repetitions -- or if I have digressed --
consider I am a father. Go, then, my children, cherish each other: avoid the
path of Deceit -- walk steadily in the road of Truth, even though the roses may
not always be in bloom: satisfy the feelings of your own conscience; be
merciful -- be moderate, and be happy."

As he ended, my dear Lady LUCY, he rose, while the big paternal tear was in
his eye, embraced us round, and taking my mother by the hand, walked with her,
arm in arm, into the house.

Oh! my friend, had ever children such parents! My heart is at this time so
full of gratitude, wonder, and the daughter, that I can only add the esteemed
name of

Your happy, and highly-honoured DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER LXXXIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY. (Before the Receipt of SEDLEY'S last.)
AS thou have not taken notice of any parts of my letters relating to the
family of Mr. VERNON, I am in hopes thou art not quite unmoved by the generous
virtues that are reciprocated between the worthiest pair I ever knew, and who
have made me quite in love with matrimony. Yes, SEDLEY, do not start -- I say
sober matrimony; and could I get a certain young lady in the mind, who is now a
visitant to Mrs. VERNON, and just arrived, I believe I should enter into the
holy estate without hesitation, for I begin to believe, whatever thy Preceptor
may say, that wedded love is, after all, the most elevated of human
connections; nay, I have had several reasons, since my residence here, to adopt
the language of the poet, and pronounce that state the most delightful wherein
Thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part,
And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart.


Never were souls more exactly in unison than those of the VERNONS. I present
-- for your emulation -- another instance of it. Upon my unfolding the
Lieutenant's design to his lady, she dispatched a letter into Sussex, which
produced the following reply:

Lieutenant VERNON to his LADY.
Most dear SOPHIA,
THAT you was superior to the feebleness of the modish female, who affects to
lisp, to shudder at the shower, and tremble at the breeze, I knew before: but
that your soul was so nicely attuned to the pains and pleasures of mine, I was
not so aware of, till the receipt of your last kind favor.

You will spare me to your King, you will lend him my services against the foes
of Britain: noble woman, generous wife! I am again at Major FRASER'S, in my way
home, and upon my arrival at our peaceful villa, I will pay you my warmest
acknowledgments by my embraces. I put your letter, with a sparkling eye, into
the hand of my old friend: he read it, and burst forth into extacies peculiar
to the manly violence of his nature. "'Sdeath, VERNON, said he, ten such wives
as thine would restore the female character from the ignominy of the rest of
the sex. Such were the Spartan, such were the Roman women: I do not wish our
wives to fight, Lieutenant: I do not wish them to wield the battle-ax, nor to
eject the bomb, but, in the name of honor, let them suffer their husbands to
behave like men, and permit those who wear beards to deserve them. I love
softness, VERNON, and consider it as the female characteristic, but still I
would have some distinction made betwixt women and children, exclusive of the
mere difference of bodily size: and I do declare to thee, Lieutenant, though I
have seen many women that I could have liked, some that I could love, yet I
never dared venture upon matrimony, lest my wife should stand betwixt me and my
duty as a soldier: but could I, like thee, have met with a SOPHIA, I had long
since taken to myself a brave-spirited wench, who should have spread the
triumphal roses under my feet, and wove her garland of welcome against my
return. But you are the happy hero: you are more than a general in the
affections of SOPHIA. Go on then, -- embark -- exert yourself to merit so
illustrious a girl: fail not, I charge you, to visit me with SOPHY under your
arm, on your coming again to the country you have honored." I was preparing to
give him the farewell embrace, but he held me by the hand, and surveying his
figure in a glass that was opposite, shook his head and burst into tears: "Thou
see, said he, (still looking in the mirror,) I do not counterfeit; my best
arm and my most serviceable leg have left me: my soul wishes for the field, but
my body -- this useless load of an old fellow, of whom the half is timber --
would but shame the troops, and disgrace his Majesty." Then turning to the
other end of the room, he took from the mantlepiece a sword, cautiously guarded
from the rust by a scarlet case, -- "There -- (continued the Major, after he
had taken it from the covering) -- there, VERNON, is the blade that attended me
in all my fortunes for more than thirty years: examine it -- take notice of the
marks of prowess: it is no maiden I Will assure thee: A better never did a belt
sustain
Upon a soldier's thigh.
Take it Lieutenant. The hand which used to manage it, is gone, and with it the
occupation of poor FRASER: it is a shame that so excellent a friend should be
converted into a piece of lazy household furniture. Take it then, I say; and
when thou art in the front of the battle, remember whose token thou have in
hand, and do it justice."

There are other traits, my dear SOPHIA, of this brave invalid's character,
which I shall reserve for the opportunity of domestic endearment. As to your
saying that you see less beauty, and smell less fragrance in the flowers of our
garden, since my absence; and then artfully urging that, as a reason why you
should accompany me to America, makes me pleased with the compliment, though I
am not convinced by the argument. The Colonies, are now in too much confusion,
to afford a lady accommodation; and your residence would be with me, always
precarious, and, for the most part, unfit for you. The scene of bloodshed would
be too near your eye; and the attention I should pay to you, would make me less
attentive to my own professional advantages. Satisfy yourself, therefore, with
the friendship of the good Mr. THORNTON -- with the exactest correspondence,
and with the unalterable love of

Your tender CAESAR VERNON.
P. S.
I am glad you are at last joined by Miss SIDNEY. Tell her I salute her. --




THORNTON in Continuation.
There, SEDLEY, is, thou see, fresh reason to animate thy amendments. But the
postman brings me a packet. I perceive it is superscribed by thy character, and
impressed by thy seal. Happily I shall find, by the contents, that thy reformation
is begun. In this hope I break thy wax, and bid thee farewell.

LETTER LXXXIV. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THORNTON, give me joy! My insinuations have extorted from FANNY "her slow
leave," and as soon as I can contrive an interview with her, I am to have it.
Hear, by what a display of my art I won her consent to see me alone. In reply
to her epistle -- that which I sent thee -- I wrote -- though I like not
trusting myself to the mercy of ink and paper -- another, in which I exerted
and exhausted all the delicacy of dissembled passion. I struck the string most
likely to work upon a woman in her situation; and, as a proof of my address and
eloquence, I tell thee again, that I prevailed -- For once she will see me.
Read her card.

Mrs. MORTIMER to Mr. SEDLEY.
FOR once, as you urge it with such vehemence, and as you promise to quit
BUXTON immediately afterward, I will see you. When you see an opportunity,
either in the garden or elsewhere, you may employ it in communicating what you
tell me is of so much consequence to my fame and felicity.

F. M.


Now then, THORNTON, must I call to my aid DORMER'S "unobserved observation,"
and banish all but the present object from my thoughts: now must I discover
"the true mark of a superior genius," and show "a steady undissipated
attention" till I have ultimately succeeded in this great, glorious particular.
-- Nothing shall seduce me a single moment from -- 'Sdeath! THORNTON, the
passing bell tolls -- Surely HARRIET is not dead -- No matter -- I will not --
dare not enquire. I will command myself this once; and when this scheme is
completed I care not how soon I descend to ELYSIUM and to CHESTERFIELD.

PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXXXV. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
OH, Mrs. LA MOTTE! the measure of my miseries is not completed -- I have
every thing to apprehend from both the looks and words of the physician. Just
as he last entered, she called out, without looking at him, that he was the
cruellest of men, and then, upon drawing the curtains, begged his pardon, and
said she was mistaken. I have not even yet had my clothes off -- I can eat
nothing; and when I drink, it is only to allay the thirstings of a slow fever
that is still lurking about me. Mr. SEDLEY came yesterday kindly to enquire,
and just as he had said -- Well, my good Mr. HOMESPUN, and how does our poor
HARRIET now -- she screamed out with inconceivable violence -- bade us shut the
door, and then remained weeping and fainting alternately for above an hour. My
fate is really a hard one, Mrs. LA MOTTE; but my conscience is void of offense,
and the wisdom of the ALMIGHTY shall not, even now, he questioned by

HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER LXXXVI. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
I CONFESS it, LUCY -- he HAS pleased me; and I am above concealing from my
friend, that I admire his manner even more than his person. His words, his
looks, his motions are truly irresistible; and if you knew half the noble
things he has done since he came to the bath, you would the less wonder at my
being caught. I will only mention to you one or two points of his conduct,
which will help you, by such specimens, to conjecture the rest. His servant had
played the libertine with an innocent wench, who depended upon the bounty of
the bathers for her attendance at the pump, and well: the fellow seduced her,
the poor deluded wretch lost her virtue, and her means of livelihood at the
same time. Common masters would have cuffed the footman, and called the injured
girl a simpleton. Mr. SEDLEY insisted upon the deceiver's marrying the
deceived; the ceremony has actually been celebrated, and it is said -- not by
him, for he never speaks of himself -- that he designs to see them well settled
before he leaves BUXTON.

There is, you must know -- a lady, who, on her return from the bath to her
house, was hurt by the over-turning of a carriage, and the husband, who is a
worthy clergyman, would have been quite distracted, had it not been for the
cares, tendernesses, and attention of this obliging man, who has the art of
propitiating everybody to him, and making everybody around him happy, by those
nice and minute, yet truly engaging offices, which (being in general considered
as unimportant, though in reality I find they are but too pleasing) are too
often neglected. He is now very frequently in our family, and I rejoice to see
him so much in the confidence and good graces of my father, mother, and
brother. As to poor dear FANNY, she seldom talks when she can avoid it; and one
may see Mr. SEDLEY'S good breeding, and even the feelings of his heart, in the
manner with which he adapts himself to the person he addresses: when his
sentiments are directed to Sir HENRY, they are acute, correct, classical,
penetrating, learned: when to my brother, they are elegant, noble, dignified,
and animating: when to my mother, they are grave, condescending, cautious: when
to my sister, gentle, in an under-tone of voice, softened as it were to the
situation of a sick person, and that person a woman: his subjects to FANNY are
such as might soothe a spirit much nearer its end than I hope that dear
creature is. He colors beautifully the ideas of hope: he talks of returning
health: he paints to her imagination, and he gives such touches to the scene of
her expected recovery, that our dear invalid smiles when she is too exhausted
to speak, and her husband thanks him, with overflowing eyes, for the
entertainment and ease he has produced to Mrs. MORTIMORE. In short, LUCY, he
is a divine fellow, and I know not what will be the consequence of my trip to
BUXTON. Let what will be the event,

I am always your DELIA DELMORE.
P. S.
I had almost forgot to tell you that I am half teazed to death with the
surfeiting fine sayings of a beau, who has offered me knick-knacks without
number, and has made serious and tempting overtures to my father. So that you
see SEDLEY has got a rival. Oh, heavens! that Providence should, into the same
world, send two creatures so uniformly different.

Adieu.


LETTER LXXXVII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE Gods have been auspicious. The interview is past, and the stratagem by
which it was obtained is worthy of myself. Thou must understand, that the
sister of FANNY -- the lady I mean with the pastoral appellation, Miss DELIA
DELMORE -- is such an object as cannot possibly be past over by the eye of a
man who is taught to ANNIHILATE THE VERY IDEA OF CRIMINALITY, and is only
intent upon the possession of as much beauty (without the vulgar consideration
of "to whom related, or by whom begot") as he can possibly find, and the more
to be found in one family the better, so as that secrecy which saves all
mischief can be procured. This DELIA, I say, THORNTON, being in the maiden
state, and to all intents and purposes in a marriageable situation, must be
addressed in the way of wedlock. To this end I have so managed the point, as to
make one sister aid me in a design upon the other, while, in the mean time, I
have so contrived it, that both shall be plotting their own personal pleasure:
nay, I will make even the husband, father, mother, and the very coxcomb I
before told thee of, who is my rival, the ostensible puppets on this occasion,
while I, in the supremacy of my wit, and pushed forward by my great Preceptor,
will make the whole family subservient to the gratification of thy

PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LXXXVIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
THY letter, this moment come to hand, convinces me of my mistake in supposing
thou were to be wrought upon by scenes of tenderness and generosity, and proves
that it is not in the language and good deeds of either man or woman to turn
thy heart. That Janus of an Earl has, I see, enfolded himself round thee: his
maxims have penetrated into thy very marrow. Nay, thou even go beyond him:
he did but point at the benefits of duplicity in a private letter, at least not
by his consent made public, but thou art duplicity itself. Thou, with an
insidiousness unparalleled, engravest his horrid precepts on thine heart,
enterest the temple of domestic joy, and (under the appearance of an angel,
while the cloven foot of the fiend is delicately concealed,) art in sober
truth, could thy real form be seen, the very demon of destruction. Call not
thyself my SEDLEY. -- I own thee not -- Thou art the Devil's SEDLEY, and I
begin to shudder that I am connected with such a monster. Yet I beseech thee --
once again in the still, serene, but pathetic voice of friendship -- I beseech
thee to desist. Bring not the gray hairs of the venerable DELMORE'S to the
grave. Pollute not the weak, defenseless FANNY -- catch not in thy treacherous
toils the heart of DELIA, who deserves a better fate. Hasten, I conjure thee,
to the metropolis. There thy appetite for women may have its full play. Our
streets are crowded with chastity destroyed, beauty in ruins, and simplicity
seduced. Dissipate, at least, with less mischief, part of thy large fortune
upon these. From thy present pursuits, I again repeat it, thou can gain
nothing but infamy: and if I could but transfer to thee my feelings, thou
would hug them to thy heart for ever, and discard all others with horror. I
have the happiness to please the visitor of Mrs. VERNON, the charming ARAMINTA
SIDNEY: she is the friend of FANNY MORTIMER: they correspond: she describes her
as thou have done -- Oh! for GOD'S sake, SEDLEY -- do not harm her -- do not
push thy cruelties to the dishonor, disgrace -- and very probably the death of
-- a sick woman. Mr. VERNON is returned: the affection, the happiness of this
pair, might soften a panther into tenderness, and subdue the veriest rake into
continence. No wonder it has touched the gentle bosom of ARAMINTA. I find a
rapture in her smiles: I anticipate every change of her countenance. I am so
far from desiring to ruin her reputation, that I tremble as I approach her. I
have not assurance enough to kiss her beautiful lips: the slightest touch of
her hand disorders me. I detect myself looking at her, and withdraw my eyes for
fear of offending. I am a very young man, Mr. SEDLEY, and thou and
CHESTERFIELD, with your united councils, had nearly led me to everything
odious: but I saw the precipice time enough to escape it: the society of
virtuous people, the friendship of the Lieutenant and his lady -- the esteem --
and, oh! that I might be allowed to say -- the love, the pure love of ARAMINTA
-- will, I hope, again restore me to what I formerly was. As to your secrets,
SEDLEY, I shall not betray them: and you will judge how true I must be to the
point of confidence, when I dare not violate it, even though, by so pious a
treachery, I could probably save a noble family, and, involved in the fate of
that, the friend of ARAMINTA SIDNEY.

I am, With prayers for your change of heart, Yours, JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER LXXXIX. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
PITY, Mrs. LA MOTTE, the distraction of a husband and a father. I have lost my
child, and my wife is in the agonies of death. The babe that was to have
blessed me, and crowned my nine months expectation, has appeared only to weep,
and to -- die -- the mother could nourish it no longer: her agonizing fits have
produced an untimely labor, and, lifeless as it is, she will not part with the
infant: she hugs it in her arms -- cradles it in her bosom -- insists upon its
being laid upon her pillow, and will not suffer any hand but hers and mine to
touch it. Oh, Mrs. LA MOTTE! what shall I do, and whither must I fly. -- There
is but one resource, and I will seek it before I finish my letter --

Blessed is the power of prayer! -- I retired, Madam, into my own bed-room, and
upon the bended knee of humility sought for comfort to the only hand that, in
an exigence like mine, can bestow it. I rise easier, Mrs. LA MOTTE, indeed I
do: He that corrects has not utterly forsaken me. I have softly opened
HARRIET'S apartment, and by the nurse's waving me to withdraw again, I judge
that my poor patient is asleep. The GOD, who alone can effectually give
medicine to a mind diseased, protect and prosper her moment of awaking!

HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XC. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
MY master-wheels are in motion: I sent brother MORTIMER upon a love-message,
made to the lady DELIA'S eyebrow, saw the old Baronet and his Dame set out for
an evening-ride to BUXTON bath, and had the fair FANNY MORTIMER all to myself.
Oh! ye Deities of Design! -- ye spirits congenial to STANHOPE'S! what an hour
of whisper and insinuation have I passed! Oh! THORNTON, for a second interview!
-- It was all done in the very key-note of seduction.

Conscious of the prepossessing idea -- I availed myself of her partiality. I
did not kneel, I did not whine, I did not smack the palms, nor squeeze the
handkerchief, but I hit her on the only chord of the soul that could make a
vibration in my favor: I pitied her want of health -- I praised the sacrifice
she had made to paternal quietude. I was all refinement -- all assiduity -- all
CHESTERFIELD: the features were obedient, and every atom of irresistible art
was levelled against her. I called the color into her face by one sentiment --
I sent it away by another: one look brought the tear -- a second dried it up.
Now the rose, now the lilly, prevailed in her cheeks. Cordials became
necessary. I ORDERED my hand to shake as I presented the hartshorn -- the water
-- the drops. The lovely object of my battery began to yield -- Nature tugged
at her heart -- her frame became weaker -- her passion stronger: every finger
tottered: her breath became difficult: she rocked herself in her chair -- her
eyes were full -- her voice faultered out an -- Oh! Mr. SEDLEY! -- the snare I
had laid for her entered into her soul, and she fainted upon my bosom.

The assiduous talents that reduced and sunk her could not even by a different
application of them bring her to herself -- and when I perceived this, and
found it impossible to quiet her increased agitations, I went into the
summer house, where my cause was pleading, and with a decent degree of
trepidation told Mr. MORTIMER (after bowing to DELIA with as decent a
confusion) that his FANNY was rather more indisposed than she found herself
before tea.

I am thy -- And, in spite of old proverbs, and all cross sayings, will be thy
PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XCI. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
YOUR letter found me at tea in this innocent family -- I begged leave to break
the seal -- I read as far as the fainting of FANNY, and the cup fell from my
hand. -- Oh! thou hard of heart! -- Thou insensible -- thou incorrigible! --
But she is yet pure. She fell upon thy bosom -- Thy horrid purpose is not yet
perpetrated: nor shall it be: for, by the God of Truth, Mr. SEDLEY, if thou
do not write me word that thou will give over the destruction of this most
pitiable girl, I will, at the risk of all consequences, take the proper steps
to put her out of thy power. No idle punctilio shall sway me in a case like
this. When Innocence is in danger, to break Faith with a bad man is not Fraud,
but Virtue.

JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER XCII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
TRAITOR and tattler as thou art, I have the start of thee. -- Yes, THORNTON,
she did fall upon my bosom; and I reaped the rewards of my insinuations, and of
my address, in her arms. -- It Is true, she returned not the embrace -- What of
that? I was wrought up to the crisis, and her strugglings only answered the
ends -- and served as the sweet succedaneum of writhing the limbs in the
transports of taste.

PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XCIII. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
MY unhappy wife is worse than ever; but as her strength decays, her affection
seems to increase for me, and this only serves to agonize me the more. I sat up
with her all the last night, part of which she passed without her senses. In
the intervals of her delirium she treated me with a tenderness that penetrated
my soul: she called me by every name that could express her fondness -- she
kissed me -- suffered the poor clay-cold corse of our little one to be taken
from her. -- It must not be, said she serenely -- Let it be given to the grave
-- bury it decently -- be sure you do not close up the earth -- leave a small
space for its mother, and all shall be well. About midnight she mentioned Mrs.
LA MOTTE -- her dear, kind, noble, virtuous Mrs. LA MOTTE -- several times.
About an hour after this she started up wildly, caught hold of the curtains --
threw them aside with some violence, and enquired of the nurse for ink and
paper -- she said, she was resolved to write to him; then, without naming
anybody, melted into tears, sunk quietly down upon her pillow, and said -- he
was not worth it, and it did not signify. I dare not tell you how my own health
is, but while I have any health at all, I am

Your HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XCIV. Mrs. MORTIMER to Miss SIDNEY.
VILLAINY too big to express, and which, though I am dying under it, I know not
how to punish, without involving innocent people, has been practiced upon me. I
foresee -- I feel it will be impossible you should ever see again your

FANNY MORTIMER.

LETTER XCV. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
THE last hope is extinguished, and I can only hold the pen to tell you that my
wife is -- in Heaven, and that the last words which came from her quivering
lips, convinced me there is a wretch somewhere upon earth, to whom I am
indebted for her death. I can say no more.

HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XCVI. Miss DELIA DELMORE, to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
WHAT a dreadful change, my dear LUCY, since I last wrote to you! There is an
unusual degree of uneasiness on the countenances of my ever-honoured parents:
my brother Mr. MORTIMER is pensive: FANNY was seized with an hysterical
disorder while her husband was communicating to me the discourse that passed
between him and Mr. SEDLEY, who has never been at our house since. Mrs.
MORTIMER, it seems, knew not that Mr. SEDLEY had interested her husband in the
declaration made, by that medium, to me: she remains exceedingly ill: has
actually refused to suffer Mr. MORTIMER to sleep with her: says, she has strong
reasons for it, which he shall know at a proper time. At our coming into the
drawing room, after we were summoned to her assistance by SEDLEY (who in his
confusion and hurry to fetch us, ran down our long garden unbraced and without
his hat), we found the poor dear creature just recovering from a swoon: her
eyes closed -- her teeth shut -- her clenched hands locked in each other -- and
her dress in the utmost disorder, I suppose, from the violent changes of
posture occasioned by the fits. I have no heart now, Lady LUCY, to talk of my
own affairs; and yet, as you have a right to know every thing that concerns me,
I just send you a sketch of my brother's conversation in the summer house
previous to these alarming circumstances. My almost constant attendance on my
sister will not permit me to transcribe it fair; and you must be contented with
a loose paper on which I have been able to scribble only at intervals.

The Paper, enclosing Mr. MORTIMER'S Address to his Sister, upon Mr. SEDLEY'S
Subject.
MR. MORTIMER, having led me by the hand through the garden into the
summerhouse, began, as usual, with a pretty compliment, told me that he found I
had already done execution -- that I had made a wound which all the waters of
BUXTON were not able to cure, and then proceeded (you know, LUCY, what an able
advocate he is) to open the design of his calling me aside. I will own to you,
said he, my dear DELIA, that I summon your attention in behalf of Mr. SEDLEY;
but I will, as nearly as I am able, recollect his own words, and, without the
least endeavor to sway you, leave the result to your own determination. I
lately had a particular conversation with Mr. SEDLEY, wherein he addressed me,
to the best of my remembrance, as follows:

"The motive of this visit, Mr. MORTIMER, is in confidence, to enquire of you,
from whom I have reason to believe she conceals nothing, whether your sister
DELIA is under any present engagement of heart, or in the least respect partial
to any one in the disposal of her affections; for I should shudder to be the
cause of even a negative pain to so amiable a woman: and I forebore to ask this
question of Sir HENRY, lest that regard which he is pleased to entertain of me
might incline him to something that might be contradictory to the private
prospects of his daughter. I know, Mr. MORTIMER, the fraternal affection your
sister bears you, and I am no stranger, young as I am in your acquaintance, to
the all-souled intimacy subsisting between you as happy relations: hence, I
imagined it more for the general peace to direct myself to you rather than to
any other: for as my enquiries are answered by you, Mr. MORTIMER, I will either
bury my ambitious wishes in my own and your bosom, or, should they meet an
encouraging reply, I will proceed to take such measures as seem to you most
conducive to the happiness I aspire to."

Here, DELIA, he paused a little, and then with inimitable grace pursued his
overtures:

"Although, Mr. MORTIMER -- said he -- I have had of late often the honor of
Sir HENRY'S company, whose nearest secrets of heart I am beginning to sh^re, I
never found that he had any view of uniting Miss DELMORE to any particular
family. But why do I talk thus? Sir HENRY spurns the bare idea of compulsitory
connections, and his noble nature can never stoop to barter the felicity of a
child to interested prospects. And yet, Sir, may it not be reasonably
apprehended, that a soul so delicate -- a heart so susceptible -- feelings so
fine -- and a bosom so alive to every nicer alarm, as Miss DELMORE'S, may have
made some wise and favorite choice of her own? If so, tell me of it frankly,
and I promise, dear MORTIMER, -- to join you in promoting rather than opposing
the happiness she hopes for. After what I have now said, you will be quite
explicit, ingenuous, and unreserved."

He waited my reply; his fine eyes shone with expectation: I told him that I
believed my sister DELIA had not yet, amongst the various pretensions made to
her hand, seen the object she could approve in the intimate light he alluded
to: that I had often heard her express a proper regard to the excellences,
manners, and address, of Mr. SEDLEY: that, as a very young friend, introduced
into the family by the hand of so revered and sagacious a father, she had an
elegant opinion of his merit: and that though I had not observed the least
intimation of her entertaining any sensibility of heart as to his person (here,
DELIA, he bowed, and blushed), yet that (be not displeased, DELIA) I knew her
naturally soft, sensible, and a nice distinguisher of superior endowments. I
concluded with saying, that, for the short time I could boast the honor of his
acquaintance, I knew none more likely to inspire Miss DELMORE; and that, as a
proof of my good wishes, I would take the opportunity given me of Sir HENRY and
Lady DELMORE'S evening-ride, from which I would excuse us young folks, to
inform you of the conversation previous to any farther procedure.

His cheeks colored to their full bloom (and you know what a complexion he
has, DELIA) at this proposal: he begged, with great delicacy, that, till I was
pre-acquainted with your proposals, wishes, and views, I would preserve the
whole matter a secret, not only from your mother and Sir HENRY, but even from
my wife, the angelic Mrs. MORTIMER, as he was pleased to call her: adding, that
he could not bear to occasion, by an ill-timed petition, one moment's
uneasiness in a family so harmonized, innocent, and affectionate, as Sir HENRY
DELMORE'S; and that, rather than be cruelly instrumental in the subversion of
this, although his heart was in the cause, he would stifle the pleadings of it
to eternity. -- I easily prevailed, DELIA, on Sir HENRY and your mother to
excuse us, and, as soon as their chariot rolled from the door, I took Mr.
SEDLEY by the arm, and told him I was going to be his advocate. He pressed my
hand, and in a whisper said he would have the honor to keep Mrs. MORTIMER
company in the saloon, while I pleaded for him in the summerhouse.

And now, my dear DELIA, continued my brother, may I not congratulate you on
the conquest of a man who, if there is any faith in the fairest appearances, is
equally adorned in mind and body, and who will, I dare say, instantly proceed
to acquaint us with his circumstances and fortunes, if he receives your
sanction to be more explicit. I must own I was never so truly attracted by any
man, and he really seems born for an alliance with a woman as enchanting as
himself. Tell me truly -- tell me like a sister -- Did you ever see so manly
yet so decorated an address -- such splendid sentiments -- so elevated an air?
or Did you ever before meet with any gentleman so easy, or so engaging, in that
sort of behavior which is the result of a brilliant capacity, ornamented
breeding, and unaffected complaisance?


When you have read the enclosed, LUCY, give me the sentiment of your heart
upon it: for my own part, flattering as it is, I am too disordered, and too
much interested in the sudden gloom that hangs over our house, to find
satisfaction in any thing. Yet I am always

Your DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER XCVII. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
I AM obliged, my good friend, to summon, not philosophy only, but all the
force of christianity to my aid; and even that sustains itself with difficulty
against the agitated powers of Nature. My child is scarce cold in the earth: my
wise is tomorrow to be enclosed within her coffin: my duty at my parish is
precariously performed, and my strength absolutely fails me. Yet the last
solemn testimonies of a husband's affection shall not be neglected, Mrs. LA
MOTTE. I have caused the dear dimensions of her dead body to be taken, my
friend. Her shroud is upon the table before me; and I have sent to bespeak the
hearse that shall convey her from hence to my own church, where I am resolved
her dear remains shall be deposited. I will not leave her in a strange land: I
will not suffer her to lie where I cannot often visit her grave, often reflect
upon her virtues, and always protect the consecrated spot which she occupies,
from all insult and sacrilegious indecency. Nay, my friend, I will do more than
this: the child that I trusted but on Tuesday last to the tomb, shall be raised
again from the earth. Little did I think the commands of my wife would be so
soon necessary to be obeyed: but her dying words shall not be forgotten. The
mother and the son -- for ah! Mrs. LA MOTTE, my infant was a boy -- shall be
buried in the embraces of each other. Nay, I will, (however the custom of the
world may pronounce against it,) -- I will read over them the awful service
with my own mouth: the funeral-oration shall be composed by myself: in my own
churchyard shall they be deposited, and I will have the fortitude to see the
last spadeful of earth cover their beloved ashes before I retire to the agony
of my solitude. That this is an uncommon proceeding I am not to be told: but it
is, nevertheless, consistent with MY notions of piety, tenderness, and duty,
and shall be done.

I am obliged to lay down the pen, but will not fold up my letter; for though I
shall be with you some time tomorrow night -- scarcely till the middle of it
-- I know I shall be incapable of relating to you (what yet you will be anxious
to understand) the manner of my poor HARRIET'S death, and therefore I will try
to set it down -- as I think I can with less misery to myself -- upon paper.

In Continuation.
About an hour before she died, she desired the nurse to withdraw, and, taking
me gently by the hand, she looked at me for some time, was almost drowned with
her tears, and hid her face within the pillow. Then, having somewhat relieved
herself, she rose again upon her arm, and with a voice scarcely audible, but
pierceingly tender, she addressed me thus: Oh, my best HORACE! I have injured
thee: I die a victim to the arts of the seducer -- a seducer under the fairest
form of irresistible virtue. Inquire not who or where he is -- resentment
would, perhaps, ruin you both, and GOD can tell, I would not have any mischief
befall either. I have long --

Mrs. LA MOTTE, she could not finish her sentence. A second effort gave her
just the power to say -- Put the child in my bosom, that we may sleep together:
-- after which, her eyes became fixed full upon mine: I fell upon the bed in
excessive grief -- she struggled hard to give the kiss which exhausted Nature
denied her power to impress, and then, Madam, half-turning upon her side, the
sigh came forth that wafted her soul to its Creator, and she expired upon my
cheek.

Oh, Mrs. LA MOTTE, that I could find the seducer! Oh, that I could discover
the dark complotter of all this mischief! -- Clergyman as I am, I would make
him feel the vengeance of a husband's arm. -- I have enquired in vain -- not a
clue is left me in her pocketbook -- the landlord to whom I applied, without
telling him the drift of my application -- assures me, that since my departure
from BUXTON, none but his wife and himself were in her company -- not even Mr.
SEDLEY, who has been constantly, of late, at a family's out of town -- but of
him, indeed, I have not the least suspicion -- Perhaps the horrid circumstance
happened before our coming to the bath -- perhaps the infant is the offspring
of some other parent -- perhaps -- Oh, Mrs. LA MOTTE! Mrs. LA MOTTE! I am
bewildered, and wild with a thousand apprehensions -- But why do I rage thus
for revenge -- Is that consistent with my holy character? Is not the poor
object of seduction punished sufficiently? Are not the child and parent both
dead? Ah, my unhappy HARRIET! -- I injure thee -- I wrong thee! -- I have just
kissed the clay-cold lip, Mrs. LA MOTTE -- I will thirst no more for the blood
of the wretch that has despoiled me -- I leave him to the justice of his Maker
-- Let me go on in the straight path -- let me still walk in the way of my
duty. -- The coffin is come -- the hearse rolls its sound in the wind -- I hear
the beat of the melancholy hoof at the door. -- My new-buried babe is bringing
into the room. -- It is the deep of night -- there is no moon -- I will have no
torches.

The child is raised -- the mother is in her shroud, and placed in her last
mansion -- the horse waits to carry me home, and I have given directions to
have both the bodies carried carefully down stairs. -- God keep your heart from
a scene like this, prays the unfortunate

HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XCVIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
Sir,
I HAVE changed my condition, and by so doing enlarged the circle of my
felicity. The chaste and honorable connection I have now made, with the sacred
and rational pursuits attending it, render it very improper for me to hold
farther correspondence with a man who professes to seduce the wife, and may,
very probably, one time or another, throw from his guard even one who is armed
against him by a knowledge of the basest system that ever was adopted.

I only write this to acquaint you that it is the last letter you will ever
receive from,

Sir, Your most humble servant, JAMES THORNTON.
P. S.
Mrs. THORNTON -- late Miss SIDNEY -- has received such a card from FANNY
MORTIMER, as pronounces you the most abandoned hypocrite upon earth. You guess
the contents of it.



LETTER XCIX. Lady LUCY SAXBY to Miss DELIA DELMORE.
HOW shall I be able to write a proper answer to so interesting a letter as
your last, in which two subjects so immediately opposite are touched upon? As
to poor Mrs. MORTIMER'S health, I anxiously hope she is, by this time, again
restored to a more tolerable degree of it; and yet how much are you all to be
pitied in being necessarily made the spectators of a disposition so full of
fears, hopes, wishes, and apprehensions! But, as JOSEPH says, "I dreamed a
dream last night," and I shall relate it to my DELIA -- my fair oracle, for
interpretation. Methought I was on a sudden -- these things are all done
suddenly -- transported from the city of LONDON to the realms of HEAVEN, where
a SERAPH, in the form of my departed sister, (whom you and I used so much to
admire,) immediately acknowledged me, and addressed me thus: Upon what account
is my dear LUCY come, uncalled, to Elysium? or How get she hither without a
guide? I come, said I, in behalf of a dying friend, on the preservation of
whose life depends the felicity of mine -- Lead me, my sister, to the Angel of
HEALTH, and I will kneel down and worship him.

If that is the purport of your errand to Elysium, I fear you are come here in
vain, said CLARISSA: there can be no partialities, and yon old, grey-headed,
frowning personage you see with a scythe in his right hand, would be very angry
if he was but to imagine what you want. Death is above a bribe, sister, you may
depend on it.

At this instant I beheld a most beautiful cherub, with golden plumage
expanded, fluttering over my head, and alight by the side of me -- I trembled
and bowed -- "Stranger," said the celestial figure -- I know your business! --
put the name of your friend into that little lattice -- it leads to the palace
of the Angel of PITY -- approach reverently --

Soon after I had obeyed these commands, a door opened, out of which came the
most elegant appearance of the female sex that can possibly be imagined, and
with her a second form, whose face was shaded by a snowy veil -- "Mortal," said
the first splendid figure -- the prayer of the affectionate shall not be
offered in vain -- thy friend shall live, and lo! here she is in the bloom of
beauty, and in the height of health. Saying this, the veil was thrown aside,
and in the second form I immediately recognized the features of FANNY, more
animated and animating than ever -- I ran to embrace the sister of my friend --
but the Angel of PITY interposed, and, after bidding me depart in peace, she
waved a golden wand, and then the different emotions occasioned by the vision
awaked me.

And yet, DELIA, I am persuaded this dream will be propitious. How truly happy
shall I be, if you send me word that I have made a trip to Elysium to some
purpose. Nor will I, at any rate, suffer you to call me superstitious; for the
thing is very probable: surely, in recovering such a woman, where such a family
and such a husband are concerned, the Angels of PITY and HEALTH may very
properly be interested. I will not excuse you, if you do not acquaint me with
the success of my dream immediately.

As to the conduct and conversation of Mr. SEDLEY, in the summer house, I
cannot but admire his address and ingenuity. His making a confident of your
brother was such a stroke of policy as shows him to be no ordinary lover; and I
can see, (from the delicate turn of his compliments, and his management of
those nameless delicacies, which, though called minute, are amongst the points
of importance,) that he is no novice in those matters. -- You ask for my
sentiments upon the subject: What can I say? -- Have you not sent me the most
amiable specimen of his attachment? -- Was not this attachment discovered in a
mode peculiar to the elegance of his character? -- Has he not person -- manner
-- fortune -- wit -- sense? -- Do you not know what a complexion he has, my
dear, when he blushes? -- Has he not, by your own confession, the most
decorated address -- the most splendid sentiments -- the most elevated air? and
Is it not the opinion of your brother, that he never met with any gentleman so
easy, or so engaging in that sort of behavior, which is the result of a
brilliant capacity, ornamented breeding, and unaffected complaisance? --

Thus recommended, then, my dear, on all sides, how is it possible that my
sentiments should not be greatly in his favor? How is it possible that I
should not wish to alter the superscription of my letters, and direct them for
Mrs. SEDLEY?

After all, suppose I was to change my note: you ask me for my sentiments:
suppose you see them in the following letter:

To Miss DELMORE.
Dear DELIA,
I OBEY your desire in regard to the offers of Mr. SEDLEY, and here send you
the secret of my heart upon them.

In the first place, I would have you to consider, men are generally false, and
can assume any shape that forwards and facilitates their purpose.

In the next place, you are most likely so partial to him, that you call those
actions elegant which are only ordinary; and his manners, which are in your eye
so enchanting, may only be a pretty method he has got of playing upon the
surface of common subjects, just to gain his ends, after which he will,
perhaps, become as insipid, or as impertinent as the fop whom you, in your
former letters, have ridiculed. -- Ten to one but this polite lover will be a
very rude husband; and when the magic of the marriage-circle is drawn in his
favor, alas, poor lady wise, how will thine eyes be open to the delusion! --
Putting all these points together, therefore, my advice is fairly this --
forbid him your house -- banish him from your company -- blot him from your
memory, and, to cut the matter short, have nothing more to say to him. These
are the councils of your

LUCY SAXBY.


Should I send this laconic epistle formally signed and sealed, what would be
the consequence? -- Methinks I see the whole scene? The angry DELIA has
finished the letter, and lays it down -- she hems twice or thrice, attempting,
but in vain, to swallow the affront -- Surely, says she, (beautifully
bridling,) surely Lady SAXBY might have softened the matter a little -- she is
very explicit -- but how should she be a judge of a man she never saw? -- I am
not much delighted with her letter, I can tell her that -- She believes all men
are alike -- What! does she compare the divine SEDLEY, to that atom of a fop,
that "bug with gilded wings?" Upon my word, a smart comparison -- very
agreeable truly -- I Will drop my correspondence with her censorious Ladyship,
however. --

Ah, DELIA! DELIA! have I not shown off the sex faithfully? -- Do I not know
what agreeable inconsistencies we are in love-affairs? How ready we are all to
ask the advice of another, when we are predetermined to take our own! Now, are
you not, my dear correspondent, are you not a little hypocrite? Have you not
resolved to encourage SEDLEY, and would not every dissuasive be ineffectual.
But I rejoice to think you are under no necessity to answer that question -- I
do not see any suspicious part in SEDLEY'S behavior, and I expect that you
will distinguish yourself from the rest of your sex, even by the elegance and
ingenuousness with which you meet his advances. That the event may be happiness
to both, is most unfeignedly the wish of your

LUCY SAXBY.

LETTER C. Mrs. LA MOTTE to the Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN. (Prior to the Receipt
of the last.)
IS then the veil rent, my good Mr. HOMESPUN? -- Is the bruised reed shaken to
pieces? -- Language was never made equal to such a heart-rending subject.
Remember, however, even in the midst of affliction remember, the character of a
christian pastor. Make haste, Oh, my unhappy friend! to your own cottage. Take
no vengeance on an unworthy rake, even should you find him. The thorn is in his
heart -- the flaming sword is in his bosom. My feeble consolations -- my hopes
-- my attentions and my prayers, will be for ever at your service. Delay not
then, longer than it is necessary, your journey to the parsonage -- and your
real sympathizing

C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER CI. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
YES, Mrs. LA MOTTE -- I will remember what is due to the character of a
Christian clergyman, and I am returning, as I ought, to my solitary cottage:
but let me enjoin you -- though your own prudence will render that injunction
superfluous -- not to satisfy curiosity of any kind, whether it comes in the
shape of condolence, sympathy, or surprise, as to the true cause of my
unfortunate HARRIET'S departure. Let her memory escape the censure even of an
ill suggestion. I write this upon the road at our resting place, while the
horses are baited, and the men refreshed. Ah, my dear Mrs. LA MOTTE, what a
mechanical creature is man! People who are hired for their attendance at a
funeral are so familiarised to the last ceremonies, that they smile in their
sables; and, while they are conveying youth and beauty to the tomb, can enjoy
the ordinary, everyday events of life with as much glee and inconsideration as
if they were carrying the gayest bride and bridegroom to the altar. The
mourners who came with me, are at this instant carousing in the next room --
while she who used heretofore to be the companion of my journeys, and made
every place a home to me by the enchantments of her presence and society, is
waiting their leisure, and lying in a gloomy vehicle, without any refreshment
whatever.

Without refreshment! What have I said, and how does my present practice
contradict my former precepts? Do I forget the rewards of an innocent soul --
and are all my tears shed over the breathless body; which, being no longer
animated by that soul, is nothing? Surely I have lost my wonted sense of
religion, and Providence --

No -- Mrs. LA MOTTE -- no -- I have not. To religion, and to Providence, be
every event committed -- but neither have robbed me of my sensibility, and
while that remains I cannot "but remember such things were, and were most
precious to me." Even memory assists in drawing a picture to distress me --

She who is there emboxed was one whom I chose from the rest of the world --
She was indeed my world -- I have seen her walk -- Her, now clay-cold hand, has
been a thousand times joined in that which is now employed in describing her
fate.

She increased every day in sense, and discretion, and beauty -- I think not of
her last offenses -- for how should village simplicity be a match for town
maxims?

-- Neither man nor angel can discern
HYPOCRISY, the only evil that walks
Invisible through earth;
And often, though Wisdom wakes, Suspicion sleeps.
At Wisdom's gate, while Goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems.
It begins to rain, Mrs. LA MOTTE -- The drops patter upon the roof of the
hearse -- I put my face to the casement, and hear them. -- The poor little
infant too -- my boy -- my darling! -- my heir -- my firstborn!

Oh, Mrs. LA MOTTE, forgive -- forgive me! -- Though I know the independency of
soul and body in such a situation -- though reason points out to me their
separate state, yet I cannot, all at once, disunite them. Human Nature --
powerful -- pathetic Nature puts in her plea, and you have too much tenderness
not to admit it -- Do not, therefore, reproach me for ordering another covering
to be thrown over the hearse --

More weakness, Mrs. LA MOTTE -- I have walked forth, and am a little relieved
-- the shower is over. Do not argue with me, dear friend; while the earth
contains the beloved remains of Mrs. HOMESPUN, I must consider her as claiming
from me respect and tenderness: the duties even of the husband do not terminate
till she is in the grave.

But the sable train have finished their repast -- We are preparing to proceed
in our journey. The postman is blowing his horn close beside me: he says this
letter will reach you some hours before the wretched writer of it -- He waits
while I beg of you to be at the Parsonage against our arrival: your presence
will be then necessary to prevent me from running the gauntlet through starers,
and condolers. Such pity is, at such periods, insupportable. The hearse is
moving awfully on. I must not leave it without one real mourner.

Farewell! Farewell! HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER CII. Mrs. LA MOTTE to PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire at BUXTON. (After the Return
of Mr. HOMESPUN.)
I CONGRATULATE you, Sir, on your victory over every feeling that should
distinguish the human species from the brutal: or rather I salute you upon your
notable transmigration! The system of the philosopher who contended for such a
change, you have adopted, even in this world, with success. Yes, Mr. SEDLEY,
you are most completely brutalized indeed. Although I have not the dishonor to
know you personally, I make bold to address a few sentiments to you, chiefly to
acquaint you with what you might otherwise be for some time ignorant. Your
principal victims were buried last night, and the survivor is in a fair way of
soon following them.

I could have wished, however, for the sake of your amusement, as it seems you
are gratified upon such occasions, that you had been a spectator of this
funeral. Though I can easily conceive you do not love preaching, yet, in the
discourse of last night, there were such remarks as might have highly diverted
so elevated a mind as yours?

But, to drop this ineffectual part of my subject, and proceed to another, more
likely to excite your curiosity, Do you know, most assiduous and yet most
negligent Sir, that a part of your treasures are now in my possession? -- To
speak plainer: you must know that, amongst the now useless clothes and other
late necessaries of the entombed HARRIET, was found a BOOK, very thickly marked
both by marginal notes, crosses of the nail, points of the pen, and strokes of
the pencil; and in the fair leaf next the title there is written what
distinguishes it to be Mr. SEDLEY'S property.

Now, it plainly appears, Sir, from the several parts referred to, that you
purposely pillaged the volume for the pernicious, and rejected the instructive.
This would have been very proper, had you contented yourself, like other
commentators, with reprobating what is wrong, in order to set it apart from
what is right: but how could such ordinary methods be expected from a person so
very extraordinary! You, Sir, have even improved upon your original, and have
ingeniously labored to annihilate its merit, while you perpetuate its infamy.

As an instance of this, I select the subsequent well-illustrated passages, out
of a multitude of others equally amiable. I shall place both the Commentator
and his Author in a seemly, orderly manner, and, as you will easily recollect,
act the part of a faithful transcriber.

CHESTERFIELD. "Avoid seeing an affront, if possible."


SEDLEY. What though L. has sorely stung me -- I must please her -- and be
revenged at a proper time -- At present, my cue is blindness.


CHESTERFIELD. "If a man of sense perseveres, he will prevail at last."


SEDLEY. Oh, DORMER, DORMER! thou dear encourager -- How do thou give me
spirits to go on? H. H. is an angel of the first order.


CHESTERFIELD. "Read faces."


SEDLEY. What a Right Reverend face, and how delightfully legible is that of
Master Minister H. -- Not a trait of suspicion about it. I like his honest
broad brow -- his gray eye -- which looks at every thing, and into nothing. The
very man. Oh divine H. H.!


CHESTERFIELD. "Don't yield to fits of rage."


SEDLEY. I am cursedly addicted to passion -- Will curb myself -- Coolness
carries all before it -- Saucy L. thou shall suffer -- for I will oblige thee;
and instead of contempt, show thee a kindness -- Then -- then -- Mum!

How could the sagacious Mr. SEDLEY trust his serious views with the very woman
he meant to destroy? But that is easily accounted for. In another part of the
book we find a clue to this mystery.


CHESTERFIELD. "Be, like Caesar's wife, unsuspected."


SEDLEY. Yes, dear, enchanting HARRIET, if it should ever be my fortune to
please thee, how would I consult the security of thy situation -- how guard thy
fame, even with my life -- from the breath of Detraction -- Ah, could thou
but surmount the vulgar prejudices of the world -- could thou but read in my
countenance the attentive -- ardent -- eternal friend -- the -- the -- Oh!
HARRIET, HARRIET, I will not swear to the truth of my passion, lest you should
suspect me -- but if I might be permitted to ask a favor with all imaginable
softness -- In a word, HARRIET -- This is the true Volume of Delight -- The
world is full of masks, and if you and I put ours delicately on, so as to talk
not of our own affairs, never show Master Minister H. any contempt, flatter his
little oratorical and classical vanity, and assume the proper flexibility, what
joys may we not taste, what treasures of tenderness may we not allow one
another?


Ah! dear arbitress -- keep this sacred volume from every eye but your own:
read -- and return it to the fondest and most faithful of men! --

Here break we off, Mr. SEDLEY, to make way for a reflection: I have always
taken notice that your great schemers counteract their fondest purposes. In the
very depth of their conspiracy they discover a little which serves as a clue to
the discovery of a great deal; nor did I ever know any man who had a bad secret
to keep, and a difficult hand of cards to play, that did not, by too much
caution in some points, and too much carelessness in others, lose the honors
of the game: You, under fair pretense of friendly ends,
And well-plac'd words of glossing courtesy,
Baited with reasons, not unplausible,
Wind into the easy, human heart,
And HUG it into snares.
And yet, Sir, to apply one more poetical line to you, what, after all, can be
said of you better than this? Oh, what a goodly outside falsehood has! These
expostulations, however, Sir, are foreign from the purpose of my address, which
is to intimate to you my design of publishing this odd Volume of the great LORD
CHESTERFIELD with the Remarks of the splendid PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire -- Such
annotations will, no doubt, give fresh vigor to the sale, and add exceedingly
to the popularity both of the Original and the Commentary. It will at least
show, how the Man of Fashion may improve upon celebrated precepts, and (what
is, perhaps, of greater consequence) how the Woman of Innocence may escape the
miseries of the practice. Above all things be assured, the world shall not long
remain unacquainted with the gentleman who has accommodated it with so spirited
an illustration of a book so much in vogue; and who knows but this conduct may
tempt you to favor the public with the remainder of the Volumes, equally
enriched, and by the same eminent hand.

I am Sir, Your indignant humble servant, C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER CIII. Mrs. THORNTON to Mrs. MORTIMER.
YOU frighten me to death, my dear FANNY: what can possibly be the matter? --
Not two hours before your alarming letter arrived at Lieutenant VERNON'S I had
given away my name, my hand, and my heart, to Mr. THORNTON, of Leicestershire.
It is a match of haste, but I hope not of rashness. He is, I find, the friend
of a gentleman now intimate in your family, and, by the disordered answers I
have received from my husband, I am afraid, to the wicked schemes of that
friend you -- But it cannot be: Mr. THORNTON would not avow any close
connection with a character so atrocious -- nay, I may be mistaken as to the
villainy under which you tell me you are dying -- Dying, FANNY MORTIMER! --
Heaven forbid -- what a wedding day have you made of mine! My husband, too, has
been in tears almost ever since the receipt of your letter. I know not what to
write, or what to think: if you ever loved, satisfy the impatience of

Your much disturbed, but sincere, ARAMINTA THORNTON.

LETTER CIV. Mrs. MORTIMER to Mrs. THORNTON.
WRITTEN in the agony of her heart, and with a trembling hand, receive the last
sentiments that are to be expected from your wretched friend.

Was Mr. THORNTON, then, intimate with the -- the -- Oh! Heaven! -- was he
intimate with this -- this -- I shudder at his name -- this Mr. SEDLEY? Perhaps
he was one of his correspondents -- If so, he knew his designs; and, if he did
know them, how shall his heart be appeased for concealing them from the unhappy
woman whom they have thrown into despair. Yes, ARAMINTA, I am in despair -- I
am ashamed, not only of my friends, and my husband, but of my shadow -- I dare
not look in the glass --

Seek not to know the particulars of what -- cannot be spoken to. I am abused
-- deceived -- and hurt beyond the possibility of cure. -- I will die --

Dreadful officiousness! I had flown up to my chamber, and turned the key, to
indulge my anguish, in all that luxury, which, on such occasions, is afforded
by solitude, when Mr. MORTIMER tapped at the door, to know how I did? -- My
father, sister, and all the family, followed his example; and last of all came
my beloved mother, whose eye I beheld through the keyhole, swimming in tears.
-- But I was proof even against this -- Steady in my resolutions, I dared not
to admit her.

The cause of my new source of grief seems yet to be undiscovered -- What of
that? -- I know it myself -- The blessed GOD, "from whom no secrets are hid,"
knows it. I was myself the aggressor -- This fatal hand brought about the
horrid circumstance -- I betrayed my weakness to him in a letter -- I told him
his departure was necessary to my repose -- That was enough to make such a man
perpetrate my destruction. --

Partiality -- Wretch that I was -- What right had I to be partial? -- Mr.
MORTIMER claimed my heart -- Mr. MORTIMER is the best of men -- Memory be
still! --

Hush! ARAMINTA, I hear his step on the stairs --

He has thrust a card through the door, and gone down again softly to the
parlour. ARAMINTA -- the pen falls from my hand -- When I send this I will send
with it the card! -- ARAMINTA -- I will not live! --

Read -- read, and tell me if I ought not to wish for annihilation.

The CARD enclosed.
EDWARD MORTIMER'S tenderest invitations wait on FANNY, for her company (after
she has amused herself with her pen) in the parlour, as DELIA is going to try a
gentle tune on her new Piano Forte, EDWARD will attempt a soft accompanyment
upon the flute, our little brother is to join in the strokes of the violin, Sir
HENRY and Lady DELMORE are to be our auditors, and they are to have quite a
little concert. But they will be all out of tune, and it is impossible there
should be any harmony, unless FANNY is amongst them, now and then bestowing a
note from one of the most melodious pipes in the world -- Perhaps Mr. SEDLEY
may drop in, and the manly elegance of his voice will be delightful -- EDWARD
desires his FANNY to observe, that this very full card is subscribed by all the
persons in the world whom she best loves, and who best love her, namely, by

Sir HENRY DELMORE, Lady DELMORE, DELIA DELMORE, And Her EDWARD MORTIMER.



I must pause again, ARAMINTA -- my strength fails me --

In Continuation. Ten o'Clock at Night.
No, my friend -- I could not obey the summons -- I could not, on the other
hand, have courage to send an apology -- About ten minutes after the card was
delivered, I heard the dear, well-known voice of Lady DELMORE, Sweet as the
shepherd's pipe upon the mountains, tenderly enquire -- "Is my child preparing
to join us? -- Will she make us happy? -- Take your own time, my love; only
remember, that the pain or pleasure of the night depends upon you -- Don't
hurry -- don't discompose your spirits" --

The excellent, most revered, and most venerable Lady a second time returned
unanswered!

Oh! ARAMINTA -- ARAMINTA -- how I wept! -- how my heart yearned to clasp this
dear mother to it! -- but I was all the time laboring with a dreadful
circumstance, which to disclose, would produce complicated misfortune --

God of compassion, to what an exigence am I reduced! --

Scarce had Lady DELMORE withdrawn, but Mr. MORTIMER ascended the stairs, and
"Will not my lovely FANNY -- will not the wife of my soul condescend to oblige
us?" said he, with a softness that was a fresh occasion of distress to me --

I could not, upon this, avoid giving to some incoherent expressions, and wild
ejaculations, part of which were uttered upon my knees.

The trembling MORTIMER turned down stairs, and presently I heard the whole
family assembled in the entry leading to the chambers, consulting by whisper.

They conclude (I overhear) that my brain is hurt -- Ah! that it were, ARAMINTA
-- How -- how, my friend, is this to be accounted for, but I would not enter
the sleeping apartment of EDWARD MORTIMER for all that the sun surveys beneath
his radiance! -- My soul is not polluted! --

"When will the darling of my wishes suffer me (said MORTIMER just now) to lead
her from that melancholy chamber to her own apartment?"

"Never -- never -- never" -- said I, in the extremity of my grief -- "Never,
Mr. MORTIMER" --

"FANNY" -- replied the astonished MORTIMER -- "Did you speak, my love?" --

I recollected my imprudence, and catching up a piece of paper wrote on it as
follows:

"LET the dear and honored friends of FANNY, indulge her idle fancy for this
single night, and they shall command her for the remainder of her whole life.
She finds herself unusually well, and inclined to scribble to her
long-neglected correspondents; and when she is weary she will lie down on the
little tent-bed in the room where she now is --

"Her peace of mind depends so much on their yielding to this request (however
romantic it may appear), that she flatters herself her dear friends will not
refuse it to her."

I put this under the bottom of the door, and heard the injured, yet most
delicate MORTIMER immediately carry it away.

The maid has brought me a candle, and though I find the whole family (even to
my aged father, he who must needs want the balms of repose) is to set up, I am
no more to be invaded -- This tenderness -- this constant, uniform compliance
distracts me -- Poor -- poor MORTIMER -- this is the first time since our union
that -- that --

Excuse me, ARAMINTA, I must leave off, and think a little!

In Continuation.
It is midnight, ARAMINTA. I have come to a resolution -- In the common course
of human declinings I cannot live long -- My constitution is utterly gone -- A
fair excuse offers (during my present state of infirmity) to be indulged with
an apartment separate from the excellent EDWARD MORTIMER. Let me, then, dare to
live -- Let me live, were it only to prevent a discovery which my death might
occasion -- Let the secret of the most barbarous SEDLEY die with me, without
involving in it either my father or my husband --

The maid tells me, the whole house is in tears -- What my venerable father --
my mother -- all -- all in tears! --

I was unable longer to support the idea; and I will go down to them, that they
may rest -- But into the chamber of her husband never shall again go the
desolate

FANNY MORTIMER.
I will privately give this letter to the postman with my own hand, if I can
steal out when he calls for others -- But -- it must -- alas! my ARAMINTA -- it
will be my last.


Farewell! Farewell!
LETTER CV. THOMAS at the Bath, to TIMOTHY in Town.
Dear TIMOTHY,
How like a dog looked Hercules,
Thus to a distaff chained!
'SDEATH, TIMONTHY, "I Am sped, I Am married." In the very flower of my youth, in
the bud of my adventures, I am cut off from all the joys of rambling, by
matrimony. In a word, TIMOTHY, the first fair she that I was well with, as the
great Lord CHESTERFIELD calls it, complained in form to my master, who, in the
moment of his rage, drew his sword, cocked his pistol, and giving me the choice
of two cursed things -- namely, death or a wife -- would certainly have sent me
to my account, "with all my imperfections on my head," even now broad blown in
the middle of May, if I had not fixed upon something: and, although in the
confusion of my fears I have chosen the worst of the two destinies, by taking
to my bed the low-born wench I have simulated, yet "no man knows the fate he is
born to," and I have been to the church with a water-dipper -- yea, TIMOTHY,
with a creature, who, for some years, has got her bread by standing at the
side of the bath, and presenting a brimmer of the water to the passenger. Then
she is as insipid as the water itself, and ten times more illiterate than the
tumbler that contains it. I marked her out only as a petty experiment, just to
bring my hand into play, as it were, before I ventured to CHESTERFIELDISE -- a
word, TIMOTHY, I collected from THORNTON'S letters, which thou know I have
an occasional access to -- with others. However, my spouse -- or rather my
sposo -- for I would avoid vulgar expressions, which are "certain
characteristics of bad company, and a bad education" -- my sposo is wholesome,
pretty, and not ill-made: but as she has not the smallest degree of ton about
her, and does not pretend the most distant acquaintance with either A, B, C, or
any of the twenty-four members in that learned family, I despair of ever making
her figure as an editor, or, indeed, of collecting together any of my papers,
upon which account I charge thee, TIMOTHY, to preserve, very cautiously, all my
letters, notes, minutes, and maxims; and as I shall very soon travel -- (for a
wife at home will only give me eclat abroad, and thou can not believe I will
live long with a water-dipper, though she were the Nereid of the spring) --
thou will observe to tie them up, date them on the backs, docket them, and if
thou should survive me (which I supplicate the heavens thou may not), I beg
of thee to put them into the hand of the best bookseller then in vogue, and
publish them against my consent; and (as order and method are the very souls of
business) suppose the title (which I am to know nothing of) were to run thus:

The Letters of THOMAS TRAVERSE, abroad, to TIMOTHY TRUEMAN, at home:
containing EVERY INSTRUCTION NECESSARY TO FORM A FOOTMAN OF HONOR, VIRTUE,
TASTE, AND FASHION.

Above all points, TIMOTHY, avoid carelessness: let not a slip of our sacred
simulations be seen. SEDLEY, with all his cleverness and graces, is a most
thoughtless fellow -- saving his authority. There is not a syllable in his
correspondence to THORNTON but I am acquainted with it. Many a small essential
he hits off to admiration. As far as the maxims of his Author extends, in
regard to being well with women, he is a wonder. But of this exclusive, between
ourselves, he is a bungler. He never puts his epistles into the office with his
own hand; he trusts them to me, under the simple safeguard of a wet wafer: my
knowledge of the world points out to me the necessity of learning all I can,
especially when I can make observations without being observed. But, besides
this, an epistle so hurried off is but half a letter; for nicely is it noted,
that neatness in folding up, sealing, and directing, is by no means to be
neglected: there is something even in the exterior of a letter that may please
or displease, and consequently deserves attention. Thou must know, TIMOTHY, and
I tell it thee in great confidence, that I have bestowed several leisure-hours
in preparing for thine eye (and in due time for the world, that is, against my
will) a Treatise on Toothpicking, wherein I show the precise method of holding,
handling, drawing, and replacing the dentical instruments. Besides which, I
have almost ready, an Essay on Nail-cutting; and I have gone a great way in
bringing to perfection an instrument -- for which, by the by, I expect both a
reward and a patent -- that is so contrived, as to curve the nails, prevent
their raggedness, hinder the flesh from growing up, and preserve them smooth,
even, and transparent. And that every thing may be complete, I have sketched
out a plan for a satire against tricks and oddities, of which I send thee,
underneath, a couplet or two, by way of specimen of the work.

Some pluck the button from the injured clothes,
While others rub the ears, and pick the nose.
Some are so destitute of air and grace,
Even while they speak, to turn away the face:
Nay, some there are, to delicacy dead,
Who always have the fingers in the head;
This smells his meat, and makes his neighbor sick,
This clown eats slow, and that a world too quick.
Nay some, to such a height is rudeness grown,
Will grease their lips in picking of a bone.
I must not, however, forget to apprise thee of the most elaborate of all my
works, entitled, The Art of Carving, wherein the adroitness and gentility of
doing the honors of the table, without hacking across a bone, without
bespattering the company with the sauce, and without overturning the glasses
into our neighbors pockets, will be critically considered. At the end of my
performances I propose to annex certain miscellaneous observations on men and
manners, such as knowledge of the world -- the taking off the hat -- offering
the hand -- making the bow -- hanging the sword -- managing the cane -- holding
the knife and fork -- blowing the nose -- and all the et-caetera essential to a
gentleman. I shall, by way of supplement, add a few free thoughts on modest
assurance, a caveat against bashfulness, hints on exterior seriousness, and
cautions on flexibility of countenance; with a key to the heart, or the study
of weaknesses, infirmities, foibles, and passions, illustrated: in short,
TIMOTHY, my labors all together will form a complete commentary on
CHESTERFIELD, and I would have them lettered on the back thus: TRAVERSE on
STANHOPE. Perspicuity is a peculiar grace.

Oh! TIMOTHY, why were talents like mine denied an adequate fortune? Here has
SEDLEY been, almost a month, catching a couple of beauties -- simulating a pair
of petticoats; when I, had my purse been like his, could have compassed a
dozen. To say the truth, he has been rather unlucky too, for one of his damsels
is dead, and the other is moving off.

You will guess what a regard I pay to moral character, when, notwithstanding
my poverty, I scorn to repair my shattered fortunes by impeaching him. No,
TIMOTHY, that would be base -- let every gentleman's affairs be sacred: I must
not wound my feelings -- I must not be blasted, TIMOTHY -- I must not be
blasted.

I lament nothing, my friend, but want of money; and yet I have been lately
thinking, manner, may procure even that. Surely, TIMOTHY, the same sprightly
powers that can make a cuckold, cannot fail, if dexterously applied, to help a
man's pocket. There is a very rich, old, rheumatical, heavy-heel'd fellow at
the bath, whom I have fixed my eye upon, and am resolved to try the experiment.

Surely the serious exterior may befriend us with men as well as women. I know
his weaknesses -- and he says he is sure I was born a gentleman. Money I must
really have.

Now, taking a ride upon the King's highway, rather late in the evening, is so
cursedly hazardous, and I have such an objection to roguery, that I cannot
think of it: but I am persuaded I can simulate or dissimulate -- (for I hardly
know the distinction) -- a purse or two, and make the person simulated pleased
with himself, and much obliged to me for taking it. This is, at worst, an
ingenious way of running round the halter, without putting the neck into it;
and if we view it as it ought to be viewed, it is only a notable way of making
a man pay so much gold for so much flattery, self-love, and satisfaction. For
the success of all these arduous and laudable undertakings, pray, TIMOTHY; and
believe me

Thy constant friend, THOMAS.

LETTER CVI. TIMOTHY in Town, to THOMAS at the Bath.
Mr. THOMAS,
I HAVE received safe all the letters you directed to me, and I should have
honored them much sooner, had it been in my power; but the truth is, I have
too much business to allow much time for pleasure -- or, rather, I endeavor to
make my pleasure and my business go fair and softly, like worthy
fellow servants in the same family. Besides this, TOM, you and your master, and
I and mine -- (if you will excuse me for following your example of putting the
cart before the horse) -- are so very different, that it is impossible we
should agree upon any point we talk of. I am a plain fellow, with a
worsted-laced livery and a wig, and you a gentleman with ruffles at your
wrists, tambour waist-coat, and your hair tucked in braids under your hat. I
condescend to take a shilling, or even sixpence, a head, by the way of Good bye
to you, honest TIM, from my master's company, and you are above such a custom,
and break your guinea at a tavern or a coffee-house to fling down your
half-crown to the waiter with a dignified disdain, like a Prince.

PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire your Lord, makes it his amusement to rattle away from
saltwater to fresh water, from this polite place to that polite place, (to
speak more properly,) from one Ton to another Ton, till he has shown himself
everywhere, without settling any-where. My master, on the contrary, Mr.
Michael Bankwell, is an elderly, industrious, regular, bachelor of a citizen,
up at eight, and in bed by eleven, who keeps me because he says I hit his
humor, and he hates new faces. Moreover, Mr. TOM, there is nothing similar
between our families. I save, you do not save. I am prudent, you are not. I
love a wife, to whom I have been married fifteen years, and am only sorry that
I cannot see her more than once in the week -- You are tired of yours, to whom
you have not been a week married. I delight in the appellation of plain TIM, or
TIMOTHY -- You are offended unless, Sir, or Mr, precedes the name which was
bestowed upon you by your godfathers and godmothers.

In short, TOM -- I beg pardon -- in short, Mr. THOMAS, I begin to think (as we
so little resemble one another, either in our likings or aversions) that we had
better not put ourselves for the future to the expense of postage; which (as
you and your master are addicted to go pretty far into the country, and you are
apt to write four letters where a man of less genius and spirit would scarce
write one) is really a serious circumstance.

Not that I should propose such a matter neither, were there no other obstacle
in the way: for (to flourish for a moment in your mode) I must inform you, that
The friends I have, and their adoption tried,
I Would grapple to my heart with hooks of steel.
Frankly to speak therefore, Mr. TRAVERSE, (though you are undoubtedly a youth
of parts, and able to do as much harm as any lad I know) you are not the man to
my mind. In a word, TOM, I never took kindly to you; and since your last
letter, which lies on the table before me, I like you less than ever.

And so you look like a dog now you have got a wife, do you, TOM? and marriage
at three-and-twenty you call being cut off. Take care you are not cut off in
your flower another way! For if the scheme of simulating (the meaning of which
God knows) the rheumatical gentleman's money out of his pocket should fail, and
you should employ the sprightly powers you talk of in making him part with it
whether he will or no, you may stand a chance to be promoted even sooner than
you wish.

With respect to the books you figure so much upon, I know nothing about them;
and if they relate only to picking of teeth, and turning out of toes, paring of
nails, blowing noses, and taking off hats, I must beg to be excused having any
thing to do with it; in the first place because I think I know all these things
partly as well as his Lordship, and, perhaps, some of them better. As to knives
and forks, I believe I can handle them as well as any nobleman in the universe
-- I am no bad carver, unless, I am sharp-set; I am not to be told when it is
my duty to have my hat under my arm; and, as to the rest, I never understood,
till his Lordship told me, that it was decent to pick the teeth at all in
company, if it could be avoided.

I shall make you laugh, no doubt, when I acquaint you that I approve a custom
my master has of reading to his family every Sunday evening; and, as to books,
I have as many as serve my purpose; namely, a Testament left by my aunt Mary in
the year 1701, a Whole Duty of Man, Farriery made Easy, and The Servants Guide.

You wish for a full purse, you say, for the sake of doing more injuries to
innocent women: there we differ again; though I am, in the main, contented with
what I have, I now and then sigh for an increase of fortune to distribute
amongst many worthy people whom I know to be under a cloud: and (if I thought
you would not smile too much) I should venture to tell you, that I have two
little orphan cousins in my eye, who shall not want a friend -- if they turn
out well -- though they have lost a father: and I have more pleasure in seating
my old frail mother in her armchair by a cheerful fire, and giving now and then
a necessary to a blind brother that I have, all which I pinch out of my
perquisites and wages, than it is possible you should even simulate, as you
call it, out of a stranger, or get by the ruin of all the men, women, and
children,, in BUXTON.

And so, pretty, polite, Mr. THOMAS, I leave you to your undertakings, and beg
that you will do me the favor to leave me to mine.

Lombard Street, London. TIMOTHY TRUEMAN.

LETTER CVII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
OH, THORNTON! -- THORNTON! -- THORNTON! -- I must write, I must fly to thy
kind bosom for resource, although it were only to tell thee that thy prophecy
is fulfilled! There walks not the insulted earth, at this present moment, such
a rascal -- such a wretch -- such a fiend as PHILIP SEDLEY. -- Oh, my GOD! what
a stroke of heart have I this instant sustained! -- The dead of the night, thou
know, is generally my hour for projection; and, as this evening was
particularly dark, serene, and favorable to my purpose of reflecting upon the
mischiefs of the morrow, I left my chamber about eleven o'clock, and took the
path that would soon have brought me to a little grove, by the side of a still
streamlet, where I could have indulged "meditation even to madness." But, oh,
Mr. THORNTON! what an agonizing interruption met me in the way! As I reached
the door where I lately resided (for on HORACE'S return to town I changed my
lodgings), what, of all things horrible to the heart, do thou think I saw --
Not lightning -- not the flames of a burning town, but a single torch, that
displayed to me two coffins, containing, the two fair creatures in whose fates
I had been instrumental, carried on the shoulders of the attendants to a hearse
that was standing ready to receive them: yes, my friend -- HARRIET HOMESPUN,
and the pledge of chaste embraces, were both passing to their last home: I gave
a scream that broke voluntarily from my bosom -- I fainted in the arms of a
person that was standing in a pensive posture against the side of the hearse --
Oh, Mr. THORNTON, -- it was HORACE himself! -- it was the honest man -- the
kind friend -- the unsuspicious priest, that I had injured past redemption -- I
recovered only to meet an eye that sunk me to the earth again -- the dominion
of the accursed DORMER was past -- Truth took me by the heart strings, and
Conscience cast me upon the knee. I had no power over my own faculties; and the
God of Nature, did as he thought proper. I took the coffin of the wife in my
arms -- I bathed it with the scalding tears of unaffected penitence -- I told
the poor, trembling, astonished priest, whom he might thank for all his
miseries -- whom he might consider as the murderer of his family. I usually
carry with me, in my night-walks, a sword -- I was armed with one at present --
I offered it to the hand of HORACE -- I tore open my waistcoat -- bared my
breast, and begged from him the stroke of mercy -- He refused to give me the
death I merited. Cruel man! he left me to my GOD! I caught the weapon,
shortened it, and pointed it at the detested heart, that directed the detested
hand* but even here I was disappointed by the barbarity of HORACE, who wrenched
it from me ere I had little more than perforated the skin; and, assuring the
attendants, that I was at times, as now, disordered in my senses, ordered the
hears^ to pass on. He mounted his horse -- bad^ the landlord go quietly to bed,
-- say nothing of what had happened -- and, wipin^ his eyes, rode after the
machine, that contained the ruins of his family.

I was left alone -- my shame is revealed -- every man's tongue will be against
me on the morrow. -- I have followed my Preceptor into the pit of irremediable
perdition. Repentance is the labor of a life: a minute's ignominy is to me
insupportable. -- I will leave this cursed place directly -- I will saddle my
horse privately; but never, never shall thou again be disgraced, my still
beloved THORNTON, by the presence of the

Detestible PHILIP SEDLEY.
P. S.
The poor FANNY MORTIMER, too, is dying -- I have reduced to ashes that family
also. To possess her undefended form in a swoon! What violence! What villainy!
Oh, shame! shame! -- I will not send this letter at present -- I must ask the
forgiveness of the expiring FANNY before I die; or else I should be ashamed
even to leave existence -- I will see her. Poor MORTIMER, how have I wronged
thee! -- Unhappy DELIA, how have I deceived thee! Let no man be tempted by the
maxims of a casuist, to leave the plain, simple path of singleness; and be it
engraven upon every heart, indelibly, that HYPOCRISY, however polished, will
lead us to the gates of Hell, and that TRUTH, only TRUTH, can conduct us,
through her temple, to Heaven!



LETTER CVIII. Mr. MORTIMER to Mr. THORNTON, At Lieutenant VERNON'S.
Sir,
I AM this moment arrived in town from BUXTON, where the body of your wounded
friend Mr. SEDLEY will be found either by you, or any of those who think it
worth while to own him. He has, as I suppose you know, been the occasion of the
most multiplied mischief that ever was, I believe, committed in the same space
of time, in that or any other town. His death, however, and his repentance,
which appears to be sincere, are all that man can have.

It would by no means interest a stranger, as you are, Sir, to particularize
the sorrows your friend has introduced, not only in my family, but others
equally happy before his admittance into them. But I understand from this
libertine, who put your late letters into my hand, after I had wounded him,
that you have married the most intimate friend of my dishonored FANNY: to her
it will not be uninteresting to observe, that it is impossible she should ever
behold again alive that most injured and unfortunate girl, who was upon the
point of expiring before I left BUXTON, which I thought it prudent to do,
(notwithstanding my indifference to all future events,) till I see what is to
be done with the brokenhearted authors of FANNY'S existence.

The scene of Mr. SEDLEY'S villainy has, I perceive, been already exhibited to
the eye of Mr. THORNTON, who has, it seems, long been his confident and
correspondent; though he must pardon me, if I esteem him less worthy the
noble-minded ARAMINTA, who could countenance, by his regard, the actions of a
PHILIP SEDLEY. Happy, however, am I to hear, for his lady's sake, that the
connection is at length dissolved. The affair betwixt me and the offender,
happened in the dead of night: the surgeon, to whom I went myself, in defiance
of danger, assures me the wound is vital. Mr. SEDLEY, who could not speak, gave
me, at my departure, your address: I must be excused from discovering mine to
Mr. THORNTON at present; and I only write to acquaint him of his friend's
situation. My own misery is, indeed, extreme: but I have the honor to be,

Sir, Your most humble servant, EDWARD MORTIMER.

LETTER CIX. Miss DELIA DELMORE, to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
NEVER was the ruin of a happy family so rapidly completed, as that of your
wretched DELIA DELMORE'S. All the fair hopes that I communicated to Lady LUCY,
in my late letters, are now totally overthrown; and the fairy prospect I drew
before her eye has terminated in death and horror. Oh! LADY SAXBY, I can
scarce command my hand, or my tears, to enter into explanations: but your kind
condolence is the only consolation now fest me, and I will endeavor to collect
myself.

About twelve o'clock, last night, a horseman stopped at our door, and knocked
loudly for admittance. We were seated quite out of spirits at the table, and
had just been talking about withdrawing for the night, while poor Mrs. MORTIMER
was lulling her cares to rest upon the sopha, having past the day in a manner
too melancholy to describe to you. WILLIAM had scarce opened the door, when a
person dismounted, from a panting, hard-ridden horse, and rushed into the
middle of the supper-room without any ceremony. We soon discovered, through the
dreadful metamorphose, the features of Mr. SEDLEY, his waistcoat unbutton'd,
his hair without a ribbon -- his shirt spotted with blood at the bosom, his
face pale and squallid, and his eyes bearing all the marks of terror and
desperation. Without making any apology for his intrusion, he drew a chair from
the side of the room, flung himself into it, stamped his foot twice against the
floor, smote his breast with an air of inexpressible vengeance, and, taking a
paper from his pocket, held it at arm's length, and burst into tears. By this
time our attention was diverted from this alarming object to another still more
dreadful -- poor FANNY MORTIMER was in the strongest convulsions I ever
remember to have seen -- SEDLEY tossed away the paper, after he had crushed it
in his hand, and flew like lightning to Mrs. MORTIMER: my father, mother, and
my brother, all assisted: we hurried her up stairs: as I had got to the edge of
the door, I saw Mr. MORTIMER, with a trembling hand, pouring out a glass of the
brandy, and lean, almost ready to sink, against the wainscot: and just as I
left the room he took up the paper that SEDLEY had thrown away. It is a good
way to any bedchamber, and the stairs is steep: we were sometime reaching
FANNY'S apartment: she remained insensible. When we got her into the bed-room,
Mr. SEDLEY went down stairs -- where he had not been two minutes before the
words villain! impostor! murderer! were vehemently reverberated. Sir HENRY ran
to the head of the stairs, and saying that he distinguished the clashing of
swords, ran down with the utmost precipitation: my mother followed him, and
FANNY started from the bed, and staggering at every step, begged; for God's
sake, I would conduct her down. Terror gave her swiftness -- horror lent her
temporary strength: she was in the supper-room in a moment, but even that was a
moment too late -- for Oh! Lady LUCY, the deed was done. -- Mr. SEDLEY was upon
the ground, writheing in blood, and Mr. MORTIMER was sobbing in his chair, with
the weapon of destruction smoking in his hand. -- FANNY MORTIMER saw --
shrieked -- shivered, and fell down: even at this moment she lies distracted.
Her senses are quite gone: neither bleeding, chafing -- nor any other
applications can recover her -- she pierces us to the heart with her cries. She
execrates first SEDLEY, then herself -- then MORTIMER: SEDLEY is put into one
of our beds -- my poor father wishes to hush the horrid affair as long as
possible -- Mr. MORTIMER, without a servant, has taken the road to LONDON, and
from thence to FRANCE. SEDLEY has never been able to articulate a word. That
paper, Lady SAXBY, that fatal paper This was the last letter Mr. SEDLEY wrote
to THORNTON, but delayed the sending of it till he had seen Mrs. MORTIMER. See
Letter CVII.
, created all the mischief. I enclose you a copy of it, from whence you may
guess the other horrid deeds committed by this all-accomplished villain. What
is to be done Heaven knows. We are all inexpressibly miserable. I cannot go on:
the cries of FANNY are again begun. --

DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER CX. Sir HENRY DELMORE to Mr. THORNTON.
Sir,
YOUR letter came to me too late: the despoiler of my family left this world
about an hour before its arrival: his body, however, shall be conveyed
according to your directions. It was his dying request that he should be
brought before Mrs. MORTIMER, my wretched daughter: but he expired before the
request could possibly be granted. In his pocket, which he begged with his last
words I would search, was found a small manuscript, that he enjoined me to
consider as the instrument of every circumstance that had happened. On opening
this I discovered, written with a pencil, the following maxims, the practice of
which might very properly lead to more mischief, if that were possible, than
they have occasioned.

MAXIMS.
1. Have a serious exterior. 2. A modest assurance. 3. Study command of temper
and countenance. 4. Dissemble resentment. 5. Judge of other men by your own
feelings. 6. Be upon your own guard. 7. Throw others off theirs. 8. Study the
passions and foibles of both sexes. 9. Flatter the vanity of all. 10. A
flexibility of manners commendable. 11. Soothe all -- please all -- conquer
all. 12. Be every thing, to every body.
These are, I perceive, selected from the pernicious volumes of the late Lord
CHESTERFIELD, whose letters falling into the hand of a voluptuous character,
might very naturally produce effects the most dreadful. It is very unhappy that
me and mine should have been marked out as the first victims. But that
misfortune, like every other, must be sustained to the best of my ability. My
poor daughter is not dead: her senses are in some measure restored to her; and
perhaps the life of her mother, husband, and father, may be made supportable by
her preservation. In the midst of my own misery, Sir, I have a wish for the
nuptial joy of you, and the amiable young lady to whom you are now so tenderly
united. I formerly knew the brave Lieutenant VERNON, and I beg the compliments
of a forlorn parent may be made welcome to him: recollect me, also, kindly to
Mrs. THORNTON, and Mrs. VERNON. The corpse of Mr. SEDLEY shall be sent to your
address, as soon as the hearse can be provided. He purposely concealed himself
from all his worthy connexions, here; nor did I know, till the receipt of
yours, the illustrious ancestors and family of the man to whom I am indebted
for this accumulated agony. Notwithstanding this -- my resentment survives not
the life of the aggressor, whom I will see justice and decency done to, with a
scrupulous exactness. His loss of honor would ill warrant my loss of humanity.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, HENRY DELMORE.

LETTER CXI. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY. (Dated six Weeks after the
preceding.)
My dear Lady LUCY,
PROVIDENCE, and Felicity, seem again disposed to smile upon us. The trial and
honorable acquittal of Mr. MORTIMER is over: and the thousand tender
assurances he has given his FANNY (whom Heaven has spared to us) that the
violence she sustained, is quite forgotten, have contributed, with the caresses
of her affectionate parents, to reconcile her to that life, which God seems
intending to continue. Though extremely weak, she is in perfect possession of
her senses, and mends every day. There is certainly some turn in her favor,
and perhaps she is preserved as an example of Almighty benignity, that will not
desert persevering goodness, and patient affliction. The truth of Mr. SEDLEY'S
death -- I mean as to the precise occasion of it -- is little known. The Judge
was extremely delicate on the subject: so was every body concerned -- Mr.
SEDLEY'S relations have not wept over the ashes of their kinsman, nor does any
body seem to regret -- though every body professes to be astonished. For my own
part -- I heartily detest his memory. Mr. MORTIMER is so truly tender of FANNY,
that her gratitude seems ripening into love: none ever deserved a fonder return
than our MORTIMER.

In a word -- I warmly hope, happiness will again subsist amongst us. On
Thursday se'nnight our whole family sets out for Montpelier: the southern
softness, and a short absence from the scenes of irksome reflection, with a
change of air and company, may be of service to us all. That, in the mean time,
you may enjoy all the tranquillity of a worthy, and ingenuous spirit, is the
often-repeated prayer of,

My dear Lady LUCY, Your own, undisguised, DELIA DELMORE.

FINIS.

