OBSERVATIONS ON THE Spleen and Vapors: CONTAINING Remarkable CASES of Persons
of both Sexes, and all Ranks, from the aspiring DIRECTOR to the humble BUBBLER,
who have been miserably afflicted with those melancholy Disorders since the
Fall of South Sea, and other public Stocks; with the proper Method taken for
their Recovery, according to the new and uncommon Circumstances of each Case.

THE WHOLE Digested by way of JOURNAL, and accommodated to public Use.

By Sir JOHN MIDRIFF, Knt M.D.

Medicus est Inspector Naturae. -- LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, in Warwick
Lane. 1721.

(Price One Shilling.)

PREFACE.
THE writing of practical Observations is so ancient, and so universally
approved among Physicians, that I need make no Apology for following that
Method in those I now offer to the Public. I shall only take Notice, that they
come forth in the same Order as they stood in my own private Journal; and
therefore, if they be mixed with Incidents which are somewhat unusual in such
Performances, yet, I hope they will not prove the less beneficial, as they are,
in every Respect, calculated for the Relief of those Persons who date their
Splenetick and Vapourish Disorders from the melancholy Circumstances of the
Times, whereunto every good Physician ought to have a strict Regard, as the
Impressions made by such Causes may sometimes require other Aids besides those
of Physic.

But there are other Reasons which may justify my deviating somewhat out of the
common Road in this Particular, viz. The many concurring Aggravations which
rendered those Maladies more than ordinarily obstinate. The Disasters which
happened to Men's Pockets fell out, unluckily, about that Season of the Year,
when above Two Thirds of the Nation are naturally Splenetick, and when the
Discontented of all Denominations usually set their Plots and Machinations on
foot. It is no wonder therefore, if the ordinary Methods can avail nothing, but
that we are forced to have Recourse to all the Stratagems and Arguments our Wit
and Reason can afford us.

This is all the Apology I thought necessary to make for what the Reader may
find new or uncommon, and I shall take my Leave, by acquainting him, that I
intend my Observations, for the two following Months, shall also be published
in a short Time, and will contain all the remaining Occurrences that were most
remarkable in that Branch of my Practice, during the black and gloomy Season of
the Year; and I doubt not, when my Labors are once finished, they will have
the same Effect with the most efficacious Remedies, either to kill or cure.

From the Feast of St. Michael, 1720. OBSERVATIONS ON THE Spleen and Vapors,
etc.
HENRY FREEMAN, Esquire; aged 42, and of a plethorick Habit of Body, was seized
with a Giddiness, and a Rising in his Throat, accompanied with Faintness, and
many other Symptoms that attend Hypochondriack Disorders. He told me, when I
asked him how long he had been ill, that he had found the Distemper creeping on
him for above a Month, but that he was every Day grown worse than another; that
the Giddiness was but newly come upon him, and that he believed it was caused
by a Cold he had got in Exchange-Ally the Day before, where he had waited an
Opportunity to sell some Stock. He told me likewise, that he had got a Pain, or
rather an Uneasiness in his Left Side near the short Ribs; and that he believed
it was occasioned by a Jew who came to beat down the Price of Stocks, carrying
a large Bag of Money, which, by reason of the Crowd, happened to be pressed
several times against his Side; that he had ever since then been troubled with
a Faintness; and in fine, that he was so bad, that he believed he could hardly
live to another Day, unless I could find some speedy Relief for him. I soon
perceived by those Circumstances, that the Gentleman had been an Adventurer in
the South Sea, and that all his Ailments had taken their Date from the Time the
Stocks began to fall; yet, as I was unwilling to dive particularly into his
Affairs, I only told him, that I perceived he had met with something lately
that had lain heavy upon him, which had been the Cause of all these Disorders.
That the Giddiness, when accompanied with a Rising in the Throat, always
denoted Trouble of Mind, either from some external Cause, which is able to make
too violent Impressions on our Imaginations, or from our own distempered
Imaginations alone. That the Pain and Heaviness in his Side might also, with
more Probability, proceed from the same universal Cause, than from any external
Injury, as it was for the most part a concurring Symptom. I likewise took
notice, that the Spirits were always seized and much affected in those
Disorders; because the Impressions were first made upon them. The Gentleman was
fully persuaded that I had fallen rightly upon his Distemper, and began to tell
me of his own accord, that he had been a considerable Loser of late, as he was
one of the last Subscribers. He said, he always had a Diffidence in that great
Project, and was even led into it in Compliance with the Multitude, though it was
against the plain Dictates of his own Mind. After which, he asked me if I
thought his Disease would prove mortal; for he had never been in such a
Condition before. I made Answer, that the Distemper seldom proved mortal to any
but those who gave themselves wholly up to it, and would by no means arm
themselves against it; I therefore advised him to be cheerful, and not to think
too much of his Losses, and I would order what was proper, by way of Physic;
and when I had prescribed him a Vomit and some Pills, with a Bottle of Cephalic
Drops, I left him.

Next Day I found him eased of the worst Symptoms, but the Heaviness and Pain
of his Side was not altogether abated, and the rising of his Throat continued;
he seemed also to be very melancholy; whereupon I ordered him a Liniment for
his Side, and bid him continue in the Use of those Things I had already
prescribed; but above all, to arm himself against the Disturbance of his Mind,
which I perceived at that Time to be great; but as he was naturally a M^n of
Sense and Resolution, he soon got the better of his Distemper.

Lady Arabella Blackham, aged 37, of a sanguin Complexion, but of a somewhat
delicate Make, was suddenly seized with violent Fits; but before I could get to
her Lodgings, they had left her, and she was fallen asleep. I asked her Woman
after what Manner she was taken, who made Answer, that her Lady had been in a
very strange Condition, and had been very ill for a Month or longer, with hot
Flushings in her Face, and had got several Cordials from the Apothecary, and
was sometimes better and sometimes worse; but that something the Apothecary had
said to her the Day before had lain so on her Mind, and had brought her into
such Madness, that they were not able to hold her; but she tore every one that
came near her, sometimes laughing, and sometimes crying, and was but just
quieted. She said her Lady had never been well since the Fall of the Stocks,
having put all Miss's Fortune into the South Sea, with an Intention to marry
her to Sir John Frisk's eldest Son, who would have 20000 Pounds a Year at the
Death of his Father, that she had borrowed Money on all her own Plate and
Jewels, excepting one Salver and a Pair of Candlesticks; and that she believed
her Lady designed herself to marry a Gentleman that used to visit her, but that
the Match was broke off within this Fortnight.

After so full an Account, I could not be at a loss how to judge of my Lady's
Indisposition. I told the young Woman I would wait upon her Lady in the
Morning, because I was of Opinion she would probably rest all Night, after she
had been so much fatigued.

Next Day I called as soon as it was proper; but the Lady was somewhat
frightened when she first saw me, and asked me if the Plague was come to
London; begging, if I had been with any one that had it, not to come near her.
I assured her, London was very free from the Plague, and that she needed not be
under any Apprehensions. The reason of the Lady's Surprise, as I came to know
since, was from what the Apothecary had said to her. He is accounted a very
honest Man; but it seems, from a Desire the Lady should think him learned
enough in his Profession, he told her she had some bad Signs, and would be apt
to have the Furor Uterinus; this being a Disease she had never heard of, made
her imagine it might be the new Distemper that now infests our neighboring
Kingdom.

After I had delivered the Lady out of all her Fears, I went and examined her
Pulse, and found it very languid. She told me she was very full of Pain, and
seemed as if she had been beat with Cudgels. That, I said, was nothing but what
was usual after all such violent Disorders, and that she would recover her
Soreness in a few Days. I ordered her some Pills with Asa foetida, and a
Galbanum Plaster, as also an Hysterical Julep to drink after her Pills, or at
any other Time when the Fits threatened. I ordered her likewise a volatile and
cephalic Mixture, whereby the Lady is now altogether recovered, excepting only
that the Flushings sometimes return upon her.

Another Disorder of the same Kind happened also at this Time to one Mary
Duroy, the Wife of Thomas Duroy Mercer in the Strand. I found her very much in
the Vapors, and scarcely sensible; she told me little of her Indisposition,
but said she was the unhappiest Woman in the World. That she had a Husband, who
kept all his Affairs to himself, and never would acquaint her with any Thing he
did, but went on his own Way to ruin himself and his whole Family. But as I had
no Business with the Concerns between Man and Wife, I turned to an elderly
Woman who attended her as her Nurse, to learn what Condition her Mistress had
been in. But the Nurse had, it seems, entered into Confederacy with her Mistress
against Mr. Duroy; and to please her, had been exasperating his Faults, and, at
the same Time, heightning her Mistress's Disorders. For instead of answering my
Question, she took up the Story where the other had ended. We Women, says she,
are nowadays no more looked upon by the Men, than if we were Hobby-Horses.
Look ye, Sir, my Master went a stock-jobbing, and used to get his hundred
Pounds a Day; my Mistress, like a good Wife, kept in the Shop all the while,
from Morn to Night, and charged him every Day to bring her home a Gold Watch,
which was but a small Thing to his gettings. He told her one Week after another
he would be worth 500 l. a Year the next, and then she should have one of
threescore Pounds; and till then, it was not becoming her to wear one; but God
knows how he has jobb'd it at last, I am sure he has left my Mistress in a
strange Condition, and never comes near her but on Sundays, and then he sits
moping all Day without speaking to any Body; and if my Mistress asks him a
Question, he tells her she is a Fool, and Women will always be meddling with
what does not concern them. Here I put a Stop to the Nurse, who I found was but
beginning her Narration, in order to know something of her Mistress's
Disorders; bur they were both so full of their Indignation against Mr. Duroy,
that I could learn but little from them.

The Hopes and Expectations of most Women are too violent to be balked, and
when they meet with Disappointments, their soft delicate Natures are the least
able to bear them; they never fail to occasion great Disorders, both in Body
and Mind, let the Object be never so trifling. The chief Cause of Mrs. Duroy's
Sickness, by what I could gather, proceeded from the Want of the Gold Watch, a
thing she had set her Heart very much upon, and perhaps had conceived Ideas of
insulting some of her Neighbors, who had got the start of her in other
Respects. I found her Case to be much the same with that of Lady Arabella, and
therefore put her under the same Method of Cure. The Accident which happened to
that Lady, put me also upon a Stratagem which I managed, so as to be of Benefit
to her, notwithstanding it had like to have cost the other her Life. Nothing
contributes so much to wear off a settled Imagination, as the giving Birth to
some new Passion. I told her there was a very dangerous Sickness in Town, and
though she was altogether free from any Symptoms of it, yet it behooved her not to
give Way to fretting, otherwise I could not promise what might follow. Upon
this both she and her Nurse were quieted, Mrs. Duroy's Sorrow and Discontent
was changed into a moderate Fear, which soon wore off, and now she is so well,
as to attend her Husband's Business in his Absence.

This Week I was called to several other Women in the same Condition, viz. to
the Wife of a Salesman in Long-lane, who had railed at her Husband for selling
old Rags, when others were getting Estates in the South Sea, and setting up
their Coaches. The Wife of John Tape, Haberdasher of Small-Wares, who, by the
Losses her Husband had sustained in the Bubbles, was disappointed of a
Diamond-Ring, a new white Damask Gown and Petticoat, and a large Silver Cup,
which she intended against her next Lyingin. But there is one Circumstance
which ought not to be omitted, because it contributed very much to the
Aggravation of her Distemper, and that was her Husband's ill Usage. It seems
she had been the Cause of his going into the Bubbles; and from the Time they
sunk, he never ceased upbraiding her with her imaginary Finery, until he made
the poor Woman not only miscarry, but in that Weakness almost distracted.
Martha Firkin, the Wife of Jonathan Firkin, Cheesemonger, and Mary Pickle, the
Wife of James Pickle, Salter, were also in a miserable Condition. I found both
these good Women had persuaded their Husbands very earnestly not to meddle with
the Stocks. But the one had promised his Wife a new Damask-Bed for the best
Chamber, and an easy Chair of the same, with a Carpet for the Dining Room; and
the other had bought his Wife a Set of new China, with half a dozen
new-fashion'd Spoons, a Silver Tea-Pot, and a Soop-Ladle; but the Misfortunes
those Men had drawn upon themselves, had been the Cause of their Wives
Disorders.

Most of these have succeeded very well under my Care; but there was a Number
of others who are like to continue in a miserable Condition, whose Names I have
omitted out of Tenderness, because I found them subject to an Infirmity which
is not altother becoming their Sex; and that is, an unseasonable and immoderate
Use of spirituous Liquors. Nothing is so destructive to hysterical Women as
Drams; and yet, from a kind of craving Necessity, they are apt to have Recourse
to them in their Languors and sinking Fits, which confirm them so into a Habit,
that they return upon every Surprise, or upon the least slight Disorder.

October 7. I was called to TO. M. Gent. aged 39. of a thin spare tallish Body,
and of a pale Complexion. When I first entered the Room, I was somewhat
surpised; his Head was as large as a Porridge-pot; for he had got five or six
Woollen Caps upon it, over all which was another lined with Fur; upon his Body
were several Flannel Wastcoats, a Cassock of thick Cloth, with a thick wadded
Gown, and about his Shoulders the Quilt which he had taken from off the Bed. A
Gentleman, who was sitting by him, seeing me look upon him with some
Earnestness, burst out into a Fit of Laughter, which gave great Offense to my
Patient, who, till then, was scarce able to speak. This unseasonable Mirth in
his Friend put him into such a Disorder, that I soon perceived what his
Indisposition was, and likewise that he had been some time a Valetudinarian. I
advised him not to give way to Passion, telling him it would waste his Spirits,
and then I took an Opportunity to ask him how long he had been ill. He was so
much out of Breath, that it was some time before he could make me any Answer,
but, as soon as he was able, he told me he had been bad about a fortnight;
whereupon his Friend ventured to put in another Word, and said, to his
Knowledge, he had not been in perfect Health these seven Years. This
exasperated my Patient to such a Degree, that he gave the other the Lie. Was
not I, says he, as well as you, or any Man alive, for three or four Months
together? did I not go every Day to Change, eat roast Beef, and drink Claret?
nay we eat salt Beef, or roasted Pork, or any other Thing we could get. Now,
Sir, I Will be judged by you, whether any Man that is not in perfect Health,
could digest those Things. I made Answer, not very well. But as all this was
little to the Purpose, I desired to know where the greatest of his Trouble lay
at present; but the Gentleman had not yet put an End to his Discourse. Could
any Man that has the least Indisposition, continued he, eat Beans and Bacon,
Green Pease, Colliflowers, and Cabbages; any such Trash would at this time kill
me in less than twelve Hours. I told him those Things were generally accounted
windy, and for that Reason, prejudicial to Persons in those Circumstances I
judged him to be in. Whereupon I asked him if he was not sometimes troubled
with Cholick Pains. Oh! always Sir, says he, never without them. Then I asked
if he had not a Pain, or rather a Weight and Uneasiness on his left Side. At
that Question his Color changed, his Hands trembled, and I perceived at the
same Time a universal Disorder; But recovering a little, he went into the
Closet, and brought out three or four Pots and Basins, one after another, in
which he had made Water at several Times. I perceive, says he, you have the
same Notion of my Distemper, that several others of your Profession have had;
you fancy I have got the Spleen, and that all my Ailments are imaginary; but
I Will assure you, Sir, you will find your self mistaken. Don't you see there, how
clear my Water is? there is not the least Sign of Concoction in it; I am told
it prognosticates a Delirium, and I expect every Minute when I shall be out of
my Senses. Feel my Pulse, what a burning Fever I have upon me. Upon this I took
hold of his Arm, and told him it was fitter for him to be in Bed than up; for
it was then very late. But, says he, I cannot lie in Bed as those do, that love
to indulge themselves; and for that Reason, most People think nothing ails me,
but that I only fancy my self to be bad. I made Answer, that those Persons were
much mistaken, that he was indeed very ill, though to the best of my Judgment, I
could not say he was in Danger. I told him that I would visit him early next
Morning; but as yet, it was not proper to prescribe any Thing for him,
excepting only white Wine and Water, which I ordered him to drink.

This Gentleman has been a Valetudinarian from his Youth, which proceeded from
a natural Indolence, that ought to have been broke and overcome by Business;
but as he had a sufficient Patrimony, he gave himself wholly up to Idleness,
and would seldom go abroad, either upon his necessary Affairs, or for his
Diversion; yet the natural Love and Indulgence to his own Person, made him feed
plentifully, though he had no Exercise or Employment to digest it. This had laid
the Foundation of his Distemper; by which Means, he became also unfit for any
of the Offices of Life; for as he had, in a manner, sequestered himself from
the Society of Mankind, so nothing was more burdensome to him than Company;
neither was this to be wondered at, for he was grown the Jest and Diversion of
all his Acquaintance. And as the Mind soon takes Part in all such
Indispositions, this solitary Person's Imaginations became exceedingly
vitiated, and his whole Thoughts were centered upon his own Condition, which he
now believes to be the most unhappy of any Man alive. The nobler Passions are
quite extinguished and sunk, in the Excesses of Fear, Sorrow, and Anguish of
Heart, which present such dreadful Images before him, as cast a Gloom upon the
whole Face of Nature, that nothing can relish with him: And albeit this
Disposition of Mind makes him shun Company, yet the Apprehension of Death, or
some sudden Disaster, works so powerfully upon him, that he can never be alone,
but must always have some near Relation or old Acquaintance with him, who is
not a Stranger to his Condition, though even that Person, notwithstanding all his
good Offices, must be a Slave to his Humors. His way of thinking is become
different from that of all other Men, yet he judges himself so absolutely right
in all his Apprehensions, that if his Friend contradicts him in any Thing, he
believes it either in Derision of him, or out of Ignorance.

Thus much I learned of his Friend, who was also his near Relation, and had
indeed judged accurately enough of his Cousin's Condition, which seems to be
the more evident, from the extraordinary Alteration that happened to him, while
he frequented the Alley, and was engaged in Business. The Disappointments he
met with there, were the Occasion of his sudden Relapse; but a Man in his
Circumstances could never be happy, had every Thing he proposed to himself
answered to his Wishes; for as all his Labor tended only to a further
Gratification of his indolent Humor, he must by degrees have fallen back into
his accustomed Disorders, only that a more plentiful Fortune might, in Time,
have increased his Maladies, instead of lessening them. Neither is this
altogether improbable, from what his Friend further told me, concerning some
Resolutions he had taken. He bought a piece of Ground, on which if his Affairs
had succeeded, he designed to have built a House, or rather a Castle, for the
Walls were to have been four Foot thick, and under the Lining, they were to be
laid over with Pitch and Bitumen, the Windows were all to be double glazed, and
the inner Doors to draw up and down like Sashes. He said this was the ancient
Way of Building, and Men lived then to a much greater Age, and more healthful
than now, that the unwholesome Damps come through our thin Walls.

After hearing those things, I very reasonably despaired of doing Service to a
Man who had given himself up wholly to his own deluded Imaginations. But
according to my Promise, I waited on him next Morning, where his Friend was so
kind as to meet me. It was broad Day when I came to the House, but the Windows
were all shut as at Midnight, with a Candle burning on the Table. I asked if he
was not almost stifled for want of Air: But this proved to be an unseasonable
Question, for he was out of Humor with his Friend, who just before had been
telling him how dangerous it would be to burn Candles Night and Day in his new
House, where there was to be so much combustible Matter. This had put him into
a very great Passion; but as soon as I came to know the Cause of it, I studied
to pacify him, telling him his Friend did that only out of good Humor, to
divert him in his Sickness, and that he ought to take it in good part. After
this, I asked him how he had rested all Night; he told me very badly, but that
the Apothecary had mistaken his Distemper, and that it was very strange no Body
could find out what the Matter was with him; whereupon he went again into his
Closet, and brought the Water which he had made in the Night. See you, Sir,
says he, with abundance of Terror in his Looks, whether I be a Man for this
World or not; Sir, you are a Physician, I know you are not afraid to dip your
Finger into it, and taste it, you will find it as sweet as any Well-Water. I
was somewhat surpised at this odd Notion, and how it had come into his Head,
for there was nothing in the Water but what was common to Hypochondriacal
Persons, who, when their Disorders are much upon 'em, make large quantities of
Water, which is also very clear. But a Gentleman had sent his Servant that
Morning, to enquire how he did, who came in about the Time he was taking a
Survey of his Basins, and seeing a great Quantity of clear Water, took it to be
the same Distemper, the last Master he had served, died of, which he told him
was a Diabetes, and that the Doctors used to taste it every Time they came to
see him, and always said he would die, because there was no Salt in it. I used
all the Arguments I could, to beat this Whim out of his Head, but to no
purpose, it being but new; I ordered what was proper for him, and left him for
two or three Days; but I found he could not be persuaded to make Use of my
Prescriptions, but was now about to call another Physician, only that the
Apothecary prevented him, by sending him some Things he said were proper in a
Diabetes.

When I came again to visit him, I found him under a fresh Disorder, for what
he had taken had indeed put a Stop to the Discharges by Urine, but not the
right Way; for he was now troubled with a violent Defluxion, and he spit like
one in a Salivation. Now, says he, I hope there needs be no further Doubt
concerning my Distemper. You see, Sir, how fast I am going; he had kept two or
three Pieces of hard discolored Phlegm in a Gallipot, which he took to be some
of his Lungs: But when we came to examine them, they were dissolved: Whereupon
I told him, there was nothing here but Phlegm; and that I hoped his Lungs were
not so bad as he imagined. But all this would not satisfy him; for he fancied
the Cat, or some Dog, had been in the Room, and had taken 'em out. I ordered
that Night a Draught, and bid him be of good Cheer, telling him, that he was
not in so imminent Danger as he apprehended. At this he was a little revived,
and asked me, if any Man could live after part of his Lungs were come up? O!
yes, says I, never fear. I had ordered the Draught to be repeated the Night
following; so that I did not see him for two Days more.

When I came the fourth Time, all things were much changed, and those Symptoms
gone off. He was also very much metamorphos'd in his Apparel; for, instead of
the Bed-Quilt, which he used to wear about his Shoulders, he was now covered
with a Bear's Skin. His Friend was along with him, and seeing me look earnestly
upon him, as I did at first, he could not again refrain from Laughter; and
addressing himself to me, Had my Cousin, says he, been clothed in a Lion's
Skin, as he is now in that of a Bear, you would undoubtedly have taken him for
a second Hercules. But this was the Cause of fresh Heat in my Patient, who told
his Friend, with a great deal of Passion, that though he was forced to wear a
Bear's Skin out of Necessity, yet it would become him much better, since he was
as savage as the Creature to which it belonged. But I interrupted the Dispute,
and then asked the Gentleman, how he did? He told me, he was something better,
and that he had got this Skin to wear about him, because he found the Quilt too
heavy. When I was about to take my Leave of him, he told me with some
Compliment, that I needed not give myself the Trouble to make him any more
regular Visits; for he hoped he was in a fair way to do well. Whereupon I
parted, with a Congratulation for the promising Signs of his Recovery.

As soon as I was gone, the Gentleman's Friend followed me to a Coffee-House I
usually frequent, and gave me an Account of a new Prepossession had pleased his
Cousin wonderfully; but that he was ashamed to mention it to me, because he had
been so often mistaken. It seems, while the Spitting continued, the Thoughts of
his Lungs coming up had frightened him to such a Degree, that notwithstanding
he was grown a great deal better by the Things I had ordered him, yet he sent
for a Scrivener to make his Will. When the Scrivener came, they were under some
Difficulty how to dispose of his Substance among his Friends; it being
impossible to know what he was worth; for all he had was in the South Sea; but
he fell upon a Contrivance of his own, and told the Scrivener, he would have it
made into so many Dividends (for these are Words he had been much used to of
late) he would give a third Part to one, a fourth to another, etc. But the
Scrivener, who was not accustomed to any thing out of the common Form, told
him, all his Goods and Chattels, and every particular Sum, ought to be
specified, otherwise it would only occasion Lawsuits among his Relations,
after he was dead. At that Word he started, and began to look pale; for he
could never hear of Death without very great Disorders. A Neighbor, who was
called up to attest the Will, and who, 'till now, could scarcely believe him to
be in good earnest, asked him, what his Sickness was? He made Answer, that he
first had a Fever, and then a Diabetes, and was now fallen into a deep
Consumption; and that he was, notwithstanding all those Afflictions, tormented
with an insupportable Pain in his Bowels. Upon this, his Neighbor told him, he
knew a Man who was just in the same Condition for a great while together, and
had been in the Hands of a great many Doctors, but none of them could do him
any Good, 'till at last he met with one who made him wear a Tyger's Skin, with
the hairy side outmost, and in a few Days he voided a Worm Thirty six Yards and
an Inch long, and has been as well since as any Man alive. This Story worked so
powerfully upon his Imagination, that he soon believed he had got such a Worm
within him, and every Time his Guts growl'd, he fancied he felt it move. He
sent all over the Town for a Tyger's Skin, but at that Time there was none to
be had; but a Furrier, who came to know what it was for, and interpreting all
this to be nothing but a Piece of Lunacy, and that the Worm was rather in his
Head than his Belly, persuaded him that a Bear's Skin would do as well, and
that he had sold several for the same Purpose.

This his Friend told me was the true Reason of his wearing the Bears Skin, and
why he was now become so shy and indifferent about my further visiting him,
having from thence conceived unquestionable Hopes of his doing well. And
moreover, that he was in so constant an Expectation of his Deliverance, that he
had provided a new Close-stool, with a Pan big enough to receive the Worm; and
that all the Family was called together as often as he went to it, that they
might be Witnesses thereof.

In this Condition I left him; but I have been since informed, that the Cure
has not succeeded to his Liking, though he is still so much taken with the Fancy,
that he has now applied himself to Mr. John Moor Apothecary in Abchurch-lane,
in order to have some Doses of his Worm Powder.

Mrs. Penelope

Mrs. Penelope Whitewash, a Maiden Lady, aged 38, was miserably afflicted with
the Vapors. Another Physician had been employed before I was called to her;
but she told me he had prescribed nothing but a Bottle of Drops to drink with
her Tea, and that she believed he did not imagine how bad she was, for he came
but seldom, and then made very light of her Indisposition. Upon this I desired
to know where most of her Trouble lay. Indeed, Sir, says she, there are many
Things trouble me, but that which lies heaviest upon me at present, is a
continual Faintness; and the Apothecary tells me I have got a Fever upon my
Spirits. I went to draw my Chair near enough to take hold of her Wrist, in
order to feel her Pulse. But this had like to have caused a very great
Disturbance, for the Chair pinched the Foot of a little Dog, who had been some
time scrambling about my Legs, but was now lain down under it to rest him. This
put the Lady into a great Fright, and made her call out so loud, that her
Spirits indeed suffered very much by it; but when she found the Dog was not
hurt, she soon recovered, and told him he was very naughty to be always in
Peoples Way, and bid him not go near the Gentleman's Chair any more: Then she
addressed her self to me, and told me, the only thing that made her have a
Concern for that Dog was, because he came of a Bitch which had been her
Mother's; with that she fetched a deep Sigh, and began to be somewhat
disordered, and asked a Gentlewoman, who was by, for her Bottle, that she might
smell to it. I bid the Lady be of good Courage, telling her, that I hoped there
was no Danger; and that I would order some Things would soon relieve her; and
accordingly I prescribed her some Pills, with a Cephalic Mixture, and then
left her. When I was got down Stairs into the Entry, an elderly Gentlewoman met
me, (who I understood to be the Landlady) and asked what I thought of Madam. I
told her, she would, in all probability, do well again. Indeed, Sir, says the
Gentlewoman, she frightened us all last Night; for she happened to see a Shroud
on the Candle, and I cannot tell what may be in it, but she believes ever
since, that she is a dying; for she says, her Mother saw just such another but
a little before her Death. I told her, there was nothing in that. It may be so,
replied the old Gentlewoman, and I believe it is only a Cold she has got
lately, when they were making all this stir about the Stock-Jobbers; for then
she used to dress every Day, and go into the City; and I perceive she has never
been to call well since. Very probable, said I, and with that I went out of
Doors.

Next Morning, I made the Lady another Visit. When I first entered the Room,
the Lady told me, she was ashamed; for she was so bad that she could not put on
clean Things, but was forced to be in that dirty pickle. Pray, Madam, said I,
make no Apology; for we never expect to find sick Persons dressed. She had got
the Landlady's Daughter to keep her company, and an ordinary Woman, with a Pot
of Coffee before 'em; which gave me an Opportunity to observe, that Coffee was
generally looked upon to be bad for Persons in her Circumstances. But the Lady
made Answer, that she had not been drinking any of it herself, but had only
provided it for Mrs. Betty and that good Woman, who was so kind as to come now
and then to divert her. I told her, nothing would do her more Service than
cheerful Company. Upon this, she asked me, if I liked Coffee? And whether I
would be pleased to accept of a Dish? I very seldom comply with my Patients in
things of this kind; but being a cold raw Day, I drank one Dish, which the Lady
poured out for me; and as soon as I had emptied my Cup, and that they found I
was unwilling to have it filled again, I observed the Landlady's Daughter take
it up, and turn it round four or five several times, looking earnestly into it
all the while: But the good Woman frowned, and knit her Brows at her, and
winked to my Patient, while the other was so intent i^ her Observations, that
she took no Notice, 'till at last she was pulled by her Petticoat; whereupon
she set down the Cup, and I perceived she was at some Pains to smother a Laugh.
By this time I had satisfied the Lady in all the Questions she had put to me
concerning her Indisposition; and it being full time for me to be gone, I left
her. When I was got to the other side of the Door, the young Woman fell a
laughing aloud, and I overheard her call to the Lady and the other Woman, to
come and see what a large Pair of Horns there was in the Doctor's Cup. But as I
am never offended at young's People's Mirth, I took no Notice, but went down
Stairs into the Entry, where the Landlady was again come to meet me. She asked
how I liked Madam to day? I told her, she seemed to be a little more cheerful;
but that I was afraid she did herself Harm by drinking too much Coffee, though
she was not willing to own it. But the Landlady confirmed what the Lady had
said, and told me, that Madam seldom drinks any herself; but this Morning, she
had a Pot made for that Woman, whom she gave me to understand was a
Fortune Tellers, and one who knew every thing by looking into the
Coffee-Grounds. That, I said, was indeed a way of Divining I had never heard of
before. Then I asked what she had told the Lady? Nay, answered the old Woman, I
cannot say to you what may be in it; but she tells Madam, she always sees a
Coach and Six in her Cup; and that she is sure the South Sea will rise to 1500
by Candlemas next; and in a little time after, she will be married to a warm
elderly Gentleman; and we believe it must be her Cousin, who comes very often
in the Afternoon to play at Cards with her; for he is just such a Gentleman as
she describes. She tells my Girl too, that she is to be married to a fine
proper young Man in a little time, who will make her a very good Husband; that
she will have several fine Children, and want for nothing that any Woman can
desire; and abundance of such Things, which, you know, pleases young People.
Very true, said I, and so bid her adieu.

This was the last Visit I made Mrs. White-wash; for I found she had received
no small Benefit from the Fortune-teller's favorable Delusions, which, although
they were practiced with the most absurd and silly Device in the World, yet all
were so artfully suited to the Lady's most earnest Desires and Inclinations,
that they easily gained upon her Credulity, and will serve for a Season, to
keep off that threatening Storm, which, in all probability, must fall so much
the more heavy upon her, by how much her Expectations have been raised and
exalted.

The following Week, which in my Account began the 15th of October, proved a
Time of so much Business, that I never remember the like since I was able to
practice; I had little or no Rest, but was sent for to all Quarters of the
Town, and to many Persons of the best Rank; and every Time I came Home, I found
my House thronged with People of inferior Degree, some of whom had been deeply
engaged in the Bubbles, but most were Tradesmen, who had sustained great
Losses, by furnishing those with Equipages, who had not as yet been in any
Decorum suitable to their new Acquisitions: A few of the latter were indeed so
happy as to be engaged in full Business, and had their Heads turned upon
Methods to retrieve their Losses, which had diverted their Minds, and kept off
melancholy Thoughts; b^t only came upon the Account of their Wives and
Daughters, who had Time to think, and had therefore laid those Things more to
Heart. The Hurry I was now brought into, confounded me to such a Degree, and
the vast many miserable Objects I had seen, dwelt so on my own Imagination,
that I began to think the Distemper infectious; and for that Reason, I kept at
Home one whole Day, and would not so much as suffer my Doors to be opened. But
I was so much terrified at last, that I fell a trembling every time I heard any
Body knock; and methought every Voice I heard in the Street named Sir John
Midriff. And just as I imagined, many of the Symptoms soon took hold of me, and
no one can conceive the great Disorders I labored under for the Space of
fourteen Hours. I began also to think of the Coffee-Cup, and was angry, and
snapt at my Wife every Time she spoke to me. But after I had slept upon it, I
summoned all my Reason, and found my Body was perfectly well, and that my
Disturbances were only imaginary; I put on a Resolution not to give way to any
such Prepossession, especially at a time when so many Objects called for my
Assistance; I therefore dressed my self, and went abroad, as usual, to visit my
Patients.

The first I made this Week was to an old Usurer, who had been no Proprietor in
the Stocks; but had privately lent very near 12000 l. at 20 per Cent. Interest,
and had himself paid at the Rate of 10 per Cent. for a good Part of that Money,
which he was afraid would all be sunk, because both Debtors and Bondsmen were
shipwrecked, if not quite lost in the South Sea. But this Gentleman was really
altogether incurable, for he had lived very abstemiously for above 20 Years;
but, since his Losses, could not be prevailed on to take any Sustenance,
excepting Bread and Water, for he was of Opinion he ought to fast for his
Folly. After I had made him two or three Visits, and had acquainted him with
the Hurry I was in, and that I was afraid I could not attend upon him any more,
and when he found that I was just a going, he stopped me, and putting on his
Spectacles, he went to a Drawer, where I heard him chink over a great many
Pieces, and after I had waited his Time, which was a pretty good while, he
brought me a Quarter-guinea, and pressed it into the Hollow of my Hand, bidding
me carry it home to my Wife for a Purse-penny; and at the same time observed,
that Gold was nowadays become as rare as a Sallad at Christmas. From him I
went to a middle aged Widow Lady, who was miserably in the Vapors, for she had
sold the Life-Rent of her Jointure for a small Sum of Money, which she put out
to be improved, in order to marry a lusty young Man, an Attorney, who was her
Steward, and did all her Business. From that Lady I went to a Frenchman, who is
an Artist, and had worked above 20 Years in a Garret, during which Time he had
lived for the most part on Roots and Herbs, and sometimes a little foetid Oil
for Sauce, whereby he had hoarded up some Money, but had lost it all in the
Bubbles. When I came to him, I asked what was the Matter with him. Oh -- de
Matter, Sir, said he, I have got your D -- md Anglise Malady, that makes your
Man and Woman hang demselves in de Room, and drown in de Water, and if I had
been ane de Anglisman I had certainly done my self so too, for I have lost all
my Money and my Health. I could not but pity the poor Frenchman very much, for
I understood he had been miserably bit by Men whose Birth and Station should
have put them above such Practices, and therefore I advised him to apply to his
Business again, and I visited him until he was pretty well, without taking any
Fee of him.

Thomas Hazard Esquire; was also one of those who ushered in this Week's Practice.
He is a noted Gamester, and has played away above two Thirds of a very handsome
Estate, which was the Acquisition of an old griping Uncle. The Remainder he
disposed of in the public. This Gentleman, though he had gone through many
Changes and Vicissitudes, yet he was never so sensibly touched as with his late
Disappointments; because he imagined himself arrived at that which he had been
laboring for, early and late, ever since he was come to Man's Estate. I
understood he had several grand Projects in view; but among others, had a
particular Eye not only to some certain Men of Quality's Estates, but also to
their Mistresses, which he thought was only but throwing a lucky Main or two as
soon as he was able to enter the Lists with them. But although his Distemper
was exceeding violent, and was also much heightened by Passion; yet it did not
last long; for the next time I came to wait upon him, I found all things much
altered; for he was whistling and singing, and practicing by himself, and with
a courageous Air rattling and striking the Dice-Box with great force upon the
Table; and as soon as he saw me, he called out, What do you think of your
Patient now, Sir John? I have reasoned myself well by Philosophy; for I believe
a Man of no Estate has as much Pleasure in winning two or three Yellow-Boys, as
a rich Man when he casts up a Thousand Pounds; and I am of opinion, a Man may
have as much Satisfaction in a neat clean Wench in a Callico-Gown and
Petticoat, as with a Lord's Mistress, who has perhaps no more to set her off,
than only that she is a Nobleman's Choice; and for that Reason, is kept fine,
like a Lady, and at a Distance from the Vulgar. Upon this I could not but
reflect in my own Mind, what Numbers of Persons were supported in their Folly
by a vicious Application of Philosophical Maxims and Rules; but I made answer
with a Smile, That I was not much acquainted with that Kind of Philosophy. This
was answered with a loud Laugh from my Patient; and as soon as he had recovered
himself, that we had Time to exchange Compliments, I took my Leave; for I found
he was not susceptible of very lasting Impressions to hurt him, but was
hardened in the Ways of Iniquity, which were almost equal to him, whether in a
higher or lower Capacity.

The next remarkable Patient was a famous Dissenting Teacher, who had acquired
a considerable Fortune, which had enabled him to become a no small Adventurer
in the South Sea. This had laid the Foundation of all his Illness; but there
were other Circumstances that contributed to keep up his Disorders. When I had
inquired into his Condition, and found him to be touched with the Spleen, I
thought it might be no hard matter to do him service, as he seemed to be a Man
of some Sense and Learning; and therefore spoke my Sentiments freely, telling
him, he ought not to mind his Disappointments, so as to give way to disorderly
Imaginations. But he made Answer, that these were at this time the least of his
Care; though he could not but own, they had made some deep Impressions on him at
first; but that now he found his Body very much distempered, and there must be
some uncommon Method taken for his Recovery, otherwise he would soon become one
of the unhappiest Men alive. Those Expressions are so usual from Hypochondriack
Persons, that I gave little ear to them, but persisted in my former Advice; and
after I had ordered him some Cephalicks, I left him.

After this, I visited him several Days, but found him always harping on the
same String, which made me somewhat more inquisitive than I had been before. He
told me, he had sometimes a grievous Pain in his Head, sometimes in his
Shoulders, and very often in his Shin Bones; and, indeed, Sir, said he, you
will hardly imagine what a miserable Condition I am in. There was still none of
those Symptoms but may attend Hypochondriack Persons; and therefore I used
several fresh Arguments to fortify him against his groundless Apprehensions;
but when Men are once given up to the Delusions that attend this gloomy
Distemper, they become so much enslaved and overwhelmed with Fear, that every
Idea presents something unto them that is dreadful; a great many new Disasters
are daily formed, which have no real Footing but in their distempered
Imaginations; and many old Afflictions, which had long been vanquished, are
aga^n revi^'d with such a Train of Aggravations, that they render Life no
better than a tormenting Dream.

This was now become the Case of our Parson, who had indeed got the better of
those Impressions which had at first given Birth to his Disorders; but it was
by others that were much more dreadful. He would often begin to disclose
himself to me, but something always prevented him; his Color often left him,
his Hands shook, and I observed him to be under the greatest Disturbance
imaginable. I must confess, it gave me some Uneasiness to see the Reverend
Divine in all this Confusion; whereupon, I spoke to him with all possible
Tenderness, entreating him not to be too reserved, but to tell me freely what
it was troubled him so much. Sir, said he, you cannot probably have any
Suspicion of what I am now going to acquaint you with; and if I was to give you
all the Signs of my Distemper, they might indeed puzzle you; but you would
hardly guess at it, as it is a Malady very unbecoming one of my Calling, nor
any ways agreeable to the Reputation I have always had among Men. By these
Expressions I began to think he had, perhaps, been lately in Liquor, and had
fallen into the Hands of some lewd Woman. Whereupon, I conjured him not to hide
any thing from me; but if he had received any Injury from that Sex, to confess
freely. The Ice being now broke, he shook his Head, and told me, it was a great
deal worse than I could imagine; for the Distemper had lain in his Blood above
Twenty Years. I got it, said he, when I was a young raw Student, and I am
afraid, by what I find now, I have never been rightly cured of it. I asked him,
why he had been so negligent not to have it cured all that while; and at the
same time I observed to him, that he did not look like one who had lain under
that Distemper. To this he said, he had been as well as any Man till lately,
but that ^ow he was sure the latent Poison had begun to work, and was got into
his Bones, which must no doubt be the Reason why he oftentimes felt so great
Pain in them. But when I was going to undeceive him in this Particular, he put
a Stop to me, and said, if the Distemper should break out upon him at this
^uncture, it was but a just Punishment for his Ava^^ce; for before he put his
Money into the South Sea, ^e was under various Scruples, and had many secret
Conflicts, whether he ought to desire more than he had already; or, if that was
allowable, whether he ought to follow the Example of worldly Men in becoming a
Trader in the Public, since he observed it had been the Cause of so much
Atheism among us, and had drawn the Hearts of most Persons from ^he true Object
of their Adoration into downright ^dolatry; and therefore as he was sensible of
his own ^rror in this Particular, and had even acted in some Measure against
the Dictates of his better Know^edge, he feared it was at last come home to
him, and that perhaps he was visited with this dreadful Calamity, which
otherwise might never have broke ^ut upon him. I made Answer, that he could not
^ndeed do better, than to make a religious Improvement of all his Afflictions;
but yet, I said the loss of his Money seemed to be the real and most sensible
Punishment he underwent at present, for in what related to his Person, I said I
could not perceive any Thing amiss with him. But all this did not give him any
great Satisfaction, for he was also under no ^mall Anxiety about his Wife, to
think that she should suffer innocently on his Account. He told me she had
likewise been very much troubled with the Headache of late, and had broke out
all about her Mouth, and that she complained greatly of a sinking in her
Spirits; but I found his Wife was only in the Vapors, as himself was in the
Spleen, and therefore I gave him to understand, that those Disorders were no
other than what are common to most Women when any Thing troubles them. Upon
this he paused a while, for he was sensible she had laid their late
Disappointments pretty much to Heart; but there was one Circumstance that still
terrified him more than all the rest, he had got two or three Pimples on his
Forehead, which he imagined certainly to be the Effects of the Distemper; and
I believe no grave Man before him ever consulted the Glass so much as he had
done while he was under this Disturbance; for all the Time I was with him, he
was continually pulling back his Wig to examine those Eruptions, and as often
as he put his Hands upon them, he remained speechless for a Minute or two, and
sometimes he also felt his Nose, lest any Thing should be amiss there. But at
length assuming a little more Courage, he addressed himself to me in this
Manner: I doubt, Sir, said he, though you are deservedly reputed a very great
Physician, you may, however, be unacquainted with my Case; for if I be not
mistaken, I believe it is more in the Way of a Surgeon than in yours. I made
Answer, that venereal Cases, if he meant those, were no less the Business of a
Physician, than any other, and that Recourse was commonly had to some one of
our Profession, when they proved too hard and difficult for the Surgeons to
manage. Pray then, Sir, said he, pointing to his Forehead, what do you think
can be the Meaning of these Blotches? don't you believe there must be something
more than ordinary in them? I told him they were nothing but what every one was
subject to as well as he, upon catching Cold, or upon any slight Disorder; and
I observed that the Distemper could not conceal it self so long as he fancied,
without making some Havoc upon the Constitution, and therefore begged him to
rest satisfied, and not torture himself with such Whims and Imaginations. But
to convince me they were no Whims, he took a Key out of his Pocket and opened a
Drawer, where there were some Books with the Leaves folded in several Places,
among which was Martin's Treatise of the venereal Disease, where he showed me
several Instances of Persons who had that Distemper lurking many Years in their
Blood. But I told him it was a Loss to any one, and even to Men of Learning, to
read Books of Physic, unless they had made that their particular Study, for
they might very readily fall upon bad Authors, and even on scandalous Books
that had been writ upon some Design, and that many a one had been so much
terrified with the false or injudicious Instances in those Books, that although
they were altogether free from that Distemper, yet they could never be easy
till they came into the Hands of those who would put them unnecessarily under
the Grand Cure, and therefore I bid him rest satisfied, unless he had been
lately transgressing. But at this he lifted up his Hands, and gave me to
understand he had been married upwards of 20 Years, and assured me upon his
Honor, that he never had any Thing to do with any Woman besides his Wife all
that Time. But Sir, says he, my Wife is a very likely Woman, and what can be
the Reason I could never have a Child by her? I satisfied him that was no Rule,
for there were many Instances of that kind, where neither the Man nor Woman
were diseased, though there might be some natural Defect, which most commonly
lies in the Woman; and on the other Hand, that there were also many Instances
of venereal Persons, who had begot Children even when the Infection had spread
it self in the Blood. And do you think, said he, that my Wife may be safe,
notwithstanding all this, and that she can be in no Danger for the future? I
made Answer there was no Manner of Danger; for I could discover nothing in his
Case that could be the least injurious to her. This put so much new Life into
the good Man, that he was even like to leap out of his Skin, and in a Transport
of Joy told me I was his Friend, his Father Confessor, and the rarest Man in
the World, for delivering him out of all his Fears, by such solid and
convincing Arguments. After which he began to tell me of the melancholy and
frightful Ideas he had lately fostered in his Breast, viz. what his own
Congregation, and all other sober Dissenters would have thought of him, what
his Friends and Acquaintance among the Ministers, what a Wound it would have
been to Religion, especially since his Life and Conversation had hitherto been
unspotted as to the World. Had People once got a Notion of my having the foul
Distemper, continued he, I should never have been able to look up any more; but
now you give me so much Comfort, that I even despise all my late
Disappointments; and upon this he embraced me with the greatest Tokens of
Friendship.

But as no Transport can continue long without some Change or Interruption,
this venerable Person's Joys were soon turned into a pannick Fear; for while he
and I were in this pleasing Conference, we were unexpectedly surpised by
another Teacher who came to see him, and had dropped in upon us before we were
aware of him, who, seeing us engaged, made a short Compliment, and went
directly to the Table where the Books lay, and taking up one of them, began to
read where my Patient had folded the Leaves. Any one may easily imagine what a
dismal Condition the poor Parson was in at this new Accident; he looked like
one that was ready to go into his Grave, and every Time the other cast his Eye
off the Book to spit, or to take a Pinch of Snuff, he was like to sink into the
Ground, lest he should ask him Questions; but my being there prevented that,
and as I had been the Instrument of delivering him out of his first Fears, I
managed the Matter in such Manner as brought him safely off, and delivered him
out of the last too. When I rose to go away, I desired him to do me the Favor
to give those Books house-room for an Hour or two, until I could send my
Servant for them, which he promised very obligingly; and so I left him in a
fair Way of doing well.

I had many other Patients at this Time, besides this reverend Teacher, who had
been consulting the Labors of Quacks and Mountebanks, and from thence
tormenting themselves with the Imagination of Symptoms and Diseases they were
altogether free from: Others were filled with the most monstrous Conceits that
perhaps were ever heard of. But this I observed was a Relief to many, and the
Flitings of their Imaginations not only preserved them from desperate
Practices, but helped greatly to wear out the first Impressions, by changing
them into others, which, as they were in themselves absurd and ridiculous, so
they were the more easily vanquished and overcome. But it was quite otherwise
with some, whose Expectations had been raised higher than to admit of any the
least Disappointment. The sudden Stop that was put to their ambitious Desires,
like an Eclipse, had so darkened their Reason, that, to them, all Things put on
quite different Appearances from what they were really in Nature, and the Ideas
of Things were altogether changed from what they had been formerly, on their
own Imaginations. All their Passions were swallowed up in Anger and Revenge,
which in that total Darkness they were sometimes eager to practice upon
themselves, from Want of Power and Ability to exercise it on others.

The following is an eminent Example of this kind, it being the Case of a
Gentleman, who was a very considerable Adventurer in the South Sea, but had
chiefly increased his Stock upon the Favor and Credit of others, and, from a
Person of narrow Circumstances, was in a little Time advanced to a very
surprising Fortune. But the higher the Precipice, the more terrible and
dangerous the Fall. This Gentleman had conceived great Things from his new
Acquisitions; but upon his being balked and disappointed, he was seized with
the worst Disorders that can happen to Mankind.

When I came to visit him, he looked exceeding wild, and seemed altogether out
of his Senses, so that I found it in vain to ask him any Questions; for he
seldom made Answer, and when he did, it was little to the purpose: But one,
whom he had lately hired to be his Valet de Chamber, gave me the following
Account of his Condition. He informed me, when the Stocks were high, his Master
used to be at Change all Day, in a perpetual Hurry of Business, and at Night he
drank very hard, went late to Bed, and was up again betimes in the Morning, so
that he took very little Rest, and was hardly cool for three Months together:
He observed him to alter daily from what he was when he came first to live with
him; for he was then a Man of a pretty even Temper; but lately, he said he was
sometimes in such Passions there was no speaking to him, and at other times, he
was so familiar and easy, that any one would have taken him to be the best
natured Gentleman in the World. He told me he had bespoke an extraordinary fine
Coach, and a great deal of rich Furniture, for which he was to pay a very high
Price; some of these Goods were sent home to him, and for others he had laid
down Money beforehand: he had also bought an Estate of 4000 l. a Year, at 40
Years Purchase, to be paid upon drawing out his Money, which he intended
against next Candlemass, and had laid himself under an Obligation of paying
10000 Pounds for Performance of his Contract. But his not being able to fulfill
the half of his Engagements, his Servant told me, had been the Cause of all his
Disorders, which, he said, were become so great, that he was afraid to serve
him any longer, for he had several times attempted to lay violent Hands on
himself.

I ordered him to be bled immediately, to be purged gently for several Days,
and all that Time to make use of some Cephalicks, which I also prescribed for
him. I charged them to keep him from all manner of Noise and Company, and when
I had also given Directions concerning his Diet, I left him.

When I was got upon the Stairs, I heard a great Noise of Tongues in the
Parlour, and above all the rest, a Woman's Voice, who seemed to be in abundance
of Sorrow and Affliction: One of the Servants told me, she was his Mistress,
who, he said, was so much engaged, that she could not come up Stairs while I
was with his Master. As I was going along the Entry, I overheard one say to
her, I could have depended on your Husband, Madam, for more than I am worth in
the World; says another, Your Husband has quite ruined and undone me; I never
made the least doubt but he was worth 400000 l. a third called out, I will
freely give you a Discharge in full, if you will be so kind as to let me have my
own Goods back again. As I went out of Doors, two Men that were leaning over
the Pales, and looked like Ruffians, started up; one of them made toward the
Door; but the other called out, Back, (whom I perceived to be a Bailiff) and as
I crossed the Way to a Hackney-Coach that waited for a Fare, I observed two Men
more, with great Sticks in their Hands, and Handkerchiefs about their Necks,
start from behind a Corner, and were coming toward me; but another hemmed to
them from an Alehouse that was hard by, which turned them back again.

When I was seated in the Coach, I desired the Coachman to drive to Sir Anthony
Wheel's, where I had a Call to go with all possible Expedition. After which, I
began to be in a great deal of Concern for the miserable Condition of that
Family, and of many others, that had lately been plunged into the like
Circumstances, though at the same time, I could not but condemn the inconsiderate
Rashness and Folly of some of those Persons, as having brought an innumerable
Train of Evils upon themselves. Their Sufferings were indeed great, but would
not have been so, or perhaps none at all, had they not tied themselves in a
thousand ridiculous Engagements, and, upon a false Presumption of being rich,
run into many unnecessary Debts and Expenses, which might have well been
spared, till their Affairs were brought to a more certain Issue.

While I was busied in those Reflections, the Coach stopped, but could not come
near the Door, because of a great Crowd, who, hearing of Sir Anthony's
Indisposition, were gathered about the House to know how he did. But most of
those Persons had earnest Business with him, which made them so inquisitive
about his Health.

Sir Anthony is a Man advanced to that Period of Life, which, Horace tells us,
is ruled by Gain and Ambition; he has been all along, 'till now, of a very
healthful Constitution, which, no doubt, was owing to his way of Living; for he
had been in constant Business of one kind or another from his Youth. He was
taught betimes to read, write, and cast Accounts; and upon his first setting
out into the World, he was employed as a Secretary to many of his Neighbors,
who had not the Advantage of so liberal an Education; wherein he acquitted
himself so well, that it was reported of him, no Man could fill up a Bond or
Indenture with greater Ability: But his main Talent lay in Accounts; and although
he never was instructed under any Tutor, further than some few Decimal
Fractions, yet he became exceedingly enamored with Figures, as they were the
Types and Representatives of that which he loved next to his Life. The Beauties
that lay hid under those pretty Devices were so great a Spur to his Industry,
that he ^ould never give over varying their Positions, till he became more
acquainted with the Powers of Numbers than any one before him, insomuch that he
was the first who discovered to the World how many Changes might be rung on
Twelve Bells. He was also said to be the first who could practice Leger-du-Main
^y Figures, and in this he even excelled the most cele^rated Artists; for most
that those Persons could do, was only to bring Counters out of Peoples Pockets,
and make them believe they were Money; But Sir Anthony could bring out real
Sterling, and make them believe it to be only Counters, which he would in Time
turn to Money.

These Accomplishments soon brought him into Favor with a noted Magician of
great Power and Authority, who always practiced with a Lituus, such as the old
Heathen Priests and Augurs were wont to divine with; and to him became an
humble Servant for several Years, during which Time, he had also great
Opportunities put into his Hands of growing both Rich and Powerful, and indeed
no one ever improved his Opportunities better; for in a little Time he amassed
together such a Heap of Treasure, as has been seldom known in the Possession of
any private Person; and at length he became to be of such Consideration, that
the Eyes of all Men were upon him, and those who had not the Opportunity of
conversing with him, studied as much as possible to follow his Example.

But this uncommon Regard, which the World paid him, at last proved his Bane;
as it led him into many Things that were ridiculous and extravagant; for he was
proud and ambitious by Nature, which he improved to such a Degree of
Haughtiness, that he even made Princes and Nobles stoop before him; and if any
Man truly had his Ear, it was his old Master or his Friends, who seldom came
openly, but were always conveyed to him by some magical Device, which rendered
them invisible to others. His old Master was the only Person whom he ever
admired for his great Abilities, but his Confidence in his own, at last very
far overcame the Esteem he had formerly of his Master's Talents; insomuch that
he has been known to laugh at him when his Back was turned, and to call him an
ignorant Impostor; because he had oftentimes helped him out by his Numbers,
when the Heavens presented no favorable Omen. In fine, he became so
presumptuous, that he thought he could do every Thing by his Calculations, and
even attempted to square the Circle; believing that extraordinary Task had been
reserved for him, because the Circle bore some Analogy to his own Name.

His ordinary Maxims were about Money, or the Relatives to it: He used to say,
Money was the Support of Kings and Princes. That no Government could subsist
without it. That it gave Power and Authority to all Men, and was so precious a
Jewel, that so the World was kept in Ignorance, as to the Means, it signified
but little how a Man came by it. That Wit was but a Flash, and those Persons
were generally poor who had most of it, and that which Divines and Philosophers
call Wisdom, was really Folly; for it was always accompanied with such a
scrupulous Preciseness, that it hindered Men from doing Justice to themselves.
That Modesty, however admired by speculative Persons, was nevertheless
unbecoming a Man, as it kept those, who were reputed so, always under the
Hatches; but that it was a Qualification well enough suited to Women. That all
Learning, excepting that which enabled a Man to look after his own Affairs, was
no other than Madness; and served only to make People troublesome to themselves
and others.

It was impossible, that a Man of this Turn and Disposition should lie idle and
unactive in our national Concerns, after the extraordinary Footing they were
lately put upon. He therefore appeared among the first on the new
Establishment, and became one of the greatest Adventurers, as he judged,
nothing could be more likely to bring him to a full Gratification of his
Wishes. But the sudden and unexpected Turn of those Affairs gave a deadly Blow
to all his Expectations. Many of his Betters, who had some time ago stooped to
his insulting Arrogance, were now no ways backward in censuring his Conduct,
and most Peoples Thoughts were filled with Jealousy, that his Practices had not
been so laudable as they ought to have been. His Abilities were also canvassed,
and his laborious Calculations condemned as empty and chimerical. All which
Afflictions coming together upon Sir Anthony, brought him into a very bad State
both in Body and Mind.

When I entered his Room, I observed it was very spacious, and every Thing in
it as sumptuous as the rich Furniture described in Dido's Palace. He was
himself seated in a Chair covered with Crimson Velvet, fringed with Gold, and
over his Head was a Canopy of the same finely wrought. I could not well at
first divine, whose Presence I was come into, and therefore I made him a more
profound Obeisance than what is usually expected from one of my Profession and
Years. As soon as he saw me, he asked my Business. I told him I had a Message
that Morning from him, and was going to enquire into his Indisposition; when he
interrupted me, saying he had so many came to him upon Business and Messages,
that his Life was no better than that of a Porter. Upon this he called his
Servant to bid one of his Stewards come to him; whereupon an elderly Person
soon entered the Room, whose Face I knew very well, and immediately I
recollected, that I had seen him often upon the Exchange, and that he was a
very noted Broker. He asked how much Stock he had sold that Day? but the old
Man tip'd him the Wink, and then went and whispered him in the Ear, yet so as I
could overhear him. He told him there was no Market, and that the Buyers were
all gone to the Devil, that now the Word signified nothing, for no body
understood it. What, says he, not 1500 per Cent. against the Payment of the
next Dividend? You may as well make People believe, replied the Man, that
Stocks will rise to 15000. Every one cries out, Who buys? But no body offers to
bid any Thing. This brought Sir Anthony into a very great Disorder, which was
accompanied with a boundless Fit of Passion. He snatched up an Ink-stand that
was on the Table, and was going to throw it at his Steward's Head; but I stepped
in between and prevented him; then he asked me who I was. What, says he, you
are the Fellow that threatened to murder me the other Day, I Will have you
secured this Minute. But I begged his Patience, and told him that I was a
Physician; that I had practiced in this City above five and twenty Years, that
my Name was Midriff, and that I was very well known to Persons of all Ranks,
and that he could not himself be a Stranger to my Reputation in Physic;
otherwise he would not have called me, when there were so many learned Persons
of the same Profession to be had every where. What, said he, was it you that
sent me the Dose of Poison the other Day? I told him, I had only been called
the same Morning, but as yet had ordered nothing for him. By this Time the
Servant came into the Room, who had been to fetch me, and went to confirm what
I had said; but he was in so dreadful a Condition, that he could neither bear
any one to be in his Presence, neither durst he be by himself; he snatched up
the Stand again, and before I could do any Thing to prevent him, he hit the
Servant with it; for he was grown jealous of all Persons that were about him,
and believed they had entered into a Confederacy against him. When they were
all gone, he looked steadfastly upon me; but being afraid to offer me any
Violence, and equally dreading to trust himself in my Company alone; he
therefore fled out of the Room with a great deal of Precipitation, and shut
himself up in another.

By all these Signs, I found Sir Anthony's, Distemper bordered upon Lunacy, and
that there was no ta^king to him, his Imaginations were so wholly fixed upon
his Disappointments; though he could not really recollect within himself, at that
Time, what they were, or how they had happened: He thought himself injured and
undone, but by whom, or in what Manner, it was impossible for him now to
conceive, so great was his Disturbance: Nor is it altogether improbable, but he
might have a Conscience and Dread of his having injured others, who were ready
to take their Revenge: And though this may not be real, yet such Impressions are
often made or the Minds of lunatic Persons, merely from the common Fame of
others, which, at last, settles into a firm Belief; and it, no doubt, proceeded
from such extravagant Conceits, that he looked upon all Persons, without
Distinction, to be his Enemies.

When I came down Stairs, I found several of his Stewards not a little dejected
at the Misfortunes which had happened to their Master. One of them had been my
Acquaintance many Years; and as I was willing to leave some Directions, I made
toward him, and told him all that had happened to Sir Anthony; and at the same
time I desired some Care might be taken of him; that he should be immediately
bled, to the Quantity of Ten Ounces, and that afterward they should not suffer
him to be by himself a Minute; for it might be hazardous, especially, if there
were either Knives or Garters in the way. I told him likewise, how dangerous
this Season was above all other Times of the Year; but that as the Weather was
become more serene, he might probably grow better. But my Friend was very much
startled at these Sayings; for he could not imagine how a Man of so much Sense
could be in such a Condition: What, says he, do yon look upon Sir Anthony to be
mad? I answered, Not directly mad, though at the same Time, I could not judge his
Case to be much different from that of a Lunatic at present. To this my Friend
replied, That it was impossible, for he had for many Years been accounted a
very long-headed Man, and had been able to go through Business that no Man
could manage but himself, and that the ablest Statesmen had always commended
his Abilities. I said, that was not at all to be doubted of; for the
Commendations of Statesmen were seldom wanting to those who could serve a
present Turn, though the Business itself might neither be difficult, nor yet
wellmanaged in all Points: But that, I told him, was not very much to the
purpose; for supposing him to be a Man of never so great Dexterity in Business,
it could be no Argument why he should not be liable to the same Maladies as
other Men. Then my Acquaintance asked me, What I meant by taking care that
there should be no Knives or Garters in the way? Do you believe, said he, that
he is so melancholy as to make away with himself? All the Answer I made to this
was, That People could never be too much upon their Guard, with respect to any
one in such Circumstances: Upon this he left me with all the Haste imaginable
to fasten the Windows; for the Thought came luckily into his Head, that unless
they were so secured as Sir Anthony could not open 'em, he might, perhaps, leap
out and break his Neck.

The Day following, I made him another Visit, and found him much altered for
the better, after a Vein had been opened. I was told he became exceeding
thirsty, and drank above a Quart of white Mountain, at several Times, mixed
with Water, which dos'd him to such a Degree, that at last he fell into a sound
Sleep, which continued for the Space of nine Hours. This had carried off the
Delirium, so that he was now become pretty sensible; and as soon as I came into
the Room, he began to make an Apology for his rude Treatment of me the Day
before, which had been told him by the People that were about him. He said he
had been in a very strange Condition; but it was so much like a confused Dream,
that he could hardly remember any thing of it, excepting only, that he imagined
there were a great many People gathered about the House to kill him, most of
whom were Persons of Distinction, and some, as he thought, were no less than
Knights of the Garter; and moreover he believed firmly, that his own Servants
were in League with them, and had engaged to deliver him up. I observed to him,
that such Imaginations were very usual to Persons in his Circumstances, and
that it was a Sign his Mind had been exceedingly shaken, but that he must
endeavor to learn a little more Fortitude, this being a Juncture which
required him to exert all the noble Qualities he was Master of. At this he made
me a Bow with his Head, and, with an obliging Air, he also thanked me for the
good Opinion I had of him. I was a little surpised at first what his Meaning
was, and began to fear a Relapse; but I soon found he was only under a Mistake,
and had applied the Epithet Noble otherwise than I intended it. But as I never
love to flatter my Patients to their own Prejudice, I ventured to put him in
the right in this Particular. I observed, that we had all of us noble Qualities
implanted in us by Nature, though the far greater Number employed them to
dishonorable and ignoble Purposes; and I doubt not, but a Person, such as he
was, who had gone through so many different Scenes of Lise, and had been so much
conversant among Men, must be very sensible of this in the Practice of the
World. And I was going to observe how useful and noble a Quality Fortitude was,
and what Virtues were required in us before we could arrive to any tolerable
degree of it; but he interrupted me, and said, those Things were indeed very
fine to talk of; though, as to his own Part, he never troubled himself with Men's
good or evil Qualities, any further than to take care they should not hurt him
with them if possible. Then he asked me if I could order him any Thing that
could do him good, for he found himself mighty subject to a Trembling, and was
apt to start and be surpised at every Thing. I told him, all that Physic
could do in that Case signified but little, for his Distemper was really more
in his Mind than Body; that his Body indeed suffered, but that was only
secondarily, and if his Mind could be brought into a right Composure, the other
would soon be freed from its present Indisposition.

Though he all this while had answered as rationally as was usual to him at other
Times, yet I observed a very great Disturbance in his Looks by Intervals, and
he was ready, upon every slight occasion, to fall into unreasonable Passions
with his Servants; whereupon I advised him not to suffer every little Offense
to discompose him, for that would be the ready means to aggravate his
Disorders, whereas a contrary Habit would help greatly to lessen them. But
while I was expostulating with him in this manner, we were suddenly alarmed
with a Noise in the Street, which brought him into a fresh Delirium; it was
nothing but the Mob was gathered about a Pick-Pocket, whom the Officers were
carrying before a Magistrate; but when Sir Anthony heard their Tongues very
loud, as is usual upon such Occasions, he star'd and began to look exceeding
wild, and all of a sudden leaping from his Chair, he went to hide himself. It
was with much difficulty we could beat this new Prepossession out of his Head,
because the Impressions were made very deep but the Day before. He believed his
Adversaries had now laid close Siege to the House, and he often called out with
a bellowing Voice to see that all the Doors were secured; but when he found
there was nothing real in all this, he seated himself again in his Chair, and
turned very dumpish, which is the usual Result of Fear, Anger and Despair,
which, as has been observed, ordinarily bear the ascendant in all such
melancholy Dispositions.

After this, I called upon him several Days successively, and prescribed what I
judged proper by way of Physic; but I was more particularly solicitous in what
concerned his Diet, and as he was a Man of a somewhat plethorick Habit of Body,
and lately become more than ordinarily addicted to Passion, I looked upon
Abstemiousness to be the likeliest Means to bring that under, and therefore I
ordered him such Food as was of easy Digestion, and at the same time afforded
but moderate Nourishment: This Method was attended with so much Success, that
he mended so far as to go abroad, for his Affairs were urgent, and very much
required his Presence.

But it is next to an Impossibility to effectuate a perfect Cure on any one in
Sir Anthony's Circumstances, for he is really but a Man of a weak Mind and
little Knowledge. He had indeed, like many other superficial Persons, gained a
very great Reputation among Men, yet that was only taken from outward Show and
Appearance, and not from any Virtue or Ability, wherein he had excelled others;
but as he had always been in constant Employment, his Mind was wholly taken off
from many of those lesser Concerns which the more numerous part of Mankind are
often engaged in. This had created a Severity in his Looks, which was
accompanied with an Air and Semblance of Wisdom, sufficient to impose on all
who had not a perfect Intimacy and Acquaintance with him. But it appears, now
the Mask is taken off, that he is no other than a mere Pedant in Business, and
one who, like the blind Horse in a Mill, went as sure and as steady as the most
quick sighted could have done, so long as he kept plodding and drudging in his
usual Round of Affairs; for then all was within the compass of his
Understanding. But when Pride, Avarice, and Ambition (the constant Companions
of our first-rate Fools) had once carried him beyond that Circle, he was soon
bewildered in a Maze of Difficulties, while his perplexed Mind was no ways
seasoned with those Virtues that were necessary to extricate and set him at
Liberty.

The last Time I went to him, I found his Condition still altered, though I
cannot say it was a great deal for the better. He was not indeed so much afraid
of Assassinations and Conspiracies as he had been before, and I perceived he
was not so easily alarumd at Noises in the Street; but I found a new Calamity
had taken hold of him, and though it did not seem directly to point at his Life,
yet it touched that which was as dear to him, viz. his Money and his
Reputation. He told me he was grown worse and worse, and that he hoped some
People would be quiet when they had made an end of him. Upon this I went to
feel his Pulse, for he had a pretty high Color in his Face, which made me
believe he was feverish, or else that he had been drinking. When I was coming
toward him, he started, looked me broad in the Face, and asked me hastily,
what I was going to do. I told him I intended nothing that would hurt him, and
with that I took hold of his Wrist. I found him a little feverish, which I
judge might be occasioned by the great disturbance of his Thoughts, which had
kept him from Sleep. After which, I asked him who those were he was now so much
afraid of? He answered, they were Persons of some Note, whom he had once in his
Lifetime obliged very much, but he found they had neither Honor nor Gratitude
in them. They envied the little Acquisitions he had made, and could never be
satisfied, unless a Man would give up all he had ever toiled and labored for.
He said they had suborned false Witness to swear against him, that he had used
many ill Practices, and been a bad Example to others; and that they might put
him to ^s great Expense, and bring him under as much Ignominy and Disgrace as
possible, they would oblige him to build a Scaffold in Westminster Hall for his
own Trial. Well, answered I, what have you further to say? To say, replied Sir
Anthony, a great deal. Those very Men and I were exceeding friendly but a
little while ago; they complimented me, and I did Favors for them, and many of
their Friends too; they often told me what a useful Subject I was, and how
great a share I had in his Majesty's Favor; and that they never omitted to
speak a good Word for me as often as they had an Opportunity. But now, said he,
I know by their Looks they have a mind to ruin me, and some of them even use
oblique Threatenings to my Face. I began by this time to believe that Sir
Anthony gave Credit to his own Dreams, and indeed I could hardly forbear being
out of Humor, to hear him talk at this extravagant Rate. I therefore desired
him to compose himself, and not suffer such idle Fancies to run in his Head,
for there was nothing at all in them. In them, said he, don't you hear it
talked in all Places wherever you come? I was not a Stranger to the Rumors
that were spread about the Town concerning Sir Anthony's Conduct; but I thought
it not proper to make him a direct Answer. I observed to him, that we were all
of us liable to Miscarriages as often as we presumed rashly to go out of our
limited Bounds. That we were naturally apt to do this, from an over-fond
Conceit and Opinion of our own Merits and Abilities. That we longed to be at
those things which were placed at the greatest distance from us, and, like
Icharus, we often plunged ourselves into an Ocean of Troubles, while we
attempted to fly up to the Sun with Wings of our own making. I took notice,
that many of us were too forward to fix our Hopes on an imaginary Good, and
from a too eager Desire after it, made use of indirect Means to obtain it.
This, I said, might undoubtedly be the reason why such Persons, when their
Expectations fail them, were commonly tossed about with the Imagination of
Evils, which had their Being no where so much as in the Mind. But Sir Anthony
took all this as applied to himself, and with a Smile, which at the same time
carried an Air of Dissatisfaction and Contempt, asked me what he had ever
aspired after that was imaginary. I know, said he, you Philosophers often
account those Things imaginary, that other People find to be real; you reckon
Money an imaginary Good, but show me what you or any Man can do without it.
Honor and Greatness, I know, are also classed in the same Rank, according to
your precise way of thinking, but let me see the Man will refuse either when
offered to him. I made answer, that there was, no doubt, a real Good in all
those Things, when they were put to their right and proper Use, and that
Peoples Desires were moderate in them, and their Designs truly honorable: And
I was going on, to tell him what it was that, in my Judgment, rendered them
evil. But he interrupted me, and said, he did not see but every Body was for
getting all they could, and what Reason was there that he should be behind
hand, since he had perhaps deserved like other Men; but especially the World
being come to that pass, that those Persons were only trampled upon, or set
light by, who were not in some Degree of Power or Authority. I could not but
own what he had observed was oftentimes too true, if meant with respect to Men
in narrow Circumstances, and inferior Station. But yet I said that was no
Argument, why such as wanted nothing, and were even got above the Insults of
the World, should aspire further, unless it was purely, that they might be able
to do the more Good. If after this, they were prompted by any other Motives to
advance their Station, than what proceeded from a truly public Spirit, I
observed that they were most commonly bad ones. I said, moreover, that no Man
could be really happy, in the Enjoyment of his Acquisitions, either of Riches,
or from any outward Marks of Distinction conferred upon him, without those
Requisites, that bear the true Stamp of Nobility; viz. a Consciousness of noble
and virtuous Actions; and wherever that Testimony was wanting in an exalted
Condition, I said, it was generally attended with a great deal of Uneasiness. I
concluded, that Titles were, at best, esteemed but mere Pageantry, when they
were not supported with true Generosity; and, whatever a vain Person in
undeserved Honors might think of himself, he was in the Eyes of all wise Men
accounted no better than a Figure of Wax, robed in Purple, or a profane Image
set up to be worshipped, though it has not the least Shadow or Appearance of a
Deity.

I could not avoid expostulating with Sir Anthony in this Manner, and likewise
bestowing on him some grave Admonitions; because I found his Heart wholly set
upon Nobility, an Honor whereunto he had no just Title, nor indeed any
Likelihood of enjoying it. Yet all my Arguments could not avail so as to bring
him to any Sense of his Folly; for he was too far gone in that Delirium to
brook the Disappointment: He had, not long ago, so strong a Presumption of
being made a Peer; and his Mind was so highly transported with the Hopes of it,
that he had drawn up the Form of a Preamble, such as he, no doubt, flattered
himself would be made on the Entry to his own Patent. This I accidentally
observed to lie open upon his Table, among some other Papers; for I was so near
that I could peruse some part of it; but looking upon it to be no less hurtful
while in his Sight, than Wine to a Man who is already drunk; I therefore, as
the best Office I could do him, waited an Opportunity to deprive him of that
Idol; and very luckily, when his Face was turned from me, I took it up, and put
it in my Pocket unobserved, and have now committed it to the public, with the
same marginal Notes that were upon it; because it will give the curious Reader
some further Insight into his Condition. It is as follows:

If a noble and ancient Pedigree has always been accounted a great Advance in
the Way to Honor and Nobility, our When I come to be a Peer, all public
Writings from the King's Majesty will run, To our trusty and well-beloved
Cousin and Counselor.
trusty and well-beloved Anthony Wheel, Knt. must, in that respect, be
sufficiently recommended to us, as he is a Person of no mean or ignoble
Extraction, but sprung from the ancient Race of the Wheels; a Family, which
though it has for many Ages past strove with the Iniquities of Fortune, yet, by
its frequent Alliances with those of the best Blood, derives a no small Honor
on all its worthy Descendants. -- And if we also put a Value on the Goods of
Fortune, as these are the Means to enable Persons in the highest Stations, as
well to support their great Dignity, as to render them the more conspicuous
Patrons of their Country, he must no less deserve our high Regard on that
Account, having by his own proper Merit arrived at such large Acquisitions, as
may vie with the greatest of our Peers; and therefore may well become the
Representative of such worthy Ancestors, whose almost extinguished Fame is
again happily revived in him; and the Memorandum, To look into Baker's
Chronicle, or some other good History, to know what Services the Wheels have
done to their Country.
Name of Wheel, by his unwearied Diligence, become once more of no small
Account in these our ancient Dominions. -- But if a continued Series of great
and laudable Actions can be sufficient to derive Titles of Honor and Nobility
on those who have traveled long, and passed through the best Stages of their
Lives in the Service of their native Country, the said Sir Anthony must
undoubtedly claim a just Title to those distinguishing Marks of our Royal
Favor, he having not only given us many signal Proofs of his uncommon
Abilities in diverse considerable and weighty I am afraid I cannot have this
Character, unless I be put into some pretty handsome Post for a little while.
Employments, but by his strict Fidelity, assiduous Care, and indefatigable
Industry, rendered himself most dear unto us, and most deservedly esteemed by
all our good and faithful Subjects. And if those Persons are highly to be
accounted of, who in all Times of Danger become notable Instruments in Defense
of their Country, though to the utmost Hazard of their Lives; and, if besides the
Glory they thereby purchase to themselves, ought also to receive all due Honor
from us, as a further Reward of their Valor and noble Achievements; so we
ought by no means to pass by unregarded the extraordinary Merit of such of our
good and Loyal Subjects, who being Masters of very large and uncommon
Possessions, are no less ready to venture them in a Time of need. This truly
public Spirit has most manifestly shown it self, in many extraordinary and
singular Instances of Sir Anthony's Life; but more especially by his hearty
Zeal and Readiness to redeem the Debts of the Nation, having, like a
true-hearted Briton, set a notable and great Pattern to many others of our
wealthy Subjects, by whose joint Endeavors, the great Burden, which by a long
and necessary War lies so heavy upon us, is now like to be soon lessened, and
our good Subjects eased of many sore and grievous Taxes, which are very
oppressive upon them. -- But if we also regard the said Sir Anthony, with
respect to many other Qualifications and Endowments, which recommend those who
are advanced unto the highest Honors, the Portliness of his Person, and
stately Behavior, ought not to be overlooked. We commend some for their
Politeness, some for their Affability, and others for their courtly Deportment.
But Sir Anthony is a Person, whose noble and stately Carriage bespeaks the real
Greatness of his Mind; he knowing full well at all times, how to keep up that
Awe and Reverence, which is so highly becoming an exalted Station. For these
and many other public and private Virtues, so manifest in Sir Anthony, besides
his known Loyalty to our Royal Person and Family, (ever since our Accession to
the Throne) we have thought fit to call him to the Dignity of a Peer of our
Realm, by the Name and Title of Anthony Lord Wheel The same Title will answer
very well to Earl, or Duke; for Wheelburrow sounds like Marlburrow.
Baron of Wheelburrow. And we do hereby, etc.

I was told, Sir Anthony had also intoxicated his Brains with many other
Things; such as usually tickle the Fancies of vain and presumptuous Persons,
and although he was as great a Lover of Money as any Man could well be, yet no
one was more lavish when it tended to the Gratification of his vain and
ambitious Desires; but among many others, I shall only name this one Instance,
which I had from my old Acquaintance; and that was concerning his Picture,
which was to be drawn at full Length, with the Frame all of pure Silver finely
gilt; for this he had agreed to pay a very extraordinary Sum, but it was put
off for a Time, and very probably until he was made a Peer, that he might be
painted in his Robes.

Oct. 22. I was called to Robert Pitfal Esquire. a country Gentleman, who had fallen
sick at an Inn. He was a Man near forty, and of a seemingly robust
Constitution, and of a hail Country Complexion, so that I could not perceive
any great Symptoms of Sickness, excepting only, that I found his Pulse somewhat
disorderly: I therefore asked him very particularly, how he found himself, and
what it was he complained of most. He told me he had got a new Distemper he
never had heard of before; and when I asked him what that was, he said, every
Body told him he had got the Hyppo, and that they said, it was a plaguey
whimsical Disease, that made People believe and fancy Things, and that he could
not imagine what it could be; unless it was the same, that a Parson had, of a
neighboring Parish to that where he lived, who used to fancy he had a clucking
Hen in his Head, and set all the Country a laughing at him. Upon this, I told
him, that I hoped he had no such Imaginations as those. Not I, replied the
Gentleman, but the other Night I could not lie in Bed, but was forced to get up
again, and had a Fire made in my Room; and in the Morning, when I told my
Landlady how I had been, she laughed at me, and said, I had only got the Hyppo;
and if I would keep my own Counsel, no body would know I ailed any Thing,
because I look so well. But to tell you freely, says he, I believe you are half
poisoned in this Town with unwholesome Food; and I am sure I have eat something
my self that cannot digest, but lies like a heavy Lump of Lead in my Stomach,
which oftentimes swells up in my Throat like to choke me; but especially when I
lay my Head down upon the Pillow: And I believe, continued he, there is
something in your Drink too, that should not be in it, which makes it more than
ordinarily diuretic, for I make a woundy deal of Water lately. By these
Expressions I found he was indeed touched with the Hyppo; and because I
observed him to be one who had been used to eat and drink plentifully, and
wanted his usual Exercise to digest it; and being of a full gross Habit of
Body, and as he complained likewise of a Swimming and Giddiness in his Head; I
was therefore of Opinion, he might be very apt to fall into a Fit or the
Apoplexy; to prevent which, I ordered him to be let Blood in the sir^^ Place,
and after that to be vomited; I ordered him likewise some Cephalicks. But when
I had got Pen, Ink and Paper, and was just going to write, he called out with a
great deal of vehemence to prevent me, and swore heartily, he would have no
more Bills and Notes, for he had lately parted with above the half of his
Estate, and had got nothing but Paper for it. But when I told him I was only
going to give some Directions to the Apothecary, that he might make up what was
proper for his Distemper, he asked my Pardon, and said he hoped I would not
take it amiss; for the very Sight of Scraps of Paper put him almost out of his
Senses. By this, I also came to know what had been the Cause of his Distemper,
viz. that he had, like the rest of my Patients, been pretty deeply engaged in
the Stocks, and that Things had not succeeded there to his Wishes. When I was
going, I desired he might be careful to mind my Directions, which the
Apothecary would acquaint him with, and that I doubted not, but I should find
him better in a short Time.

When I came the next Day, he looked somewhat out of Humor, and before I could
ask him any Questions, he began to complain, saying, I had almost killed him
with the Vomit, that it had made him as sick as a Horse, and that he had never
been in such a Condition since he was born, excepting once after a fit of hard
drinking with some Gentlemen at a Horse-race, where they drunk little or
nothing but a very strong kind of Punch, which was made with Brandy and
Whitewine without Water. By this I find, that Mr. Pitfal had never been much
used to Physic, for he also asked me what was the Bottle I had sent him, and
whether I had not put Scarburrow Water in it, for he said it tasted like Mares
Piss. I answered, that there were some Volatile Salts in it, which had not
indeed a Taste that suited every ones Palate; but at the same time I observed
to him, that these were very proper to remove that Disorder of his Head he had
so much complained of, and that they would certainly be of Service to him,
provided he would be so far his own Friend as to continue in the Use of them.
To this he replied, that he believed they had done him some good already, for
he had slept better that Night than he had done for a Week before, and he
thought his Head was not altogether so cloudy as it had been, and for that
reason he said he should very willingly take the Stuff in the Bottle, or any
thing else I thought proper for him, if it would not set him a vomiting again.
I told him I could not well avoid ordering him a Vomit in the Beginning, as it
was necessary to lay the Foundation of his Cure, but that I hoped there would
be no occasion to repeat it. After this, I advised him to go abroad and divert
himself, and as he had Horses at command, and had always been used to Riding
and Country Exercise, I said it would be of no small Service to him if he rid
out once a Day into the open Air, especially, since he had taken up his
Lodgings in so close a Place, and where there was so much Dung and Litter. But
he made answer, that he liked the Smell of Horse-dung better than some of our
finest Gardens about London, and that he believed it would do him no Hurt, for
he had heard several learned Men say, that nothing was more wholesome than the
Smell of a Muck-hill. He said he had lain one Night at Sir Thomas Courtley's,
who, he told me, was his first Cousin, but could not rest for the Noise of
People thumping at the Doors, and calling out continually in the Street; And
besides, he observed, that although Sir Thomas was indeed very civil, yet he did
not much like to be at his House, for he found he was always out of Humor when
any Body wanted him, and used to chide his Servants for saying he was at Home.
He said, that a Man had as good be continually at Church as at Sir Thomas's,
for no Body in the House spoke but as if they were whispering something that
should not be heard; and when they were at Table, Sir Thomas directed most of
his Discourse to some body else, which obliged him to sit as silent as a Stock.
He added likewise, that Sir Thomas commonly went away as soon as Dinner was
over, when it was the proper time to drink a Glass and smoke a Pipe; that he
used to take his Leave very civilly, and desired him to stay and divert himself
with his Wife and Daughters, who never entertained him with any thing but Tea,
and that the young Husseys used to fill him brimmers, which he believed was
only that he might scald his Fingers, on purpose to laugh at him when he was
gone; and for these Reasons he loved to be at an Inn, where he paid for what he
had, and could therefore use his Freedom: Besides, that he always liked to be
near his Horses, for he said the People in this Town were not to be trusted. I
could not indeed forbear giving my Assent to what Mr. Pitfal had said, because
I found Sir Thomas and he was of a quite different Turn and Education, for an
Inn is no doubt better than a Palace, where a Man is under any Restraint and
Confinement.

After two Days I made him another Visit, it was Night before I came, and I
found him much more cheerful than those times I had seen him before; but he was
engaged with a Countryman of his own, who it seems had been drinking Yorkshire
Ale with him most part of the Afternoon: I told him I was glad to see him look
so brisk, and that I hoped he found himself better. I have been much the
better, answered he, for my honest Neighbor's Company, whose coming to Town
has perfectly revived me; he lives but within three Miles of my House, and he
is a Man that, besides some Estate of his own, rents a very good Farm of a
neighboring Gentleman, and I believe were you to go to his House, you would
say you never met with a more hearty Welcome; and I Will say that for him, he
always keeps a Glass of as good Ale as any Man in the County. Ay, thank God,
says the Countryman, I am never without a Tub of Liquor, though it is not so good
as the Squire's, yet such homely Fare as we have, this, or any other honest
Gentleman should be welcome to, were they to come our Way. With that the
Countryman asked me if I were Esquire; Pitfal's Doctor. When I had satisfied him in
that Question, the Countryman replied, I thought so by what you said when you
came first in, and I was just telling him of a Cure Dr. Potter in our Country
advised my Wife to, for she was much troubled with Wind, as the Esquire; is; and
that was to swallow three Grains of white Pepper whole every Night when she
went to Bed, and this cured her that she has never been troubled with Wind
since, more than any other Woman should be; and I believe, said he, would but
the Esquire; take that Cure, it would do him as much good as any thing. I told him
black Pepper would do every bit as well as white. Ay but, said the Countryman,
Dr. Potter made my Wife take white Pepper, and it was that cured her; and I
well remember it, Dr. Potter once cured me of a great Surfeit which came by a
Cold I caught when our Waters were up one Allhallontide. I came Home miserable
bad, for my Mare had swum with me above half a Mile in the Burch-lane, and when
the Dr. brought me the Physic, I said I was sure such a small thing as it
would do nothing at me, for it was no bigger than a gray Pea; but I my Troth I
shall never forget it, for it purged me upwards and downwards at least twelve
or fourteen times, and I was as well in two or three Days as ever I was in all
my Life. After this, the Countryman went on in praise of Dr. Potter, and was
seconded by Mr. Pitfal in all he spoke; he said he was a very ingenious Man,
and the strangest Fellow in the World for finding out Peoples Diseases, and for
curing them soon, for he always struck at the Cause; and as for broken Bones,
he said he would venture to let him loose with any Man in England. I made
answer, that Dr. Potter might be a very knowing Person for any thing I could
say to the contrary; but at the same time I observed that Mr. Pitfal could
sustain no great Loss for the want of him while in London, where there were so
many able Professors. There is no doubt of that, replied the Countryman, for
you have all the Learning here, and all the Money too. But I wish Esquire; Pitfal
very well, and the whole Family; I was one of the Stewards to the old Esquire; his
Father that Year he was made High Sheriff of our County, and Mr. Robert was
then but a Stripling; I believe he remembers it well enough, for we had as
topping Doings then, as ever was known since in our Parts.

We frequently meet with Men in all Counties, who, besides an uncommon
Dexterity in Country Affairs by their unwearied Diligence and Application,
become Masters of many of those frugal Maxims of Life which are the best suited
to Persons in a Rural Station, by which means they also get the start of many
of their Neighbors. This brings them into the Notice of several of the Country
Gentlemen, while others, who were once upon a Level with them, are neglected,
and the Familiarity to which they are admitted, creates in them such a Boldness
and Confidence, that they never fail, upon all Occasions, to give in their
Verdict, though in things which are altogether out of their Depth; and although
what they say is oftentimes neither very seasonable, nor much to the purpose,
yet all this passes for the most part without Reprehension, as the better sort
are ever willing to make sufficient Allowance, while the rest are not always
competent Judges. I soon observed Mr. Pitfal's Country Neighbor to be one of
this Stamp. He knows full well, as he imagines, how to exert his Native
Property, and values himself much upon it; and as he seems to be a Man
perfectly easy in his Circumstances, he spares not those who keep him at his
due distance, but will be often very tart in his Expressions against them, though
no one is more neighbourly, and, as far as is agreeable to his Education and
Manner of Life, submissive to such of his Superiors as admit him into any
degree of Familiarity with them. This makes him have a more than ordinary
regard for Mr. Pitfal, who is a plain honest Country Gentleman, and lives with
him no otherwise than as a good sociable Neighbor. When I had thus discovered
what kind of Person the Countryman was, and that there was a mutual Respect
between Mr. Pitfal and him, I parted with an Air of Complacency, telling him
that nothing should be wanting that might tend to the Gentleman's speedy
Recovery.

The next Time I called, which was also toward Evening, I found him engaged,
as before, with his Country Neighbor, and a grave elderly Clergyman, who I
understood was his Relation; but his Case seemed to be somewhat worse, and
notwithstanding he had been drinking, his Spirits were very low, and he was in
a great deal of Despair of his Life; and there was truly a no small Concern
perceivable in his Looks. When I asked him how he did, the Countryman, who
seemed also to be in a great deal of Trouble, shook his Head, and, without
giving Mr. Pitfal time to answer, said, he believed the Esquire; would hardly get
over this, for he was afraid it had seized his Brain, and that he looked just
as the old Esquire; his Father did the last time he saw him, which was abour a Week
before he died. Upon this I told the Countryman he was one of Job's Comforters,
for there was no Danger of dying, unless Mr. Pitfal should give himself wholly
up to Sorrow and Discontent. I took Notice that Fear was a natural Ingredient
in the Distemper, and that it never failed to produce such Symptoms as were now
observable in Mr. Pitfal, and therefore that it behooved every one, who kept him
Company, to fortify him as much against it as possible. But when I began to
examine more particularly into the Matter, I found he had been tolerably well,
until such time as his Cousin the Clergyman came in, who struck a sudden Damp
upon his Mind, by telling him that the Stocks had fallen that Day above 30 per
Cent. and therefore as soon as I came to learn this, I made use of several
Arguments to give a turn to his melancholy Thoughts, and to cheer his Spirits,
by telling him that the Price of all such things were precarious; that they
were up one Day, and down another, and that in time they might perhaps rise as
high as ever, and let the worst come, they would hardly sink so low as some
People imagined. I observed that the Care of his Health ought to take place of
all other Temporal Interests, as that was agreeable to the principal Law of
Nature, viz. Self-preservation; and, I said any one would undoubtedly be
thought a Madman, who should love his Money, or any other of his Goods so well,
as to hurry himself out of the World for the sake of them. Upon this, the
Clergyman also made use of several grave Arguments, telling him, that a Man's
Life consists not in the Abundance of the Things which he possesses, and that
a small matter, rightly managed, would easily support each individual in all
that is absolutely necessary either for Life or rational Pleasure. And I found
he was also going to put him in Mind wherein to place his true Happiness; but
the Countryman, who I observed had been drinking, and was now somewhat
fluster'd, broke in upon him, and interrupted him. By the Mass, says he, if
that be all troubles the Esquire; I think he is to blame; for when he has sold as
much as will pay that new Mortgage, he will have Five hundred a Year still, to my
Knowledge, and if he cannot live upon that, believe me, a Lord's Rent would be
little enough for him. But while he was going on to take a Survey of all the
Manors and Farms belonging to Mr. Pitfal, he stopped him, saying, Thou know
very well, Thomas, when my Father died, there was some Burden upon my Estate,
which I was forced to clear; Thou know likewise, that I am forced to pay
fourscore Pounds a Year to my Brother Marle, who married ray Sister Betty, as
the Interest of her Fortune, and the Principal must be paid when he wants it;
and I have a Wife and four Children at Home, besides my Mother's threescore
Pounds a Year. God preserve the good old Lady, cried Thomas, you will never have
the less for her, she has been a good Woman in her time as I believe was in all
our Country. But Mr. Pitfal went on and took notice, that his House was grown
very old and chargeable in Repairs, and if he had succeeded as he thought once
to have done, he intended to have built a new one. I hope, says Thomas, you will
take care how you send your Money to the South Sea again, but keep it on the
dry Land for the time to come, and with the Grace of God, you may do well
enough still, as we live in a Country where all Things are both cheap and
plentiful. I seconded what Thomas had said, and told Mr. Pitfal, that a
continued Course of frugal Management in his Affairs at Home would be a means
as likely to retrieve his past Losses, as could be expected any other way; and
though the Gain might not be so sudden, yet it would be very certain, as there
was still a Foundation for it; besides, that a continual Employment would give
a good relish to his Life, and maintain a constant Series of Health, as that,
would never fail to refresh the Mind at all times, and keep up a perfect
Sunshine and Cheerfulness, by the Succession of one easy and useful Project
after another; and that he might perhaps, at last, find as much Pleasure and
real Satisfaction in a gradual retrieving of his Fortune, as if it had been all
at once by those new Methods he had proposed to himself. I observed that the
Mind of Man was, according to its present State of Existence, incapable of very
high or sudden Enjoyments, and that those Persons, who had the weakest Minds,
and the least Ability, had commonly the most powerful Incentives to prompt them
suddenly to something they proposed, as an Ultimate of their Wishes, and that
it often fared with them in the End, as with the fond young Man, who was so
much in Love with his own Image in the Water, that he drowned himself in
endeavoring to come at it. I warrant you, said Thomas, that was before
Looking-Glasses were in Fashion. But I went on, and observed, that it was
always an Argument of a great Mind to anticipate Disappointments, by laying a
just weight on things, and thereby moderating its Desires; and that it was a no
less Token of a noble and brave Soul to fight manfully, and boldly encounter
Disappointments when they come; but at the same time I told Mr. Pitfal, that I
did not apply what I had been saying, in all its Circumstances, to him, for so
far as I had learned into his Affairs, I could discover nothing he had aimed
at, but what was very reasonable, and what any other Man in the same Condition
would have done as well as he, and that I had only taken the Freedom to use
those Arguments, because I would not have his Misfortunes prey upon him so as
to injure his Health. Upon this, he assured me he aimed at nothing but to clear
his Estate, and that he had never gone that way to work, but that several
neighboring Gentlemen had been in before him, and his Cousin Sir Thomas had
sent him two Letters about it. Sir Thomas -- said the Countryman: Ay, marry,
that is a fine spun Gentleman indeed, and his fine London Lady; when he was down
at the Hall last Summer was three Years, he said he wondered how Gentlemen could
drink Ale as they did; and my Lady, forsooth, would not eat ripe Plumbs that
came out of one of our Wench's Hands, for fear they were not clean, but gave
them to her Woman.

But all this while, Mr. Pitfal's Mind run very much upon his Losses. He asked
me if I could give any Account of the Nature of the South Sea, and what was
intended by it. I was not much surpised at this Question, though it might no
doubt seem very odd from any one who was engaged in it; yet his Case was the
same with many others, who had only in a blindfold Manner followed their
Leaders; and it was no Wonder, that a plain country Gentleman should be thus
ignorant, when so many Persons about London were so little acquainted with it,
and some of those, Men of Business too. I told him, that to dive into the
Nature of that vast Undertaking, so as to give any tolerable Insight into it,
either with respect to the Advantages of it, or the manifold Hazards that might
be in it, would in my Opinion require more Time and Study, than perhaps every
one is aware of. But I said, he could not be ignorant of what was intended by
it, viz. the Payment of the national Debts; and that in order thereunto, the
South Sea Company had agreed with the Government to take in most of those Debts
and Revenues into their capital Stock, and had engaged not only to allow every
Proprietor such Dividends as would in a few Years pay him his Principal, but
his full Interest, proportionable to what had been granted by the Government
for a longer Term of Years; and besides that, entitle him also to a remaining
Capital, which would be very considerable. I observed, that this Proposal had
so good an Aspect both to the Government, as it would ease the Nation of so
heavy a Burden of Debt; and to all the Proprietors, who would be such
considerable Gainers by it, that all Persons, who either had Money at command,
or could raise it, though at never so great a Discount, strove to become
Proprietors in it; and sure, said I, the Nation was never known in any Age so
well disposed, and so unanimous for the good of Posterity, as they have been in
this Affair; many Persons of considerable Rank having laid by their State, and
condescended to mingle with the Crowd, to give the greater Countenance and
Encouragement to it. But at this the Clergyman took me up very smartly: Pray,
Sir, said he, what was the Occasion of all this great Humility in those
Persons? do you believe it was from a public Zeal, or from a View to their own
private Interest, that Men of Quality exposed themselves among Crowds of
People, and even among the Mob, who at other times would not go one Step to do
the least Kindness to a poor indigent Person? I made Answer, that it was not to
be doubted, but among so great a Number, there might be some who had chiefly
their own Interest in View; but yet, we ought to believe, there were also many,
whose Views were more extensive and noble; and who had the good of others, and
the Benefit of Posterity most at Heat; and I observed, that this Nation was
never at any Time without a Number of brave Spirits, if not superior, at least
equal to those of any other Country round about us, and that it was to be hoped
the Nation was not now sunk beneath what it had been in all former Ages. But
the Clergyman, agreeable to his Function, judged according to the Scripture
Rule; I found he was a very great Enemy to all those who sought after Riches,
and produced several Texts, particularly against such as hasted to be rich. He
also used many Arguments in behalf of a true and laudable Industry, and
distinguished between that kind of Diligence, which is guided by Virtue, and
that which was conducted by Avarice and other vicious Desires; after which he
asked me what Motive could prompt those Persons, who were already remarkable
for their vast Possessions, to toil and struggle, and to watch every
Opportunity of buying and selling to the greatest Advantage, as if they were
the poorest Creatures upon Earth, toiling and laboring for Bread. I made
Answer, that I could not indeed commend that Practice; but I said, every Man
was willing to keep his Ground, and those who had most, and had always bore the
Ascendant over others, were inclinable to do so still; and that I believed some
of those Persons might be urged on, from a Suspicion and Jealousy, lest such,
as had been all along inferior to them, should at this Juncture rise up to the
same Pitch with themselves; and others, who had been constantly upon a level
with them, might now also get above them. But the Clergyman insisted that these
were Motives neither honorable, nor any ways justifiable; and if there was to
be used any other more favorable Pretense, in the behalf of such Persons, viz.
the Support of the public Credit, he said, it was the direct Way to destroy
it; he took notice that it was the Means to raise it, and give it a Name, but
it was only a Monster like the Shadow magnified on the Wall by the Light of a
Candle, which was no ways proportionable to its Object.

He was at the same time going back to make Allowances for those who were Men
of Quality by Birth, but of inconsiderable Fortune, and likewise for such as
had been raised into some Station in the World, and had not wherewithal to
support it, when the Countryman broke in upon our Discourse again. He had been
all this while leaning forwards, with both his Hands upon the Head of his
Stick, and his Face turned backwards to us: In this Posture he had been
listening very attentively to what we were upon, but being unable to keep
silent any longer, he grasped me hastily by the Arm, and stretching out his
Neck toward me, till his Mouth approached dole to mine, said he, what in the
Name of Mercy do you think they would do with all that Riches and those great
Estates if they had them? I was sensible Thomas would not be easily put off
without an Answer to his Question; I therefore observed, that the greater a
Man's Possessions were, he had, no doubt, the more Power put into his Hands of
doing Good, and as those Persons, we had been taking notice of, were supposed
to be Men of high and noble Pedigree, and as it might be expected they were
virtuous and honorable, and had likewise great and excellent Examples from
their own worthy Ancestors; it Was therefore to be hoped they would do nothing
that might bring a Stain upon their Families, to sully that Luster which had
been so conspicuous in many of their Progenitors; but if they desired a further
Augmentation of their Substances, it was only that they might be able to
outshine others in Acts of true Generosity. I told him there were Ways enough
to bestow the greatest Superfluities any Man could be Master of; and I said, it
was to be presumed, if those Persons had doubled their Estates, as they were
once in a fair way to do, many of them would have, no doubt, doubled their
Beneficence also, and done much greater Services, not only to their Country in
general, and to all useful Communities of Men, but also to particular Persons.
I took notice, it would be then in their Power in a more eminent Manner to
support Virtue and Innocence wherever it was under Oppression, to raise up
Persons of distinguished Merit, and to depress those, who by their Pride and
Insolence were troublesome to their Neighbors. Ay, marry, said Thomas; but
when will they do all those fine Things you speak of? and with a grinning
Laugh, he asked if they would build any new Churches. I could not my self
forbear smiling at this Question; but to satisfy Thomas, I made Answer, that
they would, no doubt, among other Things assist in all such pious Works as
these. But Thomas, as is usual to such Persons, judged of all Men from the few
Instances himself was acquainted with. Believe me, said he, if they be all like
our Sir John, the Parsons may preach in Barns like the Presbyterians. There is
a Man knows, pointing to Mr. Pitfal, that our Church has been out of Repair
these twenty Years at least, and now it is in so great Danger of falling, that
on a windy Day, I believe verily there are sometimes not above six Men and
Women in it besides the Parson, and there are above forty Head in our Parish,
who will not venture into it at all, but go to the neighboring Parishes about.
All our Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, and the whole Parish, have been upon
Sir John about it, to get us a Brief, because he comes so much to London among
great Men. He has promised many time as fair as any Man can do, and said, he
would give a hundred Pound toward it himself; but we cannot see a Penny of his
Money, nor the Brief neither, to this Day; but if he was not much belied, they
say he is able to build twenty Churches himself with the Money he has got out
of the South Sea lately, and I am sure he was rearing a Dog Kennel when I left
home, though he comes but seldom to hunt among us, that will be half as good as
any Church we have near us. And as for raising up poor Men, as you was talking,
he is so far from doing that, that since he is grown so rich, he will turn away
any Servant that will suffer a poor Man or Woman to come about the House. But,
said I, you know, Thomas, the old Proverb, One Swallow makes not a Summer,
perhaps all your great Men are not like Sir John. Ay, marry, answered Thomas,
there is Esquire; Bramble in the next Parish to ours came down in the beginning of
Harvest in a fine Coach, and six tearing Horses in it; when he went up about
six Years ago, I think it may be thereabouts, as near as I can remember, his
Estate was not counted to be better than Esquire; Pitfal's, and some say it was not
so good; but believe me, we thought he had a mind to buy the whole County when
he came down this last Time, for he bid Money for every Body's Estate, and
among the rest, would have fain had my bit of Land, and offered me a very
topping Price for it, I Will assure you. But I thank God I had no occasion to
part with the little I had; but he was at me every Day about it, and sent for
me to his House, and was so kind as never was known; he said his Steward should
put my Money in the South Sea, where in two or three Months time it might be
worth 500 l. a Year. You Will say that was a pretty thing enough, but his Steward
was a Stranger among us, and never trust me, but I think now it is as well where
it is. But all this while, said I, Mr. Bramble may be a very good Man, and
perhaps may do great Kindnesses to your Country, as he is now become so rich.
Ay, answered Thomas, if he end as he has begun, I doubt we shall have such
doings as has not been known in our Parts. He brought down a parcel of fine
dancing Fellows with white Gloves. People said they were his Footmen; but by
Lady, I think they were more like Gentlemen, and turned away most of his old
Servants, except one or two that his Lady would have him keep. Some of them had
lived there in the old Esquire; his Father's time, and I dare say there was none of
them would have wronged him of a Hair's breadth; but he said it was a Disgrace
to see such Fellows about a Gentleman's House; he warned away two of the oldest
Tenants on his Estate too, whose Leases were almost up, to make way for a
Friend of his new Steward's, who they say is to rent both Farms. I cannot tell
how all things will end, but I hear he is for being off his Bargain again in
most of the Estates he has bought about us. I said indeed, these were Instances
enough of Gentlemen departing from the Footsteps of their Forefathers, for I
wanted very much that Thomas should make an end, but this Expression set him on
foot again. Ay, marry, answered Thomas, if I were to go through our County, I
warrant I could tell you half a score more. There is the Lawyer who came down
with Esquire; Bramble, and bought Esquire; Clover's Estate, but he is but a new Comer
among us, they say, has got a Notion of Money in that South Sea; but I think he
is like to do but little good with it. How so, said I? How, answered Thomas, he
brought a young Damsel, with her wide Petticoats down with him, to be his
Housekeeper, as I understand; and when I went to him about an Affair of my
Wife's Brother, who was one of Esquire; Clover's Tenants before this new one came
among us, who should come to speak to me but this Whisk? I told her I had no
Business with her, but I wanted her Master; but the Flirt scoffed at me, and
asked one of the fine Fellows that was in the Hall, what the Country Calf
meant; but I heard her well enough, and I think I gave her her own. I told her
there was no such Cattle as she ever used to be in this House before. This
somewhat heightened my Curiosity, whereupon I asked him if he saw the new Esquire;
Ay, marry, answered Thomas; after I had waited till I was welly tired; I was at
last brought in to his Worship, who was sitting in a fine silk Robe, like a
Lady, picking and scraping his Nails with a fine Tortoiseshell Knife; but how
strangely were things altered there from what they were in Esquire; Clover's Time?
I came away without being so much as asked to drink a Cup of small Beer, though I
had come above seven Miles that Morning. I observed to him that it was not the
Custom among Gentlemen, who had been used to Business about London, to drink
before Dinner, and that most Men were apt to judge of other Peoples
Inclinations by their own; that it might perhaps be otherwise when he came to
be acquainted with the manner of the Country, and as for keeping a good neat
Housekeeper, I said such Things were not much thought of in our Times. By the
Mass, replied Thomas, I think that is bad enough, though I could even almost
pardon that too, if he were good for any Thing in other Matters; but the second
or third Day after he came to his new Estate, he caused two little Cottages in
the Lane, as ye go up to the House, to be pulled down, which had stood there,
for ought I know, all Esquire; Clover's Time, and the poor People and their little
ones have been forced o lie in the Barns ever since, and, as I understand, it
was to please this Wagtail, for she said they and their Brats stunk with
Nastiness. I could not indeed but take Notice of that as an Act of great
Cruelty; but Thomas told me, there was a Copse of Shrub upon the Brook-side on
his Ground, which used, Time out of Mind, to be free to all the poor People
thereabouts to gather Sticks to burn, and that he had given out Orders, if any
presumed to go there any more, he would send them to the House of Correction.
That he had also stopped up the Watercourse to a Gentleman's Mill, which ran
through his Ground; and said he would oblige him to pay a new Fine, because he
found the Gentleman had omitted for two or three Years giving some small Thing
to Squire Clover, that was to be paid every Year as an Acknowledgment for the
same.

These, and many other Instances, the Countryman told me concerning this
Gentleman's Conduct, which were not only ungenerous, but cruel; and, if rightly
looked into, must be also accounted foolish and imprudent; and he was going on
to give us Instances of the Misbehaviour of some other Gentlemen in the same
Neighborhood; but although there might be some Instruction gathered from all he
said, yet I had not Time to hear more of them, especially with the
Circumstances which are usual in his way of rehearsing them. I told him, I
should be glad to be further informed in those Things, when I had more Leisure;
whereupon he sum'd up all in this general Observation: Verily, said he, I
thought we had been like our Neighbors, but mayhap other Countries may be
better than ours, and may have such fine Gentlemen in them as you have been
talking of; but I wot they are but thin in our Parts; unless it be Squire
Pitfal, and some other honest Gentlemen; there are but few of our great ones
will suffer poor Men to get any thing under them.

But this gave the Clergyman an Opportunity to reassume his Discourse. He
observed, that although Riches were, next to Health, one of the greatest temporal
Blessings to all those who knew how to use them aright; yet nothing could be so
great a Snare, and so destructive to Persons of vicious Inclinations, as they
were the proper Food and Nourishment of all their Lusts; and because of the
Power and Authority which accompanied them, he said, when they were once in the
Possession of bad Men, they were like a Sword in the Hands of a Tyrant, which
cut without Mercy, as they enabled such the more violently to oppress others.
He took notice, that many of those who were born to great Fortunes, were
oftentimes a Blessing to their Country, as were also those who acquired a
moderate Substance by their honest Industry and Labor; but, on the other hand,
that such who became Masters of very great and uncommon Acquisitions by their
boundless Avarice, were for the most part a Plague to all who were about them,
or had any Concerns with them; and that he believed there was no Country more
than another free from such Persons, who being emulous, or rather envious, at
the Prosperity and good Fortune of others, stuck at nothing to come up with
them, though by all the cruel Methods of Oppression. He observed, as the Body was
nourished by its proper Food, so a Gratification of our Desires and
Inclinations was the proper Food of our Minds, but with this Difference, that
the Body was often satisfied, and even surfeited, but the Mind could seldom
have enough, especially when it was guided by vicious Appetites; it might
indeed be heated and intoxicated, but that would, like all other Drunkenness,
only increase the Thirst. This he observed was so manifest, with respect to
Riches, that no one could be insensible of it, after so universal an
Infatuation of that kind as had happened lately among us; but what, said he,
must have been the End of all this, had every thing succeeded according to Men's
vain Wishes? Any one who had been but some few Years out of his native Country,
would have hardly known it upon his Return, the Face of Things would have been
so strangely changed, and the Possessions of Men passing through so many Hands,
would have, no doubt, caused as many Alterations as there were different
Humors and Passions in those Parties to have been gratified; what one would
have built, another would have pulled down, and what one had planted, another
would have soon rooted up; and such an infinite Number of strange Projects
would have been set on Foot, as were never heard of before. But he took notice,
that the Methods of Providence were for the most part deliberate and slow,
especially those that were the most favorable; and though the Wheel was indeed
turned more about, at some particular Times, than what is ordinary, whereby
many strange Revolutions were accomplished, yet such Things did not happen
often, neither would we be able to bear them, if they were either to be
frequent, or the Hurry of them was to last any Time.

But Mr. Pitfal, as himself was deepliest engaged in this Affair, and had
hitherto understood but little of the Matter, was therefore willing to know
something more particularly about it. He put a Stop to the Clergyman, while he
was making those general Observations, and asked him, What he judged to be the
Reason why the Stocks had risen so high? And why, all of a sudden, they should
fall so low? To this he made Answer, That Men's Avarice had, no doubt, been the
Cause of the prodigious Rise, as that extraordinary Height was with no less
Probability the Occasion of the Fall. He observed to him, that according to the
Footing it was put upon, the Advantages to every Adventurer were in a great
Measure to be proportionalble to the Advantage of Credit; and for that Reason,
as the Credit was advanced, the Number of Purchasers also increased, which was
easily enough to be expected in a Nation so rich and populous as this is. The
Gains that some boasted of, and that others had really made, set all Persons
agog after it, and so sweet was the Prospect of getting suddenly rich, that
those were looked upon as Fools and Asses who had the least Diffidence in it;
as on the other hand, the greatest Blockneads were countenanced, who could
glean up any thing to its Advantage, though never so absurd and ridiculous. He
observed, that as most Persons, who were concerned in it, had their own private
Gains chiefly in view, and thought but little of the Public; whatever
therefore they had ventured, was only with a Design to transfer it to some
other Hand, as soon as they imagined it come to its utmost; and as there were
but few, however, forward in it, who cared to trust it longer than while it was
upon the rising hand, it must have had the same Fate at whatever Time it came
to a stand; and unless the Advance of Credit was no more than could bear a
reasonable Balance with our real Substance, it was impossible that it could be
supported, especially, considering the various Humors, Interests, and Tempers
of Men, and the vast Numbers concerned in it, but must be like a Ship at Sea,
which is apt to sink when she is either over-burden'd with too much Sail, or
oppressed with too high and violent Winds. But besides that evil Humor which
he observed to run more or less through the whole Body, he said, it was to be
feared some of the principal Members were particularly in fault, both in the
excessive Rise and Fall; and as the Eyes of all Persons were, no doubt, upon
those who were most deeply concerned, their Example could not avoid being
strictly followed; and the Consequence of this must be to sink the public
Credit very much lower than was any ways reasonable.

Upon this, Mr. Pitfal asked him, Whether he thought it would rise again? He
made Answer, As the Hopes of getting Riches had encouraged People to adventure
boldly, and become Proprietors even beyond what many of them were able; so,
after so great a Damp, the Fear of losing, as that was of equal, if not
superior Importance on the Mind, would, no doubt, hinder many for some Time
from becoming Purchasers; but yet as there was perhaps no just Reason for its
sinking so low; and as there was such a vast Number of Persons, and those of
all Ranks, immediately concerned in it, and as the whole Nation was now in a
manner linked into it, it was not therefore improbable, but such prudent
Measures would be taken, as would not only in time raise it to a moderate
Height, but also support it; and it was likewise to be hoped, that those who
had hitherto only an Eye to their own private Interest, would henceforward
believe, as they were all Members of the same Body, that nothing would in the
End turn so much to their real Account, as consulting the Interest of other
Persons, as well as their own.

Mr. Pitfal began now to be more cheerful, and his country Neighbor was no
less encouraged to see him so; he jog'd him on the Arm, and drank to his good
Success, telling him, That he hoped to see Maple-Hall new built in a shorter
Time than he thought for; and after the Glass had gone round, and that I was
going to take my Leave of him, I desired him to be of good Courage, to wait
with Patience, and not to be troubled or anxious about his Interest in the
Public; since, as the Gentleman had observed, the ablest and greatest Men in
the Nation were concerned in it as well as he, and that therefore there would
be sufficient Care taken of it; and as he was to go shortly into the Country, I
put him in Remembrance of the Advice I had already given him, to keep himself
always employed i^ some useful Business or another, and, at proper times, said
he might also drink a Glass, in Moderation, with his Friends, which would not
only be the likeliest Means to recover him, but also to preserve him in a
perfect State of Health, as the Intervals of Business and Company would keep
off all melancholy Reflections.

FINIS.
Just Published,
THE Divine or Apostolical Institution, and Power of Jurisdiction of that
Sacred Order of Men in the Church of CHRIST now called Bishops. Fully proved
from Scripture, Fathers, and the fundamental Laws of this Realm. Wherein every
Objection of the Dissenters of all Sorts, is heartily examined, and fairly
confuted. With the Sentiments of the most Learned Foreigners on Separation; and
their express Censure of the Dissenters for withdrawing themselves from the
Communion of the Church of England; viz. Calvin, Beza, Grotius, Le Moyne, De l'
Angle, etc. As also the Opinions of the most celebrated Puritans on the Nature
and Heinousness of Schism; as Gifford, Parker, Baxter, Calamy, etc. By a
Presbyter of the Church of England. Price 1 s.

The Jamacia Lady: Or, the Life of Bavia. Containing an Account of her
Intrigues, Cheats, Amors in England, Jamaica, and the Royal Navy. A pleasant
Relation of the Amors of the Officers of a Fourth Rate Man of War with their
Female Passengers, in a Voyage from Jamaica to England. With the diverting
Humors of Capt. Fustian, Commander of the said Ship. And the Character of his
Irish Surgeon; the Reason of his Preferment, and Manner of obtaining his
Warrant. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Both sold by T. Bickerton at the Crown in Paternoster-row.


