DIRECTIONS FOR THE MEDICINE CHEST.

NORTH SHIELDS: PRINTED BY W. KELLEY.

1795.

INDEX.
Ague -- PAGE. 10 Bad Digestion -- PAGE. 10 Blood to Stop -- PAGE. 10 Bruises
-- PAGE. 11 Burns and Scalds -- PAGE. 12 Cholic and Gripes -- PAGE. 13 Clap --
PAGE. 13 Pox -- PAGE. 14 Cold and Pains all Over -- PAGE. 15 Consumption --
PAGE. 15 Cough and Shortness of Breath -- PAGE. 16 Costiveness -- PAGE. 17
Dropsy -- PAGE. 17 Fainting and Low Spirits -- PAGE. 17 Fever -- PAGE. 17
Gravel -- PAGE. 19 Itch -- PAGE. 19 Jaundice -- PAGE. 19 Looseness and Bloody
Flux -- PAGE. 20 Measles -- PAGE. 20 Pleurisy or Stitch in the Side -- PAGE. 21
Piles -- PAGE. 21 Rheumatism -- PAGE. 22 Scurvy -- PAGE. 22 Smallpox -- PAGE.
23 Sprains -- PAGE. 23 Swellings -- PAGE. 24 Wounds -- PAGE. 24
CATALOGUE.
No. I. LINAMENT. A table-spoonfull, rubed upon the part pained, twice aday;
Proper in sprains, bruises, broken limbs, and out of joint, and rheumatic
pains. No. II. OIL. Inwardly a teaspoonful mixed with a little brown sugar or
honey, and swallowed slowly -- Proper in colds, hoarseness, or coughs --
Outwardly, a table-spoonful of this and No. V. mixed and sprinkled upon a piece
of flannel and applied -- proper in sore throats, stitches, or any fixed pain;
a table-spoonful of this and the bigness of a nutmeg of No. XIII. melted
together; proper to rub white swellings. No. III. EXTRACT. A tea-spoonful put
into four table spoonfuls of water, and a teaspoonful of brandy, fourfold rags
wetted with it and applied as often as they dry, wetting them again, or mixing
it with oatmeal or biscuit-dust into a poultice -- proper for broken limbs,
joints that have been out, sprains, bruises, inflamed swellings, or inflamed
wounds, three drops put into a table-spoonful, and the parts washed with a
feather -- proper for scalds and burns, two drops put into a table-spoonful of
water along with three drops of No. XI. and injected gently four times a day up
the yard -- proper in clap, and two drops mixed with six of No. IV. in a
table-spoonful of water -- proper to wash the ulcers, or when the foreskin
cannot be got back, injected under it, proper in chancers and venereal ulcers;
twenty drops put into four table-spoonfuls of water and one table-spoonful of
brandy -- proper for sore eyes, used thrice a day. No. IV. SOLUTION. A
tea-spoonful put into a table-spoonful of water, if it smarts adding more
water, and the ulcers or chancers washed, then a little piece of lint wetted
with it applied to the sores -- proper in pox. No. V. VOLATILE SPIRIT. From
eight to fifteen drops taken in half a glass of wine or cold water -- proper in
sickness, faintings, or beating of the heart. No. VI. BITTERS. A tea-spoonfull
taken in a glass of wine, or spirits and water -- proper for weak stomachs, bad
digestion, loss of appetite, and after hard drinking. No. VII. CORDIAL SPIRIT.
A tea-spoonful taken in half a glass of water, wine, or spirits and water --
proper in faintings, low spirits and low fevers. No. VIII. DIURETIC DROPS. From
eight to fifteen drops taken in gin and water, parsley root tea, or barley
water -- proper in gravel -- Outwardly, a table-spoonful of this and No. V.
mixed and sprinkled upon flannel -- proper to apply to sore throats, stitches
or fixed pains. No. IX. BALSAM. From thirty to forty drops taken upon sugar --
proper in vomitings, and spitting of blood; lint wetted with it and put up the
nose, or applied to a wound -- proper to stop the bleeding. No. X. ELIXIR. From
eight to fifteen drops, taken in a glass of water. -- proper in consumptions
when the sweating comes on in the morning, and for weak stomachs, or weakness
after disorders. No. XI. MUSILAGE. Three drops put into a table-spoonful of
water, and two drops of No. III. and a little injected up the yard gently --
proper in clap. No. XII. DROPS. From fifteen to thirty drops taken in barley
water, wine and water, or spirits and water -- proper in violent vomitings,
purgings, cholic, gripes, gravel, after severe fatigue, want of rest, great
restlessness in fevers, cramps, or violent fixed pains. No. XIII. BASILICON.
Spread upon lint or tow -- proper to dress wounds, sores, etc. and upon rag for
blisters. No. XIV. CERATE. Spread upon lint, tow, or rag -- proper to skin
wounds, sores, broken shins, scalds, and burns. No. XV. WHITE OINTMENT. Spread
upon fine rag -- proper for burns, scalds, and inflammations of the skin. No.
XVI. ITCH OINTMENT. Rub the body all over at bedtime, let it remain three
days, wash all clean off with soap and warm water, and change the linen; the
bigness of a nut of No. XVII. added to it makes it more effectual. No. XVII.
MERCURIAL OINTMENT. The bigness of a nut rubbed upon the inside of the thighs
every night at bed time -- proper in pox, mixed with pomatum, it kills vermin,
etc. No. XVIII. CORDIAL ELECTUARY. The bigness of a nutmeg taken off the point
of a knife -- proper in agues after vomits, in fever when rest is wanting, in
gripes, or looseness. No. XIX. CONSERVE. A tea-spoonful of this and No. II.
mixed and taken, swallowing it slowly -- proper in coughs, hoarseness, and
consumptions. No: XX. SALTS. A table-spoonful dissolved in four table-spoonfuls
of water in a pan upon the fire, and taken, drinking while they work, barley
water, water gruel, fresh broth, or tea -- proper in inflammatory fevers,
cholics, pleurisy, inflammations, scalds, burns, or any foulness of the blood,
and in clap. No. XXI. FEVER POWDERS. One third part of one of the papers, taken
in boiled bread and water every hour, being in naked bed, and when they either
vomit or purge, take no more, but drink a little warm water -- proper in
inflammatory fevers, pleurisies, and cholics after bleeding, in fevers, bilious
disorders, bloody flux, small pox, measles, and inflamed rheumatism. No. XXII.
VOMITING POWDERS. One of the papers taken in a table-spoonful of water, and
when they vomit only a little warm water drank -- proper in agues, bad
digestion, foul stomach, heart burns, looseness, bloody flux, and spittings of
blood. No. XXIII. PURGING POWDERS. One of the papers taken in tea in the
morning fasting, and wrought off with water gruel, fresh broth or tea -- proper
in costiveness, gripes, piles, scorbutic humors, or foulness of the blood, and
after bruises. No. XXIV. RHUBARB. One of the papers taken in tea in the morning
fasting, and worked off with water gruel or tea -- proper in weak stomachs,
looseness, weak bowels, or in fevers where a loose stool is wanting. No. XXV.
ASTRINGENT POWDERS. One third part of one of the papers, taken in tea, barley
water, or port wine and water -- proper in looseness. No. XXVI. MERCURIAL
PILLS. One taken night and morning -- proper in pox. No. XXVII. WHITE PILLS.
One of the pills taken on the first, third and sixth night, with a dose of
salts on the morning following each -- proper in clap. No. XXVIII. PERUVIAN
POWDER. A tea-spoonful taken in water, wine, or brandy and water -- proper in
agues, slow and nervous fevers, putrid fevers, any great weakness after
disorders, and in wounds, broken limbs, or inflammations, where mortification
threaten. No. XXIX. STRENGTHING PLASTER. Spread with a warm knife upon leather
and applied -- proper for sprains, bruises, broken limbs, joints that have been
out, after the swelling is gone, and also to ruptures. No. XXX. DIACHYLON
PLASTER. Spread upon leather with a warm knife and applied -- proper to bring
to a head gatherings or boils. No. XXXI. BLISTER PLASTER. Spread upon leather
with a cool knife -- proper after lying on fifteen or twenty hours, and when
taken off, dressed with No. XIII. -- proper in fevers when very insensible,
pleurisies, sore throats, rheumatism, cramps, palsies, small pox, measles,
convulsions and sore eyes. No. XXXII. PRAECIPITATE. Sprinkled upon the part --
proper to cleanse sores, foul wounds, and ulcers. No. XXXIII. BLUE VITRIOL. Wet
in a little and touch the part -- proper to take down proud flesh. No. XXXIV,
SYRINGE. No. XXXV. LEATHER. No. XXXVI. LINT. No. XXXVII. TOW. No. XXXVIII.
LANCET.
DISEASES.
AGUE.
One hour before the fit is expected, take a dose of No. 22. and after it is
operation take a dose of No. 18. next day begin to take a dose of No. 28. four
times a day -- if costive, open the bowels with No. 24. after it is operation
take a dose of No. 18. and continue No. 28 four times a day, adding a dose of
No. 7. to each taking. If the fits continue obstinate, repeat a dose of No. 22.
once a week.

BAD DIGESTION.
Take a dose of No. 22. if costive, take a dose of either No. 20. 23 or 24.
then take thrice a day a dose of No. 6. if it continues, add to every dose of
No. 6. a dose of No. 18 or 10.

BLOOD TO STOP.
If from the Nose, take eight ounces of blood from the arm, and if costive,
take a dose of No. 20. observe if there are purple spots upon any part of the
body, bleeding is very improper, apply cloths wet with cold water or vinegar
and water to the forehead and back of the neck; wet pieces of lint with No. 9.
and stop up the nostrils, and put the feet into warm water. -- If the blood is
coughed up, take from eight to fourteen ounces of blood from the arm -- open
the bowels with No. 20. and take a dose of No. 9. four times a day -- the diet
should be light, such as pudding, milk, and fruits, also vegetables. If the
strength is much reduced, a dose of No. 28. and No. 10. mixed, must be taken
twice a day; if the cough teases and tickles much, a dose of No. 12. is often
found necessary at bedtime -- if the blood is vomited, take eight ounces of
blood from the arm, take a dose of No. 9. four times a day, and when costive,
open the bowels with No. 24. a purging of blood must be treated the same way --
for outward bleedings -- see Wounds.

BRUISES.
If inwards, take from eight to fourteen ounces of blood from the arm, and
repeat it every day according to the violence of the bruise, next day open the
bowels, either with a dose of No. 20. 23 or 24. after it is operation give a
dose of No. 18. and after it drink a pint of very warm weak grog, to produce a
sweat. If a fever comes on, live low, and drink plentifully of warm barley
water, and bleed again. If no fever comes on and the bruises left are violent,
on the sixth day give a quarter of a dose of No. 22. and sixty drops of No. 12.
mixed in a little brandy and water, at six o'clock in the morning, having the
shirt off, being in blankets and a woollen nightcap on, and when the sweat
breaks out, drink freely of very weak warm grog, or warm barley water, and keep
up the sweat three or four hours, then begin to turn over gently in bed to cool
gradually, and when cooled have a warm dry shirt to put on, and take care not
to catch cold after it -- this generally removes the most violent bruises. --
If the bruise is outward, rub them with No. 1. thrice a day, if they inflame,
apply No. 3. as directed, with cloths or a poultice, as are directed.

BURNS.
Cut the blisters, wash them with a feather dipped in No. 3. unmixed with
water, and after it apply No. 15. -- night and morning wash with No. 3. mixed
with water, and always after it apply No. 15. -- if it inflames, take a dose of
No. 20. -- when near healed, skin it over with No. 14. SCALDS. Treat them in
the same way as burns, but if they inflame, live low and repeat the Salts No.
20. twice or thrice in six days, and in both burns and scalds, live low.

CHOLIC.
Take from eight to ten ounces of blood from the arm, and immediately after
take a full dose of No. 12. foment the belly with two fourfold flannel cloths
wrung out of boiling water and applied, as one cools apply another, continue
them for two hours or till easier -- if the pain continue, apply heated wood or
bricks to the feet, and take a dose of No. 20. and after its operation repeat
another full dose of No. 12. if the pain still continues, bleed again,
repeating the fomentation -- also No. 20. and after it No. 12.

GRIPES.
Take a full dose of No. 18. in a glass of gin or spirits with a little hot
water, keep the feet warm with heated wood or bricks, and apply warm flannel to
the belly -- if costive next day take a dose of No. 23. and after its operation
take another dose of No. 18.

CLAP.
As soon as the running appears, take at bedtime one of the pills No. 27. next
morning take a dose of No. 20. and repeat both the pills and salts on the third
and sixth days after -- inject gently six times a day with the syringe a little
of No. 3. and No. 11. as directed for clap, and continue to do so till cured,
if a chordee comes on, rub a little of No. 17. along the under side of the yard
for two or three nights -- if from cold the running should stop, and the
testicles swell, take eight ounces of blood from the arm, and after that a dose
of salts No. 20. sling the testicles up with a handkerchief double and tied
round the back -- apply rags wet with No 3. as directed, or apply a poultice of
No. 3. and oatmeal or biscuit dust, and as it dries wet it again.

POX.
When an ulcer or chancer appears, wash it well with No. 4. as directed to be
mixed with water, twice a day, and after it wet a little of the lint No. 36. in
it and apply to the sore -- if the foreskin inflames, add No. 3. as directed,
and if the foreskin cannot be drawn back, inject it under it with the syringe
-- take a pill No. 26. night and morning -- rub the bigness of a nut of the
ointment No. 17. upon the inside of the thighs every night at bedtime --
observe when the mouth turns sore, the pills and ointment must be left off till
the mouth is well, and then begin them again and continue them till all the
sores are mended; if a bubo appears, apply twice a day a poultice of biscuit
dust, or oatmeal and water boiled up, and melt upon the top of it the bigness
of a nut of No. 17 -- buboes should always be prevented from breaking if
possible, and if they will not go back, never cut them, but allow them to break
of themselves -- when they break, wash them thrice a day with No. 4. as
directed to be mixed with water, wet a piece of lint with it and lay to the
sore, or put it into the sore if very open, and lay a dressing of No. 14.
spread upon tow over it -- if it looks very bad, sprinkle a little of No. 32.
into it once in three days.

COLD or PAINS all OVER.
At bedtime take a dose of electuary No. 18, with a tumbler of weak hot grog
-- if they continue take a dose of No. 21. next night at bedtime, and keep
warm, and drink freely of toast and hot water.

CONSUMPTION.
If newly come on, take eight ounces of blood from the arm, and in the evening
take a dose of No. 21. -- if a pain in the side, apply a blister No. 31. to the
part pained -- if the cough is troublesome take frequently a dose of No. 19.
and a tea-spoonful of No. 2. mixed, -- if morning sweats come on, take a dose
of No. 10. twice a day -- if the breathing gets free, a dose of No. 28 may be
taken with No. 10. live upon puddings, milk, fruits, vegetables, and low
seasoned meats -- if the cough becomes very troublesome, take a dose of twelve
or sixteen drops of No. 12. every night at bedtime.

COUGH and SHORTNESS of BREATH.
If shiverings and coldness have been felt before it comes on, take from eight
to twelve ounces of blood from the arm, if after standing, the blood has a
buffcoat, curled round like a ball, and hollow upon the top, bleed again, and
repeat it if necessary in twenty-four hours; after the first bleeding take a
dose of No. 21. as directed -- if costive after it take a dose of No. 20. -- if
the complaints continue, apply a blister No. 31. either to the side or breast
-- when the cough troubles much, swallow a dose of No. 2. and a dose of No. 19.
mixed -- let the common drink be barley water, or boiled water and a toast in
it, and take nothing strong -- if an asthmatic shortness of breath, take a dose
of No. 22. and repeat it every two days.

DROPSY.
Take half of one of the pills No. 27. every night at bedtime, and take a dose
of No. 23. every three days -- rub the belly with No. 2. every third or fourth
night at bedtime.

COSTIVENESS.
Take either a quarter of a dose of No. 20. 23 or 24. every four hours till the
bowels are opened.

FAINTING and LOW SPIRITS.
Take a dose of No. 5. and rub a little upon the temples, and snuff it up the
nose -- if lowness remains, add a dose of No. 7. to No. 5. and take them every
six hours.

FEVERS.
If inflammatory, it is known by a pain in the head, a beating in the temples,
and giddiness after stooping down, and frequently costiveness, take from eight
to ten ounces of blood from the arm, and at bedtime take a dose of No. 21.
next morning if costive, take a dose of No. 20. if the complaints continue
violent, bleed again on the third day, and dissolve a dose of No. 20. in a gill
of water with four knobs of sugar, and take a table-spoonful every six hours.

If a putrid fever, which is known by shiverings, tremblings, pain in the head
and back, great weariness of the limbs and weakness, sickness and load at the
stomach, with a bitter taste in the mouth, a great thirst, a white dry tongue
and trembles when put out, a giddiness of the head, light affects the eyes, and
the mind wanders from one thing to another -- six or eight ounces of blood may
be taken from the arm, any time within the first three days, if the patient is
a stout healthy man, and has not been infected from another person in the fever
-- the first evening after bleeding, or if not proper to bleed, as soon as the
disorder appears, take a dose of No. 21. if it should operate violently and
open the bowels downwards, a dose of No. 18. or a dose of No. 12. must be taken
after its operation, next day begin to take a dose of No. 28. three or four
times a day till the patient recovers, or if the patient is low add a dose of
No. 7. to each taking -- if very restless at nights take a dose of No. 12. or
No. 18. every night at bedtime -- if very raging apply a blister No. 31. to
the back of the neck -- port wine must be given to the quantity of a bottle a
day and mixed with barley water, and toast and water for common drink; if at
any time No. 28. makes the patient open in the bowels, five or eight drops of
No. 12. may be added to each dose; if costive, the bowels may be opened with a
quarter of a dose of No. 24. taken every two hours till a stool is procured --
if great weakness rem^ins after the fever is abated, a dose of No. 10 may be
added to No. 28. twice a day.

GRAVEL.
Take a dose of No. 8. twice a day, and the bigness of a pea of soap four times
a day -- when the pain is violent, take at times a dose of No. 12. -- and
whenever costive, open the bowels with No. 20. -- Avoid malt liquor.

ITCH.
Rub the body all over at bed time with No. 16. let it remain on three days,
and wash all off with warm water and soap, changing the linen; if any spots
remain, repeat it again -- take a dose of No. 20. after well.

JAUNDICE.
Take a dose of No. 22. -- and if the complaint continues, repeat it every six
days -- take the bigness of a pea of soap twice a day -- keep the bowels open
with No. 24.

LOOSENESS and BLOODY FLUX.
Looseness -- take a dose of No. 24. with a quarter of a dose of No. 22. mixed,
after its operation, take either a dose of No. 12 or 18. -- if it continues,
take a dose No. 22. at night, -- next morning take a dose of No. 24. -- after
its operation take either a dose of No. 12. or 18. then begin to take a dose of
No. 25. as directed, two or three times a day -- if it continues, repeat No.
22. and 24. and then after them continue No. 25. -- BLOODY FLUX -- take at
bedtime, a quarter of a dose of No. 21. -- next morning take a dose of No. 20.
or 23. -- after its operation, take a dose of No. 12. -- if the pain and
pressing down continues, repeat every two days a quarter of a dose of No. 21.
at night -- and next morning a dose of either No. 20. or 23. -- after every
painful stool, in the intermediate time take ten drops of No. 12.

MEASLES.
Upon their first appearance, if the complaints are violent, a little blood
must be taken from the arm -- a dose of No. 21. must be taken at bedtime --
immediately upon the turn take a dose of No. 20. and if a looseness comes on,
take a dose of No. 12. after every three or four loose stools:

PLEURISY.
Take immediately from eight to twelve ounces of blood from the arm, and if the
blood has a buff-top, bleed every twelve hours -- if the stitch continues,
apply to the stitch a dose of No. 5. mixed with either No. 2. or 8. sprinkled
upon flannel; take a dose of No. 20. and dissolve it in a pint of water
sweetened with a little sugar, of this take a table-spoonful every four hours --
if the stitch continues, apply a blister No. 31. to the side -- live low, taste
neither beer, ale, wine, nor spirits; but drink freely of toast and water,
barley or boiled water.

PILES.
Take either a dose of No. 20. or 23. wet a rag with No. 3. as directed to be
mixed with water, and apply to the part, when it dries, wet it again.

RHEUMATISM.
If the joints inflame and swell, take from eight to twelve ounces of blood
from the arm, dip double flannels in boiling water, wring them out and apply as
warm as can be endured to the swelling, as one cools apply a fresh one,
continue this an hour night and morning -- the evening after being bled, take a
dose of No. 21. if costive, open the bowels next morning with No. 20. -- if it
continues, repeat the bleeding and No. 21. -- afterward dissolve a
table-spoonful of No. 20. in a pint of boiling water with sugar in it, and take
a table-spoonful morning and evening -- if the pains continue, and all the
swellings are subsided, a quarter of a dose of No. 22. mixed with sixty drops
of No. 12. in a little brandy and water may be taken at bedtime -- and if a
sweat breaks out, drink freely of warm barley water.

If a cold Rheumatism -- rub it night and morning with No. 1. and take a dose
of No. 8. -- if it continues, apply a blister No. 31.

SCURVY.
Take a dose of No. 20. or 23. twice a week, with one of the pills No. 27. the
night before; if the out-breakings are inflamed, wash them with No. 3. four
times a day as directed to be mixed with water -- and apply the ointment No. 15.

SMALLPOX.
Immediately upon their appearance, give a dose of No. 21. and four hours after
give (if costive) a dose of No. 20. -- on the first coming out, keep cool, and
drink cold water -- when the face begins to swell, drink weak brandy and water
at times -- if the swelling goes suddenly down, give a dose of No. 12. -- and
if very restless, give every night and morning a dose of No. 18. -- during the
time let the patient take gruels, tea with bread sopped in it, and plenty of
fresh broth -- when at any time costive, keep the bowels open with a quarter of
a dose of either No. 20. 23. or 24. given every four hours till a stool is
procured -- when they have dried off, take at three days distance a pill No.
27. with either a dose of No. 20. 23. or 24.

SPRAINS.
All limbs out of joint or broke, must be endeavored to be put in or set
strait, and treated as sprains -- if with a wound, the wound must be treated as
under the title wounds. -- immediately rub it with No. 1. and cloths wet with
vinegar apply, let the vinegar be cold the first time, and as warm as can be
endured afterward, as the cloths dry wet them again -- if no vinegar is to be
had, apply No. 3. as directed -- when the swelling is nearly gone, apply a
plaster No. 29. -- if weakness remains afterward, pour a kettle of cold sea
water upon it every morning.

SWELLINGS.
Upon the first appearance, if a large swelling, take eight ounces of blood
from the arm, four hours after take a pill No. 27 -- four hours after that take
either a dose of No. 20. or 23. -- either foment the swelling with flannels
wrung out of boiling water, or apply No. 3. as directed -- if it is designed to
be brought forward, apply a plaster No. 30. spread upon leather -- when ripe,
open it with the lancet and heal it as a wound.

WOUNDS.
If gunshot, all balls and splinters must if possible be taken out -- first
apply dry lint No. 36. and over it a little of No. 13. -- spread upon tow No.
37. let it remain on till such times as the dressings come easy off, and then
dress in the same manner every day, if it inflames, apply over the dressing No.
3. as are directed -- if a sever comes on, take some blood from the arm, and
open the bowels with No. 20. -- if the matter discharged is large in quantity,
and the wound looks worse, take a little wine and a dose of No. 28. three or
four times a day -- if a mortification threatens, wash the sore with No. 9.
twice a day -- take a dose of No. 28. six times a day, and either a dose of No.
12. or 18. every night at bed time -- if the wound looks ill and discharges a
brown matter, sprinkle a litte of No. 32 into the wound once in two or three
days, if the wound turns out proud, touch it with No. 33. every dressing --
when the wound is fit for skinning over, apply No. 14. over the dry lint
instead of No. 13. -- if a dangerous bleeding follows the wound when first got,
apply plenty of dry lint and over that tow with wheat flower put into it, and
when laid over, apply either a bandage, or the hand; pressing strongly upon it,
till the blood stops -- all small cuts may be cured by a little lint No. 36.
wetted with No. 9. and applied till the cut is mended; the lips of all wounds
should be brought as close together as possible, when first dressed.

N. B. Boiled water and toast is thus made, pour a quart of boiling water upon
a piece of bread toasted brown, take the toast out immediately, and add a
little sugar to make it pleasant.

FINIS.

