TRACTS, MATHEMATICAL AN^ PHILOSOPHICAL.

BY CHARLES HUTTON, LL. D.

F. R. S. OF LAND. AND EDINB. MEMB. OF THE SOCIETY OF SCIENCES OF HOLLAND, AND
PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE ROYAL MILITARY ACADEMY, WOOLWICH.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER ROW.

M.DCC.LXXXVI.

TO HIS GRACE CHARLES, DUKE OF RICHMOND, LENNOX, AND AUBIGNY, etc. etc. etc.
MASTER GENERAL OF THE ORDNANCE, (UNDER WHOSE AUSPICES THE EXPERIMENTS IN
GUNNERY WERE MADE)

THESE TRACTS ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY

HIS GRACE'S MOST HUMBLE AND MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THE Author presumes to lay the following Tracts before the Public with the
greater confidence, as he hopes these productions of his leisure will be found
to bear a due relation to the engagements of his official duty.

The preference given of late, even among professed philosophers, to studies of
a less abstract kind, has too frequently diverted the pursuits of
mathematicians into paths less suited to their talents, from the desire of a
vain and fleeting popularity, instead of the more laudable ambition of making
real improvements in the sciences which they had professed to cultivate. The
humble consciousness which the author has ever entertained of the limits of his
own abilities, has, he hopes, preserved him from this common and pernicious
vanity. However solicitous to extend and diversify his own acquirements, he can
only hope to add, and that a little, to the public stock of knowledge, in those
parts of science to which his early habits, and subsequent occupations, have
led him peculiarly to consecreate his studies.

The very honorable distinction paid to the author by the Royal Society, for
his former experiments in gunnery, as well as their general indulgence to his
attempts in other mathematical subjects, would perhaps have given an obvious
destination to these papers, had he not thought their publication in a
collective form, better adapted, from the connection of their subject, to
extend their utility.

The first six tracts in this volume will be found to have an obvious
connection in respect to their subject; having all of them a tendency either to
illustrate the history, or improve the theory of that species of mathematical
quantities called Series. The particular subjects of these tracts are
sufficiently discussed in the introduction to each of them, respectively, to
render any previous detail unnecessary in this place. The author hopes,
however, they will be thought to have some claim to the merit of invention; and
that their utility will be readily recognized by those who are conversant in
these subjects.

The seventh and eighth tracts are rather detached in their nature, relating to
subjects purely geometrical. It is hoped, however, that the former of them,
being an investigation of some new and curious properties of the sphere and
cone, which have always been a fruitful and favorite source of exercise to
geometricians, will be both acceptable and useful to those who are engaged in
similar speculations. The latter problem, concerning the geometrical division
of a circle, having hitherto been deemed impracticable, the solution of it is
here given, it is presumed, for the first time.

The largest, and, in the author's opinion, the most important of these tracts,
is the ninth, or last; the main purpose of which is altogether practical,
though founded in a very subtle and complex theory.

Though the late excellent Mr. Robins first showed the importance of this
theory, and invented a very curious mechanical apparatus for the experiments
which he made to verify it, the author is persuaded that none have been
hitherto made with cannon balls so completely, as those here related and
described; and that these are the first from which the Data for determining the
resistance of the medium can be accurately derived. It has been the author's
great object, next to the accuracy of the experiments, and the full and precise
description of them, to simplify the theorems deduced from them, or from the
theory itself; of which an example may be found in the new rule given for the
velocity of the ball. And it is presumed that the table of the corresponding
Data, namely, of the Dimensions and Elevation of the gun, and the Range,
Velocity and Time of slight of the ball, is now so accurately framed, and so
perspicuous, that the several cases of gunnery may be very certainly and easily
referred to it; and rules of practice, adapted to the common purposes of the
artillerist, may be very readily formed upon these principles.

MATHEMATICAL TRACTS, etc.
TRACT I. A Dissertation on the Nature and Value of Infinite Series.
1. ABOUT five years since I discovered a very general and easy method of
valuing series whose terms are alternately positive and negative, which equally
applies to such series, whether they be converging, or diverging, or their
terms all equal; together with several other properties relating to certain
series: and as we shall have occasion to deliver some of those matters in the
course of these tracts, I shall take this opportunity of premising a few ideas
and remarks on the nature and valuation of some of the classes of series which
form the object of those communications. This is done with a view to obviate
any misconceptions that might, perhaps, be made concerning the idea annexed to
the term value of such series in those intended tracts, and the sense in which
it is there always to be understood; which is the more necessary, as many
controversies have been warmly agitated concerning these matters, not only of
late, by some of our own countrymen, but also by others among the ablest
mathematicians in Europe, at different periods in the course of the present
century; and all this, it seems, through the want of specifying in what sense
the term value or sum was to be understood in their dissertations. And in this
discourse, I shall follow, in a great measure, the sentiments and manner of the
late famous L. Euler, contained in a similar memoir of his in the fifth volume
of the New Petersburgh Commentaries, adding and intermixing here and there
other remarks and observations of my own.

2. By a converging series, I mean such a one whose terms continually decrease;
and by a diverging series, that whose terms continually increase. So that a
series whose terms neither increase nor decrease, but are all equal, as they
neither converge nor diverge, may be called a neutral series, as a - a + a - a
+ etc. Now converging series, being supposed infinitely continued, may have
their terms decreasing to o as a limit, as the series 1 - + - + etc. or only
decreasing to some finite magnitude as a limit, as the series 2/1 - 3/2 + 4/3 -
5/4 + etc. which tends continually to 1 as a limit. So in like manner,
diverging series may have their terms tending to a limit that is either finite
or infinitely great; thus the terms 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + etc. diverge to infinity,
but the diverging terms - + - + etc. only to the finite magnitude 1. Hence
then, as the ultimate terms of series which do not converge to o, by supposing
them continued in infinitum, may be either finite or infinite, there will be
two kinds of such series, each of which will be farther divided into two
species, according as the terms shall either be all affected with the same
sign, or have alternately the signs + and -. We shall, therefore, have
altogether four species of series which do not converge to o, an example of
each of which may be as here follows: I. 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + etc. I. + + +
+ + 6/7 + etc. II. 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + etc. II. - + - + - 6/7 + etc. III. 1
+ 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + etc. III. 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + 32 + etc. IV. 1 - 2 + 3 -
4 + 5 - 6 + etc. IV. 1 - 2 + 4 - 8 + 16 - 32 + etc.


3. Now concerning the sums of these species of series, there have been great
dissensions among mathematicians; some affirming that they can be expressed by
a certain sum, while others deny it. In the first place, however, it is evident
that the sums of such series as come under the first of these species, will be
really infinitely great, since by actually collecting the terms, we can arrive
at a sum greater than any proposed number whatever: and hence there can be no
doubt but that the sums of this species of series may be exhibited by
expressions of this kind a/ 0. It is concerning the other species, therefore,
that mathematicians have chiefly differed; and the arguments which both sides
allege in defense of their opinions, have been endued with such force, that
neither party could hitherto be brought to yield to the other.

4. As to the second species, the famous Leibnitz was one of the first who
treated of this series 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + etc. and he concluded the sum of
it to =, relying upon the following cogent reasons. And first, that this series
arises by resolving the fraction 1/1+ a into the series 1 - a + a2 - a3 + a4 -
a5 + etc. by continual division in the usual way, and taking the value of a
equal to unity. Secondly, for more confirmation, and for persuading such as are
not accustomed to calculations, he reasons in the following manner: If the
series terminate any where, and if the number of the terms be even, then its
value will be = 0; but if the number of terms be odd, the value of the series
will be = 1: but because the series proceeds in infinitum, and that the number
of the terms cannot be reckoned either odd or even, we may conclude that the
sum is neither = 0, nor = 1, but that it must obtain a certain middle value,
equidifferent from both, and which is therefore =. And thus, he adds, nature
adheres to the universal law of justice, giving no partial preference to either
side.

5. Against these arguments the adverse party make use of such objections as
the following. First, that the fraction 1/1+ a is not equal to the infinite
series 1 - a + a2 - a3 + etc. unless a be a fraction less than unity. For if
the division be any where broken off, and the quotient of the remainder be
added, the cause of the paralogism will be manifest; for we shall then have ^;
and that although the number n should be made infinite, yet the supplemental
fraction ^ ought not to be omitted, unless it should become evanescent, which
happens only in those cases in which a is less than 1, and the terms of the
series converge to 0. But that in other cases there ought always to be included
this kind of supplement ^; and although it be affected with the dubious sign ^,
namely - or + according as n shall be an even or an odd number, yet if n be
infinite, it may not therefore be omitted, under the pretense that an infinite
number is neither odd nor even, and that there is no reason why the one sign
should be used rather than the other; for it is absurd to suppose that there
can be any integer number, even although it be infinite, which is neither odd
nor even.

6. But this objection is rejected by those who attribute determinate sums to
diverging series, because it considers an infinite number as a determinate
number, and therefore either odd or even, when it is really indeterminate. For
that it is contrary to the very idea of a series, said to proceed in infinitum,
to conceive any term of it as the last, although infinite: and that therefore
the objection abovementioned, of the supplement to be added or subtracted,
naturally falls of itself. Therefore, since an infinite series never
terminates, we never can arrive at the place where that supplement must be
joined; and therefore that the supplement not only may, but indeed ought to be
neglected, because there is no place found for it.

And these arguments, adduced either for or against the sums of such series as
above, hold also in the fourth species, which is not otherwise embarrassed with
any further doubts peculiar to itself.

7. But those who dispute against the sums of such series, think they have the
firmest hold in the third species. For although the terms of these series
continually increase, and that, by actually collecting the terms, we can arrive
at a sum greater than any assignable number, which is the very definition of
infinity; yet the patrons of the sums are forced to admit, in this species,
series whose sums are not only finite, but even negative, or less than nothing.
For since the fraction 1/1- a^, by evolving it by division, becomes 1 + a + a2
+ a3 + a4 + etc. we should have 1/1-2 = - 1 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + etc. 1/1-3 =
- = 1 + 3 + 9 + 27 + 81 + etc.
which their adversaries, not undeservedly, hold to be absurd, since by the
addition of affirmative numbers, we can never obtain a negative sum; and hence
they urge that there is the greater necessity for including the
beforementioned supplement additive, since by taking it in, it is evident that
- 1 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 8........ 2n + 2n+1/1-2, although n should be an infinite
number.

8. The defenders therefore of the sums of such series, in order to reconcile
this striking paradox, more subtle perhaps than true, make a distinction
between negative quantities; for they argue that while some are less than
nothing, there are others greater than infinite, or above infinity. Namely,
that the one value of -1 ought to be understood, when it is conceived to arise
from the subtraction of a greater number a + 1 from a less a; but the other
value, when it is found equal to the series 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + etc. and arising
from the division of the number 1 by -1; for that in the former case it is less
than nothing, but in the latter greater than infinite. For the more
confirmation, they bring this example of fractions,,, 1/1, 1/0, 1/-1, 1/-2,
1/-3, etc. which, evidently increasing in the leading terms, it is inferred
will continually increase; and hence they conclude that 1/-1 is greater than
1/0, and 1/-2 greater than 1/-1, and so on: and therefore as 1/-1 is expressed
by -1, and 1/0 by or infinity, -1 will be greater than, and much more will - be
greater than. And thus they ingeniously enough repelled that apparent absurdity
by itself.

9. But although this distinction seemed to be ingeniously devised, it gave but
little satisfaction to the adversaries; and besides, it seemed to affect the
truth of the rules of algebra. For if the two values of -1, namely 1 - 2 and
1/-1, be really different from each other, as we may not confound them, the
certainty and the use of the rules, which we follow in making calculations,
would be quite done away; which would be a greater absurdity than that for
whose sake the distinction was devised: but if 1 - 2 = 1/-1, as the rules of
algebra require, for by multiplication ^, the matter in debate is not settled;
since the quantity -1, to which the series 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + etc. is made equal,
is less than nothing, and therefore the same difficulty still remains. In the
mean time however, it seems but agreeable to truth, to say that the same
quantities which are below nothing, may be taken as above infinite. For we
know, not only from algebra, but from geometry also, that there are two ways,
by which quantities pass from positive to negative, the one through the cipher
or nothing, and the other through infinity: and besides that quantities, either
by increasing or decreasing from the cipher, return again, and revert to the
same term o; so that quantities more than infinite are the same with quantities
less than nothing, like as quantities less than infinite agree with quantities
greater than nothing.

10. But, farther, those who deny the truth of the sums that have been assigned
to diverging series, not only omit to assign other values for the sums, but
even set themselves utterly to oppose all sums belonging to such series, as
things merely imaginary. For a converging series, as suppose this 1 + + + +
etc. will admit of a sum = 2, because the more terms of this series we actually
add, the nearer we come to the number 2: but in diverging series the case is
quite different; for the more terms we add, the more do the sums which are
produced differ from one another, neither do they ever tend to any certain
determinate value. Hence they conclude that no idea of a sum can be applied to
diverging series, and that the labor of those persons who employ themselves in
investigating the sums of such series, is manifestly useless, and indeed
contrary to the very principles of analysis.

11. But notwithstanding this seemingly real difference, yet neither party
could ever convict the other of any error, whenever the use of series of this
kind has occurred in analysis; and for this good reason, that neither party is
in an error, but that the whole difference consists in words only. For if in
any calculation I arrive at this series 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + etc. and that I
substitute instead of it; I shall surely not thereby commit any error; which
however I should certainly incur if I substitute any other number instead of
that series; and hence there remains no doubt but that the series 1 - 1 + 1 - 1
+ etc. and the fraction, are equivalent quantities, and that the one may always
be substituted instead of the other without error. So that the whole matter in
dispute seems to be reduced to this only, namely, whether the fraction can be
properly called the sum of the series 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + etc. Now if any persons
should obstinately deny this, since they will not however venture to deny the
fraction to be equivalent to the series, it is greatly to be feared they will
fall into mere quarrelling about words.

12. But perhaps the whole dispute will easily be compromised, by carefully
attending to what follows. Whenever, in analysis, we arrive at a complex
function or expression, either fractional or transcendental; it is usual to
convert it into a convenient series, to which the remaining calculus may be
more easily applied. And hence the occasion and rise of infinite series. So far
only then do infinite series take place in analytics, as they arise from the
evolution of some finite expression; and therefore, instead of an infinite
series, in any calculus, we may substitute that formula, from whose evolution
it arose. And hence, for performing calculations with more ease or more
benefit, like as rules are usually given for converting into infinite series
such finite expressions as are endued with less proper forms; so, on the other
hand, those rules are to be esteemed not less useful by the help of which we
may investigate the finite expression from which a proposed infinite series
would result, if that finite expression should be evolved by the proper rules:
and since this expression may always, without error, be substituted instead of
the infinite series, they must necessarily be of the same value: and hence no
infinite series can be proposed, but a finite expression may, at the same time,
be conceived as equivalent to it.

13. If therefore, we only so far change the received notion of a sum as to
say, that the sum of any series, is the finite expression by the evolution of
which that series may be produced, all the difficulties, which have been
agitated on both sides, vanish of themselves. For, first, that expression by
whose evolution a converging series is produced, exhibits at the same time its
sum, in the common acceptance of the term: neither, if the series should be
divergent, could the investigation be deemed at all more absurd, or less
proper, namely, the searching out a finite expression which, being evolved
according to the rules of algebra, shall produce that series. And since that
expression may be substituted in the calculation instead of this series, there
can be no doubt but that it is equal to it. Which being the case, we need not
necessarily deviate from the usual mode of speaking, but might be permitted to
call that expression also the sum, which is equal to any series whatever,
provided however, that, in series whose terms do not converge to o, we do not
connect that notion with this idea of a sum, namely, that the more terms of the
series are actually collected, the nearer we must approach to the value of the
sum.

14. But if any person shall still think it improper to apply the term sum, to
the finite expressions by whose evolution all series in general are produced;
it will make no difference in the nature of the thing; and instead of the word
sum, for such finite expression, he may use the term value; or perhaps the term
radix would be as proper as any other that could be employed for this purpose,
as the series may justly be considered as issuing or growing out of it, like as
a plant springs from its root, or from its seed. The choice of terms being in a
great measure arbitrary, every person is at liberty to employ them in whatever
sense he may think fit, or proper for the purpose in hand; provided always that
he fix and determine the sense in which he understands or employs them. And as
I consider any series, and the finite expression by whose evolution that series
may be produced, as no more than two different ways of expressing one and the
same thing, whether that finite expression be called the sum, or value, or
radix of the series; so in the following paper, and in some others which may
perhaps hereafter be produced, it is in this sense I desire to be understood
when searching out the value of series, namely, that the object of my enquiry,
is the radix by whose evolution the series may be produced, or else an
approximation to the value of it in decimal numbers, etc.

Royal Military Acad. Woolwich, May 24, 1785.
TRACT II. A new Method for the Valuation of Numeral Infinite Series, whose
Terms are alternately (+) Plus and (-) Minus; by taking continual Arithmetical
Means between the Successive Sums, and their Means.
Article 1. THE remarkable difference between the facility which mathematicians
have found in their endeavors to determine the values of infinite series whose
terms are alternately affirmative and negative, and the difficulty of doing the
same thing with respect to those series whose terms are all affirmative, is one
of those striking appearances in science which we can hardly persuade ourselves
is true, even after we have seen many proofs of it, and which serve to put us
ever after on our guard not to trust to our first notions, or conjectures, on
these subjects, till we have brought them to the test of demonstration. For, at
first sight it is very natural to imagine, that those infinite series whose
terms are all affirmative, or added to the first term, must be much simpler in
their nature, and much easier to be summed, than those whose terms are
alternately affirmative and negative; which, nevertheless, we find, upon
examination, to be directly contrary to the truth; the methods of finding the
sums of the latter series being numerous and easy, and also very general,
whereas those that have been hitherto discovered for the summation of the
former series, are few and difficult, and confined to series whose terms are
generated from each other according to some particular laws, instead of
extending, as the other methods do, to all sorts of series, whose terms are
connected together by addition, by whatever law their terms are formed. Of this
remarkable difference between these two sorts of series, the new method of
finding the sums of those whose terms are alternately positive and negative,
which is the subject of the present paper, will afford us a striking instance,
as it possesses the happy qualities of simplicity, ease, perspicuity, and
universality in a great degree; and yet, as the essence of it consists in the
alternation of the signs + and -, by which the terms are connected with the
first term, it is of no use in the summation of those other series whose terms
are all connected with each other by the sign +.

2. This method, so easy and general, is, in short, simply this: beginning at
the first term a of the series a - b + c - d + e - f + etc. which is to be
summed, compute several successive values of it, by taking in successively more
and more terms, one term being taken in at a time; so that the first value of
the series shall be its first term a, (or even o or nothing may begin the
series of sums); the next value shall be its first two terms a - b, reduced to
one number; its next value shall be the first three terms a - b + c, reduced to
one number; its next value shall be the first four terms a - b + c - d, reduced
also to one number; and so on. This, it is evident, may be done by means of the
easy arithmetical operation of addition and subtraction. And then, having found
a sufficient number of successive values of the series, more or less as the
case may require, interpose between these values a set of arithmetical mean
quantities or proportionals; and between these arithmetical means interpose a
second set of arithmetical mean quantities; and between those arithmetical
means of the second set, interpose a third set of arithmetical mean quantities;
and so on as far as you please. By this process we soon find either the true
value of the series proposed, when it has a determinate rational value, or
otherwise we obtain several sets of values approximating nearer and nearer to
the sum of the series, both in the columns and in the lines, either horizontal
or obliquely descending or ascending; namely, both of the several sets of means
themselves, and the sets or series formed of any of their corresponding terms,
as of all their first terms, of their second terms, of their third terms, etc.
or of their last terms, of their penultimate terms, of their antepenultimate
terms, etc. and if between any of these latter sets, consisting of the like or
corresponding terms of the former sets of arithmetical means, we again
interpose new sets of arithmetical means, as we did at first with the
successive sums, we shall obtain other sets of approximating terms, having the
same properties as the former. And thus we may repeat the process as often as
we please, which will be found very useful in the more difficult diverging
series, as we shall see hereafter. For this method, being derived only from the
circumstance of the alternation of the signs of the terms (+ and -), it is
therefore not confined to converging series alone, but is equally applicable
both to diverging series, and to neutral series, (by which last name I shall
take the liberty to distinguish those series whose terms are all of the same
constant magnitude); namely, the application is equally the same for all the
three following sorts of series, viz. Converging, 1 - + - + - + etc. Diverging,
1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + 5 - 6 + etc. Neutral, 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + etc.
As is demonstrated in what follows, and exemplified in a variety of instances.

It must be noted, however, that by the value of the series, I always mean such
radix, or finite expression, as, by evolution, would produce the series in
question; according to the sense I have stated in the former paper, on this
subject; or an approximate value of such radix; and which radix, as it may be
substituted instead of the series in any operation, I call the value of the
series.

3. It is an obvious and well-known property of infinite series, with alternate
signs, that when we seek their value by collecting their terms one after
another, we obtain a series of successive sums, which approach continually
nearer and nearer to the true value of the proposed series, when it is a
converging one, or one whose terms always decrease by some regular law; but in
a diverging series, or one whose terms as continually increase, those
successive sums diverge always more and more from the true value of the series.
And from the circumstance of the alternate change of the signs, it is also a
property of those successive sums, that when the last term which is included in
the collection, is a positive one, then the sum obtained is too great, or
exceeds the truth; but when the last collected term is negative, then the sum
is too little, or below the truth. So that, in both the converging and
diverging series, the first term alone, being positive, exceeds the truth; the
second sum, or the sum of the first two terms, is below the truth; the third
sum, or the sum of three terms, is above the truth; the fourth sum, or the sum
of four terms, is below the truth; and so on; the sum of any even number of
terms being below the true value of the series, and the sum of any odd number,
above it. All which is generally known, and evident from the nature and form of
the series. So, of the series a - b + c - d + e - f + etc. the first sum a is
too great; the second sum a - b too little; the third sum a - b + c too great;
and so on as in the following table, where s is the true value of the series,
and o is placed before the collected sums, to complete the series, being the
value when no terms are included: Successive sums. s is greater than o s is
less than a s is greater than a - b s is less than a - b + c s is greater than
a - b + c - d s is less than a - b + c - d + e etc. etc.

4. Hence the value of every alternate series s, is positive, and less than the
first term a, the series being always supposed to begin with a positive term a;
and consequently if the signs of all the terms be changed, or if the series
begin with a negative term, the value s will still be the same, but negative,
or the sign of the sum will be changed, and the value become - s = - a + b - c
+ d - etc. Also, because the successive sums, in a converging series, always
approach nearer and nearer to the true value, while they recede always farther
and farther from it in a diverging series; it follows that, in a neutral
series, a - a + a - a + etc. which holds a middle place between the two former,
the successive sums o, a, o, a, o, a etc. will neither converge nor diverge,
but will be always at the same distance from the value of the proposed series a
- a + a - a + etc. and consequently that value will always be = a, which holds
every where the middle place between o and a.

5. Now, with respect to a converging series, a - b + c - d + etc. because o is
below, and a above s the value of the series, but a nearer than o to the value
s, it follows that s lies between a and a, and that a is less than s, and so
nearer to s than o is. In like manner, because a is above, and a - b below the
value s, but a - b nearer to that value than a is, it follows that s lies
between a and a - b, and that the arithmetical mean a - b is something above
the value of s, but nearer to that value than a is. And thus, the same
reasoning holding in every following pair of successive sums, the arithmetical
means between them will form another series of terms, which are, like those
sums, alternately less and greater than the value of the proposed series, but
approximating nearer to that value than the several successive sums do, as
every term of those means is nearer to the value s than the corresponding
preceding term in the sums is. And like as the successive sums form a
progression approaching always nearer and nearer to the value of the series, so
in like manner their arithmetical means form another progression coming nearer
and nearer to the same value, and each term of the progression of means nearer
than each term of the successive sums. Hence then we have the two following
series, namely, of successive sums and their arithmetical means, in which each
step approaches nearer to the value of s than the former, the latter
progression being however nearer than the former, and the terms or steps of
each alternately below and above the value s of the series a - b + c - d + etc.
Successive sums Arithmetical means O a a a - b a - b a - b + c a - b + c a - b
+ c - d a - b + c - d a - b + c - d + e a - b + c - d + e a - b + c - d + e - f
etc. etc. where the mark, placed before any step, signifies that it is too
little, or below the value s of the converging series a - b + c - d + etc. and
the mark signifies the contrary, or too great. And hence a, or half the first
term of such a converging series, is less than s the value of the series.

6. And since these two progressions possess the same properties, but only the
terms of the latter nearer to the truth than the former; for the very same
reasons as before, the means between the terms of these first arithmetical
means, will form a third progression, whose terms will approach still nearer to
the value of s than the second progression, or the first means; and the means
of these second means will approach nearer than the said second means do; and
so on continually, every succeeding order of arithmetical means, approaching
nearer to the value of s than the former. So that the following columns of sums
and means will be each nearer to the value of s than the former, viz. Suc.
sums. 1st means. 2d means. 3d means. 4th means. 0 a/2 3 a- b/4 7 a-4 b+ c/8 15
a-11 b+ cc- d/16 a a - b/2 a - 3 b- c/4 a - 7 b-4 c+ d/8 a - 15 b-11 c+5 d- e/8
a- b a - b + c/2 a - b + 3 c- d/4 a - b + 7 c-4 d+ e/8 a - b + 15 c-11 d+5 e-
f/8 a - b + c a - b + c - d/2 a - b + c - 3 d- c/4 a - b + c - etc. a- b+ etc.
a- b+ c- d a- b+etc. a- b+etc. a- b+etc. a- b+ etc. Where every column consists
of a set of quantities, approaching still nearer and nearer to the value of s,
the terms of each column being alternately below and above that value, and each
succeeding column approaching nearer than the preceding one. Also every line,
formed of all the first terms, all the second terms, all the third terms, etc.
of the columns, forms also a progression whose terms continually approximate to
the value of s, and each line nearer or quicker than the former; but differing
from the columns, or vertical progressions, in this, namely, that whereas the
terms in the columns are alternately below and above the value of s, those in
each line are all on one side of the value s, namely, either all below or all
above it; and the lines alternately too little and too great, namely all the
expressions in the first line too little, all those in the second line too
great, those in the third line too little, and so on, every odd line being too
little, and every even line too great.

7. Hence the expressions 0, a/2, 3 a- b/4, 7 a-4 b+ c/8, 15 a-11 b+5 c- a/16,
31 a-26 b+16 c-6 d+ e/32, etc. are continual approximations to the value s of
the converging series a - b + c - d + e - etc. and are all below the truth. But
we can easily express all these several theorems by one general formula. For,
since it is evident by the construction, that whilst the denominator in any one
of them is some power (2n) of 2 or 1 + 1, the numeral coefficients of a, b, c,
etc. the terms in the numerator, are found by subtracting all the terms except
the last term, one after another, from the said power 2n or ^ which is = 1 + n
+ n ^ n-1/2 + n ^ n-2/3 + etc. namely the coefficient of a equal to all the
terms 2n minus the first term 1; that of b equal to all except the first two
terms 1 + n; that of c equal to all except the first three; and so on, till the
coefficient of the last term be = 1 the last term of the power; it follows that
the general expression for the several theorems, or the general approximate
value of the converging series a - b + c - d + etc. will be ^ continued till
the terms vanish and the series break off, n being equal to o or any integer
number. Or this general formula may be expressed by this series, ^ where A, B,
C, etc. denote the coefficients of the several preceding terms. And this
expression, which is always too little, is the nearer to the true value of the
series a - b + c - d + etc. as the number n is taken greater: always excepting
however those cases in which the theorem is accurately true when n is some
certain finite number. Also, with any value of n, the formula is nearer to the
truth, as the terms a, b, c, etc. of the proposed series, are nearer to
equality; so that the slower the proposed series converges, the more accurate
is the formula, and the sooner does it afford a near value of that series:
which is a very favorable circumstance, as it is in cases of very slow
convergency that approximating formulae are chiefly wanted. And, like as the
formula approaches nearer to the truth as the terms of the series approach to
an equality, so when the terms become quite equal, as in a neutral series, the
formula becomes quite accurate, and always gives the same value a for s or the
series, whatever integer number be taken for n. And farther, when the proposed
series, from being converging, passes through neutrality, when its terms are
equal, and becomes diverging, the formula will still hold good, only it will
then be alternately too great, and too little as long as the series diverges,
as we shall presently show more fully. So that in general the value s of the
series a - b + c - d + etc. whether it be converging, diverging, or neutral, is
less than the first term a; when the series converges, the value is above a;
when it diverges, it is below a; and when neutral, it is equal to a.

8. Take now the series of the first terms of the several orders of
arithmetical means, which form the progression of continual approximating
formulae, being each nearer to the value of the series a - b + c - d + etc.
than the former, and place them in a column one under another; then take the
differences between every two adjacent formulae, and place in another column by
the side of the former, as here below: Approx. Formulae. Differences. a/2 a-
b/4 3 a- b/4 a-2 b+ c/8 7 a-4 b+ c/8 a-3 b+3 c- d/16 15 a-11 b+5 c- d/16 a-4
b+6 c-4 d+ e/32 31 a-26 b+16 c-6 d+ e/32 etc. etc. From which it appears, that
this series of differences consists of the very same quantities, which form the
first terms of all the orders of differences of the terms of the proposed
series a - b + c - d + etc. when taken as usual in the differential method. And
because the first of the above differences added to the first formula, gives
the second formula; and the second difference added to the second formula,
gives the third formula; and so on; therefore the first formula with all the
differences added, will give the last formula; consequently our general formula
^ which approaches to the value of the series a - b + c - d + etc. is also
equivalent to, or reduces to this form, ^ which, it is evident, agrees with the
famous differential series. And this coincidence might be sufficient to
establish the truth of our method, though we had not given other more direct
proof of it. Hence it appears then, that our theorem is of the same degree of
accuracy, or convergency, as the differential theorem; but admits of more
direct and easy application, as the terms themselves are used, without the
previous trouble of taking the several orders of differences. And our method
will be rendered general for literal as well as numeral series, by supposing a,
b, c, etc. to represent, not barely the coefficients of the terms, but the
whole terms, both the numeral and the literal part of them. However, as the
chief use of my method is to obtain the numeral value of series, when a literal
series is to be so summed, it is to be made numeral by substituting the numeral
values of the letters instead of them. It is farther evident, that we might
easily derive our method of arithmetical means from the above differential
series, by beginning with it, and receding back to our theorems, by a counter
process to that above given.

9. Having, in Art. 5, 6, 7, 8, completed the investigations for the first or
converging form of series, the first four articles being introductory to both
forms in common; we may now proceed to the diverging form of series, for which
we shall find the same method of arithmetical means, and the same general
formula, as for the converging series; as well as the mode of investigation
used in Art. 5 et seq. only changing sometimes greater for less, or less for
greater. Thus then, reasoning from the table of successive sums in Art. 3, in
which s is alternately above and below the expressions o, a, a - b, a - b + c,
etc. because o is below, and a above the value s of the series a - b + c - d +
etc. but o nearer than a to that value, it follows that s lies between o and a,
and that a is greater than s, but nearer to s than a is. In like manner,
because a is above, and a - b below the value s, but a nearer to that value
than a - b is, it follows that s lies between a and a - b, and that the
arithmetical mean a - b is below s, but that it is nearer to s than a - b is.
And thus, the same reasoning holding in every pair of successive sums, the
arithmetical means between them will form another series of terms, which are
alternately greater and less than s the value of the proposed series; but here
greater and less in the contrary way to what they were for the converging
series, namely, those steps greater here which were less there, and less here
which before were greater. And this first set of arithmetical means, will
either converge to the value of s, or will at least diverge less from it than
the progression of successive sums. Again, the same reasoning still holding
good, by taking the arithmetical means of those first means, another set is
found, which will either converge, or else diverge less than the former. And so
on as far as we please, every new operation gradually checking the first or
greatest divergency, till a number of the first terms of a set converge
sufficiently fast, to afford a near value of s the proposed series.

10. Or, by taking the first terms of all the orders of means, we find the same
set of theorems, namely ^, etc. or in general, ^ which will be alternately
above and below s the value of the series, till the divergency is overcome.
Then this series, which consists of the first terms of the several orders of
means, may be treated as the successive sums, taking several orders of means of
these again. After which the first terms of these last orders may be treated
again in the same manner; and so on as far as we please. Or the series of
second terms, or third terms, etc. or sometimes, the terms ascending obliquely,
may be treated in the same manner to advantage. And with a little practice and
inspection of the several series, whether vertical, or horizontal, or oblique,
(for they all tend to the detection of the same value s) we shall soon learn to
distinguish whereabouts the required quantity s is, and which of the series
will soonest approximate to it.

11. To exemplify now this method, we shall take a few series of both sorts,
and find their value sometimes by actually going through the operations of
taking the several orders of arithmetical means, and at other times by using
some one of the theorems ^, etc. at once. And to render the use of these
theorems still easier, we shall here subjoin the following table, where the
first line consisting of the powers of 2, contains the denominators of the
theorems in their order, and the figures in their perpendicular columns below
them, are the coefficients of the several terms in the numerators of the
theorems, namely, the upper figure, next below the power of 2, the coefficient
of a; the next below, that of b; the third that of c, etc. 2 22 23 24 25 26 27
28 29 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 1 3 7 15 31 63 127 255 511
1023 2047 4095 8191 16383 32767 65535 131071 262143 524287 1048575 1 4 11 26 57
120 247 502 1013 2036 4083 8178 16369 32752 65519 131054 262125 524268 1048555
1 5 16 42 99 219 466 968 1981 4017 8100 16278 32647 65399 130918 261972 524097
1048365 1 6 22 64 163 382 848 1816 3797 7814 15914 32192 64839 130238 261156
523128 1047225 1 7 29 93 256 638 1486 3302 7099 14913 30827 63019 127858 258096
519252 1042380 1 8 37 130 386 1024 2510 5812 12911 27824 58651 121670 249528
507624 1026876 1 9 40 176 562 1586 4096 9908 22819 50643 109294 230964 480492
988116 1 10 56 232 794 2380 6476 16384 39203 89846 199140 430104 910596 1 11 67
299 1093 3473 9949 26333 65536 155382 354522 784626 1 12 79 378 1471 4944 14893
41226 106762 262144 616666 1 13 92 470 1941 6885 21778 63004 169766 431910 1 14
106 576 2517 9402 31180 94184 263950 1 15 121 697 3214 12616 43796 137980 1 16
137 834 4048 16664 60460 1 17 154 988 5036 21700 1 18 172 1160 6196 1 19 191
1351 1 20 211 1 21 1

The construction and continuation of this table, is a business of little
labor. For the numbers in the first horizontal line next below the line of the
powers of 2, are those powers diminished each by unity. The numbers in the next
horizontal line, are made from the numbers in the first, by subtracting from
each the index of that power of 2 which stands above it. And for the rest of
the table, the formation of it is obvious from this principle, which reigns
through the whole, that every number in it is the sum of two others, namely of
the next to it on the left in the same horizontal line, and the next above that
in the same vertical column. So that the whole table is formed from a few of
its initial numbers, by easy operations of addition.

In converging series, it will be farther useful, first to collect a few of the
initial terms into one sum, and then apply our method to the following terms,
which will be sooner valued because they will converge slower.

12. For the first example, let us take the very slowly converging series 1 - +
- + - + etc. which is known to express the hyp. log. of 2, which is =.69314718.

Here a = 1, b =, c =, d =, etc. and the value, as found by theorem the 1st,
2d, 3d, 4th, 10th, and 20th, will be thus: 1st, a/2 = =.5. 2d, ^. 3d, ^. 4th,
^. 10th, ^. 20th, ^.
Where it is evident that every theorem gives always a nearer value than the
former: the 10th theorem gives the value true to the 4th figure, and the 20th
theorem to the 8th figure. The operation for the 10th and 20th theorems, will
be easily performed by dividing, mentally, the numbers in their respective
columns in the table of coefficients in Art. 11, by the ordinate numbers 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, etc. placing the quotients of the alternate terms below each other,
then adding each up, and dividing the difference of the sums continually five
or ten times successively by the number 4: after the manner as here placed
below, where the operation is set down for both of them.

1. For the 10th Theorem. ^

2. For the 20th Theorem. ^

Again, to perform the operation by taking the successive sums, and the
arithmetical means: let the terms,,, etc. be reduced to decimal numbers, by
dividing the common numerator 1 by the denominators 2, 3, 4, etc. or rather by
taking these out of the table at the end of my Miscellanea Mathematica,
published in 1775, which contains a table of the square roots and reciprocals
of all the numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. to 1000, and which is of great use
in such calculations as these. Then the operation will stand thus: ^ Here,
after collecting the first twelve terms, I begin at the bottom, and, ascending
upwards, take a very few arithmetical means between the successive sums,
placing them on the right of them: it being unnecessary to take the means of
the whole, as any part of them will do the business, but the lower ones in a
converging series best, because they are nearer the value sought, and approach
sooner to it. I then take the means of the first means, and the means of these
again, and so on, till the value is obtained as near as may be necessary. In
this process we soon distinguish whereabouts the value lies, the limits or
means, which are alternately above and below it, gradually contracting, and
approaching toward each other. And when the means are reduced to a single one,
and it is found necessary to get the value more exactly, I then go back to the
columns of successive sums, and find another first mean, either next below or
above those before found, and continue it through the 2d, 3d, etc. means, which
makes now a duplicate in the last column of means, and the mean between them
gives another single mean of the next order; and so on as far as we see it
necessary. By such a gradual progress we use no more terms nor labor than is
quite requisite for the degree of accuracy required.

Or, after having collected the sum of any number of terms, we may apply any of
the formulae to the following terms. So, having as above found.653211 for the
sum of the first 12 terms, and calling the next or 13th term.076923 = a, the
14th term.0714285 = b, the next,.06666 etc. = c, and so on: then the 2d theorem
3 a- b/4 gives.039835, which added to.653211 the sum of the first 12 terms,
gives.693046, the value of the series true in three places of figures; and the
3d theorem ^ gives.039927 for the following terms, and which added to.653211
the sum of the first 12 terms, gives.693138, the value of the series true in
five places. And so on.

13. For a second example, let us take the slowly converging series 2/1 - 3/2 +
4/3 - 5/4 + 6/5 - 7/6 + etc. which is = + hyp. log. of 2 = 1.19314718. Then ^

Here, after the 3d column of means, the first four figures 1.193, which are
common, are omitted, to save room and the trouble of writing them so often
down; and in the last three columns, the process is repeated with the last
three figures of each number; and the last of these 147, joined to the first
four, give 1.193147 for the value of the series proposed. And the same value is
also obtained by the theorems used as in the former example.

14. For the third example let us take the converging series 1 - + - 1/7 + 1/9
- 1/11 + etc. which is =.7853981 etc. or of the circumference of the circle
whose diameter is 1. Here a = 1, b =, c =, etc. then turning the terms into
decimals, and proceeding with the successive sums and means as before, we
obtain the 5th mean true within a unit in the 6th place as here below: ^

15. To find the value of the converging series ^ which occurs in the
expression for determining the time of a body's descent down the arc of a
circle:

The first terms of this series I find ready computed by Mr. Baron Maseres, pa.
219 Philos. Trans. 1777; these being arranged under one another, and the sums
collected, etc. as before, give.834625 for the value of that series, being only
1 too little in the last figure.

^

16. To find the value of 1 - + - 1/16 + 1/25 - etc. consisting of the
reciprocals of the natural series of square numbers. ^ The last mean.822467 is
true in the last figure, the more accurate value of the series 1 - + 1/9 - 1/16
+ etc. being.8224670 etc.

17. Let the diverging series - + - + etc. be proposed; where the terms are the
reciprocals of those in Art. 13.

^

Here the successive sums are alternately + and -, as well as the terms
themselves of the proposed series, but all the arithmetical means are positive.
The numbers in each column of means are alternately too great and too little,
but so as visibly to approach toward each other. The same mutual approximation
is visible in all the oblique lines from left to right, so that there is a
general and mutual tendency, in all the columns, and in all the lines, to the
limit of the value of the series. But with this difference, that all the
numbers in any line descending obliquely from left to right, are on one side of
the limit, and those in the next line in the same direction, all on the other
side, the one line having its numbers all too great, while those in the next
line are all too little; but, on the contrary, the lines which ascend from
below obliquely toward the right, have their numbers alternately too great and
too little, after the manner of those in the columns, but approximating quicker
than those in the columns. So that, after having continued the columns of
arithmetical means to any convenient extent, we may then select the terms in
the last, or any other line obliquely ascending from left to right, or rather
beginning with the last found mean on the right, and descending toward the
left; then arrange those terms below one another in a column, and take their
continual arithmetical means, like as was done with the first successive sums,
to such extent as the case may require. And if neither these new columns, nor
the oblique lines approach near enough to each other, a new set may be formed
from one of their oblique lines which has its terms alternately too great and
too little. And thus we may proceed as far as we please. These repetitions will
be more necessary in treating series which diverge more; and having here once
for all described the properties attending the series, with the method of
repetition, we shall only have to refer to them as occasion shall offer. In the
present instance, the last two or three means vary or differ so little, that
the limit may be concluded to lie nearly in the middle between them, and
therefore the mean between the two last 144 and 150, namely 147, may be
concluded to be very near the truth, in the last three figures; for as to the
first three figures 193, I dropped the repetition of them after the first three
columns of means, both to save space, and the trouble of writing them so often
over again. So that the value of the series in question may be concluded to
be.193147 very nearly, which is = - + the hyp. log. of 2; or 1 less than its
reciprocal series in Art. 13.

18. Take the diverging series 5/4 - 5^7/4^6 + 5^7^9/4^6^8 - 5^7^9^11/4^6^8^10
+ etc. Here, first using some of the formulae, we have by the 1st, a/2 =.625
2d, ^ 3d, ^ 4th, ^ 5th, ^. etc.


Or, thus, taking the several orders of means, etc.

^

Here the successive sums are alternately + and -, but the arithmetical means
are all +. After the second column of means, the first two figures 56 are
omitted, being common; and in the last three columns the first three figures
569, which are common, are omitted. Toward the end, all the numbers, both
oblique and vertical, approach so near together, that we may conclude that the
last three figures 035 are all true; and these being joined to the first three
569, we have.569035 for the value of the series, which is otherwise found 2+2/6
=.56903559 etc.

19. Let us take the diverging series 22/1 - 32/2 + 42/3 - 52/4 + etc. or 4/1 -
9/2 + 16/3 - 25/4 + etc. or 4 - 4 + 5 - 6 + 7 - 8 + etc.

^

After the second column of means, the first four figures 1.943 are omitted,
being common to all the following columns; to these annexing the last three
figures 147 of the last mean, we have 1.943147 for the sum of the series, which
we otherwise know is equal to 5/4 + hyp. log. of 2. See Simp. Dissert. Ex. 2.
p. 75 and 76.

And the same value might be obtained by means of the formulae, using them as
before.

20. Taking the diverging series 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + 5 - etc. the method of means
gives us, ^

Where the second, and every succeeding column of means, gives for the value of
the series proposed.

In like manner, using the theorems, the first gives, but the second, third,
fourth, etc. give each of them the same value; thus: a/2 = ^ ^ ^. etc.


21. Taking the series 1 - 4 + 9 - 16 + 25 - 36 + etc. whose terms consist of
the squares of the natural series of numbers, we have, by the arithmetical
means, ^

Where it is only in the second column of means that the divergency is
counteracted; after that the third and all the other orders of means give o for
the value of the series 1 - 4 + 9 - 16 + etc.

The same thing takes place on using the formulae, for a/2 = ^ ^ ^
where the third and all after it give the same value 0.

22. Taking the geometrical series of terms 1 - 2 + 4 - 8 + etc. then ^

Here the lower parts of all the columns of means, from the cipher 0 downwards,
consist of the same series of terms + 1 - 1 + 3 - 5 + 11 - 21 + 43 - 85 + etc.
and the other part of the columns, from the cipher upwards, as well as each
line of oblique means, parallel to, and above the line of ciphers, forms a
series of terms,,, 5/16..... ^ 2n +/- 1/2n, alternately above and below the
value of the series,, and approaching continually nearer and nearer to it, and
which, when infinitely continued, or when n is infinite, the term becomes for
the value of the geometrical series, 1 - 2 + 4 - 8 + 16 - etc.

And the same set of terms would be given by each of the formulae.

23. Take the geometrical series 1 - 3 + 9 - 27 + 81 - etc. Then ^ Here the
column of successive sums, and every second column of the arithmetical means,
below the o, consists of the same series of terms 1, - 2, + 7, - 20, + etc.
whilst all the other columns of means consist of this other set of terms, -, +
2, - 6, + etc. also the first oblique line of means,, 0,, 0,, 0, etc. consists
of the terms and 0 alternately, which are all at equal distance from the value
of the series proposed 1 - 3 + 9 - 27 + 81 - etc. as indeed are the terms of
all the other oblique descending lines. And the mean between every two terms
gives for that value. And the same terms would be given by the formulae, namely
alternately and 0.

And thus the value of any geometrical series, whose ratio or second term is r,
will be found to be = 1/1+ r.

24. Finally, let there be taken the hypergeometrical series 1 - 1 + 2 - 6 + 24
- 120 + etc. = 1 - 1 A + 2 B - 3 C + 4 D - 5 E + etc. which difficult series
has been honored by a very considerable memoir written upon the valuation of
it by the late famous L. Euler, in the New Petersburg Commentaries, vol. v.
where the value of it is at length determined to be.5963473 etc.

To simplify this series, let us omit the first two terms 1 - 1 = 0, which will
not alter the value, and divide the remaining terms by 2, and the quotients
will give 1 - 3 + 12 - 60 + 360 - 2520 + etc. which, being half the proposed
series, ought to have for its value the half of.596347 etc. namely.298174
nearly.

Now, ranging the terms in a column, and taking the sums and means as usual, we
have ^ Where it is evident, that the diverging is somewhat diminished, but not
quite counteracted, in the columns and oblique descending lines from beginning
to end, as the terms in those directions still increase, though not quite so
fast as the original series; and that the signs of the same terms are
alternately + and -, while those of the terms in the other lines obliquely
ascending from left to right, are alternately one line all +, and another line
all -, and these terms continually decreasing. The terms in the oblique
descending lines, being alternately too great and too little, are the fittest
to proceed with again. Take therefore any one of those lines, as suppose the
first, and ranging it vertically, take the means as before, and they will
approach nearer to the value of the series, thus: ^ Here the same approximation
in the lines and columns, toward the value of the series, is observable again,
only in a higher degree; also the terms in the columns and oblique descending
lines, are again alternately too great and too little, but now within narrower
limits, and the signs of the terms are more of them positive; also the terms in
each oblique ascending line, are still either all above or all below the value
of the series, and that alternately one line after another as before. But the
descending lines will again be the fittest to use, because the terms in each
are alternately above and below the value sought. Taking therefore again the
first of these oblique descending lines, treat it as before, and we shall
obtain sets of terms approaching still nearer to the value, thus: ^ Here the
approach to an equality, among all the lines and columns, is still more
visible, and the deviations restricted within narrower limits, the terms in the
oblique ascending lines still on one side of the value, and gradually
increasing, while the columns and the oblique descending lines, for the most
part, have their terms alternately too great and too little, as is evident from
their alternately becoming greater and less than each other: and from an
inspection of the whole, it is easy to pronounce that the first three figures
of the number sought, will be 298. Taking therefore the last sour terms of the
first descending line, and proceeding as before, we have ^

And, finally, taking the lowest ascending line, because it has most the
appearance of being alternately too great and too little, proceed with it as
before, thus: ^ where the numbers in the lines and columns gradually approach
nearer together, till the last mean is true to the nearest unit in the last
figure, giving us.298174 for the value of the proposed hypergeometrical series
1 - 3 + 12 - 60 + 360 - 2520 + 20160 - etc.

And in like manner are we to proceed with any other series whose terms have
alternate signs.

Royal Military Acad. Woolwich, May, 1780. POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the foregoing method was discovered, and made known to several friends,
two passages have been offered to my consideration, which I shall here mention,
in justice to their authors, Sir Isaac Newton, and the late learned Mr. Euler.

The first of these is in Sir Isaac's letter to Mr. Oldenburg, dated October
24, 1676, and may be seen in Collins's Commercium Epistolicum, p. 177, the last
paragraph near the bottom of the page, namely, Per seriem Leibnitii etiam, si
ultimo loco dimidium termini adjiciatur, and alia quaedam similia artificia
adhibeantur, potest computum produci ad multas figuras. The series here alluded
to, is 1 - + - 1/7 + 1/9 - 1/11 + etc. denoting the area of the circle whose
diameter is 1; and Sir Isaac here directs to add in half the last term, after
having collected all the foregoing, as the means of obtaining the sum a little
exacter. And this, indeed, is equivalent to taking one arithmetical mean
between two successive sums, but it does not reach the idea contained in my
method. It appears also, both by the other words, and alia quaedam similia
artificia adhibeantur, contained in the above extract, and by these, alias
arts adhibuissem, a little higher up in the same page 177, that Sir Isaac
Newton had several other contrivances for obtaining the sums of slowly
converging series; but what they were, it may perhaps be now impossible to
determine.

The other is a passage in the Novi Comment. Petropol. tom. v. p. 226, where
Mr. Euler gives an instance of taking one set of arithmetical means between a
series of quantities which are gradually too little and too great, to obtain a
nearer value of the sum of a series in question. But neither does this reach
the idea contained in my method. However, I have thought it but justice to the
characters of these two eminent men, to make this mention of their ideas, which
have some relation to my own, though unknown to me at the time of my discovery.



TRACT III.
A Method of summing the Series a + bx + cx2 + dx3 + ex4 + etc. when it
converges very slowly, namely, when x is nearly equal to 1, and the
Coefficients a, b, c, d, etc. decrease very slowly: the Signs of all the Terms
being positive.

Art. 1. WHEN we have occasion to find the sum of such series as that
abovementioned, having the coefficients a, b, c, d, etc. of the terms,
decreasing very slowly, and the converging quantity x pretty large; we can
neither find the sum by collecting the terms together, on account of the
immense number of them which it would be necessary to collect; neither can it
be summed by means of the differential series, because the powers of the
quantity x/1- x will then diverge faster than the differential coefficients
converge. In such case then we must have recourse to some other method of
transforming it into another series which shall converge faster. The following
is a method by which the proposed series is changed into another, which
converges so much the quicker as the original series is slower.

2. The method is thus. Assume a2/D the given series a + bx + cx2 + dx3 + etc.
Then shall ^; which, by actual division, is ^ Consequently a2 divided by this
series will be equal to the series proposed, and this new series will be very
easily summed, in comparison with the original one, because all the
coefficients after the second term are evidently very small; and indeed they
are so much the smaller, and fitter for summation, by how much the coefficients
of the original series are nearer to equality; so that when these a, b, c, d,
etc. are quite equal, then the third, fourth, etc. coefficients of the new
series become equal to nothing, and the sum accurately equal to ^; which we
also know to be true from other principles.

3. Although the first two terms, a - bx, of the new series be very great in
comparison with each of the following terms, yet these latter may not always be
small enough to be entirely rejected where much accuracy is required in the
summation. And in such case it will be necessary to collect a great number of
them, to obtain their sum pretty near the truth; because their rate of
converging is but small, it being indeed pretty much like to the rate of the
original series, but only the terms, each to each, are much smaller, and that
commonly in a degree to the hundredth or thousandth part.

4. The resemblance of this new series however, beginning with the third term,
to the original one, in the law of progression, intimates to us that it will be
best to sum it in the very same manner as the former. Hence then putting a = c
- b2/ a b = d - 2 bc/ a + b3/ a2 c = e - 2 bd+ c2/ a + 3 b2 c/ a2 - b4/ a3 etc.
and consequently the proposed series a + bx + cx2 + etc. = ^, by taking the
sum of the series a + b x + c x2 + etc. by the very same theorem as before, the
sum S of the original series will then be expressed thus, ^. where the series
in the last denominator, having again the same properties with the former one,
will have its first two terms very large in respect of the following terms. But
these first two terms, a - bx, are themselves very small in comparison with the
first two, a - bx, of the former series; and therefore much more are the third,
fourth, etc. terms of this last denominator very small in comparison with the
same a - bx: for which reason they may now perhaps be small enough to be
neglected.

5. But if these last terms be still thought too large to be omitted, then find
the sum of them by the very same theorem: and thus proceed, by repeating the
operation in the same manner, till the required degree of accuracy is obtained.
Which it is evident, will happen after a small number of repetitions, because
that, in each new denominator, the third, fourth, etc. terms are commonly
depressed, in the scale of numbers, two or three places lower than the first
and second terms are. And the general theorem, denoting the sum S when the
process is continually repeated, will be this, ^.

6. But the general denominator D in the fraction a2/D, which is assumed for
the value of S or a + bx + cx2 + etc. may be otherwise found as below; from
which the general law of the values of the coefficients will be rendered
visible. Assume S or a + bx + cx2 + etc. or ^; then shall ^ Hence, by equating
the coefficients of the like terms to nothing, we obtain the following general
values: a = c - bb/ a ^ ^ ^ ^ etc.
Where the values of the coefficients are the same in effect as before found,
but here the law of their continuation is manifest

7. To exemplify now the use of this method, let it be proposed to sum the very
slow series x + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6 + etc. when x = 9/10 =.9, which denotes
the hyperbolic log. of 1/1- x, or in this case of 10.

Now it will be proper, in the first place, to collect a few of the first terms
together, and then apply the theorem to the remaining terms, which, by being
nearer to an equality than the terms are near the beginning of the series, will
be fitter to receive the application of the theorem. Thus to collect the first
12 terms: No. Powers of x The first 12 terms, found by dividing x, x2, x3, etc.
by the numbers 1, 2, 3, etc. 1.9.9 2.81.405 3.729.243 4.6561.164025
5.59049.118098 6.531441.0885735 7.4782969.06832812857 8.43046721.05380840125
9.387420489.043046721 10.3486784401.03486784401 11.31381059609.02852823601
12.282429536481.02353579471 13.2541865828329 2.17081162555 the sum of 12 terms.
Then we have to find the sum of the rest of the terms after these first 12,
namely of x13 x: 1/13 + 1/14 x + 1/15 x2 + 1/16 x3 + etc. in which x =.9, and
x13 =.2541865828329; also a = 1/13, b = 1/14, c = 1/15, etc. and the first
application of our rule, gives, for the value of 1/13 + 1/14 x + 1/15 x2 + etc.
or S, ^ the second gives ^ the third gives ^ the fourth gives ^ Or, when the
terms in the numerators are squared, it is ^ Or, by omitting a proper number of
ciphers, it is ^

I have written an unknown quantity z after the last denominator, to represent
the small quantity to be subtracted from the last denominator 344. Now,
rejecting the small quantity z, and beginning at the last fraction to
calculate, their values will be as here ranged in the first annexed column.

^ placing z below them for the next unknown fraction. Divide then every
fraction by the next below it, placing the quotients or ratios in the next
column. Then take the quotients or ratios of these; and so on till the last
ratio ^; which, from the nature of the series of the first terms of every
column, must be less than the next preceding one 2.39: consequently z must be
less than 1.68x187/63, or less than 5. But, from the nature of the series in
the vertical row or column of first ratios, 187/ z must be less than 63; and
consequently z must be greater than 187/63, or greater than 3. Since then z is
less than 5 and greater than 3, it is probable that the mean value 4 is near
the truth: and accordingly taking 4 for z, or rather 4.3, as z appears to be
nearer 5 than 3, and taking the continual ratios, as placed along the last line
of the table, their values are found to accord very well with the next
preceding numbers, both in the columns and oblique rows.

Hence, using 043 for z in the denominator.344 - z of the last fraction of the
general expression, and computing from the bottom, upwards through the whole,
the quotients, or values of the fractions, in the inverted order, will be 213
12079 1223397.518414000
of which the last must be nearly the value of the series 1/13 + 1/14 x + 1/15
x2 + etc. when x =.9.

Then this value.518414 of the series, being multiplied by x13
or.2541865828329, gives.1317738 for the sum of all the terms of the original
series after the first 12 terms, to which therefore the sum of the first 12
terms, or 2.17081162, being added, we have 2.30258542 for the sum of the
original series x + x2 + x3 + x4 + etc. Which value is true within about 3 in
the 8th place of figures, the more accurate value being 2.30258509 etc. or the
hyp. log. of 10.

TRACT IV. The Investigation of certain easy and General Rules, for Extracting
any Root of a given Number.
1. THE roots of given numbers are commonly to be found, with much ease and
expedition, by means of logarithms, when the indices of such roots are simple
numbers, and the roots are not required to a great number of figures. And the
square or cubic roots of numbers, to a good practical degree of accuracy, may
be obtained, almost by inspection, by means of my tables of squares and cubes,
published by order of the Commissioners of Longitude, in the year 1781. But
when the indices of such roots are certain complex or irrational numbers, or
when the roots are required to be found to a great many places of figures, it
is necessary to make use of certain approximating rules, by means of the
ordinary arithmetical computations. Such rules as are here alluded to, have
only been discovered since the great improvements in the modern algebra: and
the persons who have best succeeded in their enquiries after such rules, have
been successively Sir Isaac Newton, Mr. Raphson, M. de Lagney, and Dr. Halley;
who have shown that the investigation of such theorems is also useful in
discovering rules for approximating to the roots of all sorts of affected
algebraical equations, to which the former rules, for the roots of all simple
equations, bear a considerable affinity. It is presumed that the following
short tract contains some advantages over any other method that has hitherto
been given, both as to the ease and universality of the conclusions, and the
general way in which the investigations are made: for here, a theorem is
discovered, which, although it be general for all roots whatever, is at the
same time very accurate, and so simple and easy to use and to keep in mind,
that nothing more so can be desired or hoped for; and farther, that instead of
searching out rules severally for each root, one after another, our
investigation is at once for any indefinite possible root, by whatever quantity
the index is expressed, whether fractional, or irrational, or simple, or
compound.

2. In every theorem, or rule, here investigated, let N be the given number,
whose root is sought, n the index of that root, a its nearest rational root, or
an; the nearest rational power to N, whether greater or less, x the remaining
part of the root sought, which may be either positive or negative, namely,
positive when N is greater than an, otherwise negative.
Hence then the given number N is ^, and the required root ^ = a + x.

3. Now, for the first rule, expand the quantity ^ by the binomial theorem, so
shall we have ^ Subtract an from both sides, so shall ^ Divide by ^, so shall ^
or ^ Here, on account of the smallness of the quantity x in respect of a, all
the terms of this series, after the first term, will be very small, and may
therefore be neglected without much error, which gives us ^ for a near value of
x, being only a small matter too great. And consequently ^ is nearly = N1/ n
the root sought. And this may be accounted the first theorem.

4. Again, let the equation ^ be multitiplied by n - 1, and an added to each
side, so shall we have ^ for a divisor: Also multiply the sides of the same
equation by a and subtract an + 1 from each, so shall we have ^ for a dividend:
Divide now this dividend by the divisor, so shall ^ Which will be nearly equal
to x, for the same reason as before; and this expression is nearly as much too
little as the former expression was too great. Consequently, by adding a, we
have a + x or N1/ n nearly ^ for a second theorem, and which is nearly as much
in defect as the former was in excess.

5. Now because the two foregoing theorems differ from the truth by nearly
equal small quantities, if we add together the two numerators and the two
denominators of the foregoing two fractional expressions, namely ^ and ^, the
sums will be the numerator and denominator of a new fraction, which will be
much nearer than either of the former. The fraction so found is ^; which will
be very nearly equal to N1/ n or a + x the root sought; for, by division, it is
found to be equal to a + x * - n-1/2 ^ n+1/6 ^ x3/ a2 + etc. where the term is
wanting which contains the square of x, and the following terms are very small.
And this is the third theorem.

6. A fourth theorem might be found by taking the arithmetical mean between the
first and second, which would be ^; which will be nearly of the same value,
though not so simple, as the third theorem; for this arithmetical mean is found
equal to a + x * + n-1/2 ^ n-2/3 ^ x3/ a2 + etc.

7. But the third theorem may be investigated in a more general way, thus:
Assume a quantity of this form ^, with coefficients p and q to be determined
from the process; the other letters N, a, n, representing the same things as
before; then divide the numerator by the denominator, and make the quotient
equal to a + x, so shall the comparison of the coefficients determine the
relation between p and q required. Thus, ^ ^ then dividing the former of these
by the latter, we have ^ or ^ Then, by equating the corresponding terms, we
obtain these three equations ^ = a, p- q/ p+ q n = 1, n-1/2 - qn/ p+ q = 0.


From which we find p- q/ p+ q = 1/ n and p q n + 1 n - 1. So that by
substituting n + 1 and n - 1, or any quantities proportional to them, for p and
q, we shall have ^ for the value of the assumed quantity ^, which is supposed
nearly equal to a + x, the required root of the quantity N.

8. Now this third theorem ^, which is general for roots, whatever be the value
of n, and whether an be greater or less than N, includes all the rational
formulas of De Lagney and Halley, which were separately investigated by them;
and yet this general formula is perfectly simple and easy to apply, and easier
kept in mind than any one of the said particular formulas. For, in words at
length, it is simply this: to n + 1 times N add n - 1 times an, and to n - 1
times N add n + 1 times an, then the former sum multiplied by a and divided by
the latter sum, will give the root N1/ n nearly; or, as the latter sum is to
the former sum, so is a, the assumed root, to the required root, nearly. Where
it is to be observed that an may be taken either greater or less than N, and
that the nearer it is to it, the better.

9. By substituting for n, in the general theorem, severally the numbers 2, 3,
4, 5, etc. we shall obtain the following particular theorems, as adapted for
the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, etc. roots, namely, for the 2d or square root, ^ 3d or
cube root, ^ 4th root ^ 5th root ^ 6th root ^ 7th root ^


10. To exemplify now our formula, let it be first required to extract the
square root of 365. Here N = 365, n = 2; the nearest square is 361, whose root
is 19.

Hence 3 N + a2 = 3 x 365 + 361 = 1456, and N + 3 a2 = 365 + 3 x 361 = 1448;
then as 1448 1456 19 19x182/181 = 19 19/181 = 19.10497 etc.

Again, to approach still nearer, substitute this last found root 19x182/181
for a, the values of the other letters remaining as before, we have a2 =
192x1822/1812 = 34582/1812; then 3N + a2 = 3 x 365 + 34582/1812 =
47831059/32761, N + 3 a2 = 365 + 3x34582/1812 = 47831057/32761;
hence 47831057 47831059 19x182/181 or 3458/181 3458x47831059/181x47831057 =
the root of 365 very exact, which being brought into decimals, would be true to
about 20 places of figures.

11. For a second example, let it be proposed to double the cube, or to find
the cube root of the number 2.

Here N = 2, n = 3, the nearest root a = 1, also a3 = 1. Hence 2 N + a3 = 4 + 1
= 5, and N + 2 a3 = 2 + 2 = 4; then as 4 5 1 5/4 = 1.25 = the first
approximation. Again, take a = 5/4, and consequently a3 = 125/64; Hence 2N + a3
= 4 + 125/64 = 381/64, and N + 2 a3 = 2 + 250/64 = 378/64; then as 378: 381, or
as 126 127 5/4 5/4 x 127/126 = 635/504 = 1.259921, for the cube root of 2,
which is true in the last figure.

And by taking 635/504 for the value of a, and repeating the process, a great
many more figures may be found.

12. For a third example, let it be required to find the 5th root of 2.

Here N = 2, n = 5, the nearest root a = 1.

Hence 3 N + 2 a5 = 6 + 2 = 8, and 2 N + 3 a5 = 4 + 3 = 7; then as 7 8 1 8/7 =
1 1/7 for the first approximation.

Again, taking a = 8/7, we have 3 N + 2 a5 = 6 + 65536/16807 = 166378/16807, 2
N + 3 a5 = 4 + 98304/16807 = 165532/16807; then as 165532 166378 8/7 8/7 x
83189/82766 = 4/7 x 83189/41383 = 332756/289681 = 1.148698 etc. for the 5th
root of 2, and is true in the last figure.

13. To find the 7th root of 126.

Here N = 126, n = 7, the nearest root a = 2, also a7 = 128.

Hence 4 N + 3 a7 = 504 + 384 = 888 = 4444/5, and 3 N + 4 a7 = 378 + 512 = 890
= 4453/5; then as 4453 4444 2 8888/4453 = 1.995957, for the root very exact by
one operation, being true to the nearest unit in the last figure.

14. To find the 365th root of 1.05, or the amount of 1 pound for 1 day, at 5
per cent. per annum, compound interest.

Here N = 1.05, n = 365, a = 1 the nearest root. Hence 366 N + 364 a = 748.3,
and 364 N + 366 a = 748.2; then as 748.2 784.3 1 7483/7482 = 1 1/7482 =
1.00013366, the root sought very exact at one operation.

15. Let it be required to find the value of the quantity ^ or ^.

Now this may be done two ways; either by finding the power or 3/2 root of 21/4
at once; or else by finding the 3d or cubic root of 21/4, and then squaring the
result.

By the first way: -- Here it is easy to see that a is nearly = 3, because 33/2
= 27 = 5 + some small fraction. Hence, to find nearly the square root of 27, or
27, the nearest power to which is 25 = a2 in this case: Hence 3 N + a2 = 3 x 27
+ 25 = 106, and N + 3 a2 = 27 + 3 x 25 = 102; then as 102: 106, or as 51 53 5 5
x 53/51 = 265/51 = 27 nearly.

Then having N = 21/4, n = 3/2, a = 3, and a3/2 = 265/51 nearly; it will be 5/2
N + a3/2 = 5/2 x 21/4 + x 265/51 = 6415/408, and N + 5/2 a5/2 = x 21/4 + 5/2 x
265/51 = 6371/408; hence as 6371 6415 3 19245/6371 = 3 134/6371 = 3.020719, for
the value of the quantity sought nearly, by this way.

Again, by the other method, in finding first the value of ^, or the cube root
of 21/4. It is evident that 2 is the nearest integer root, being the cube root
of 8 = a3.

Hence 2 N + a3 = 21/2 + 8 = 74/4, and N + 2 a3 = 21/4 + 16 = 85/4; then as 85
74 2 148/85 or = 7/4 nearly. Then taking 7/4 for a, we have 2 N + a3 = 21/2 +
343/64 = 1015,64, and N + 2 a3 = 21/4 + 2.343/64 = 1022/64; hence as 1022:
1015, or as ^ nearly. Consequently the square of this, or ^ will be = 72/42 x
1452/1462 = 1030225/341056 = 3 7057/341056 = 3.020690, the quantity sought more
nearly, being true in the last figure.

TRACT V. A new Method of finding, in finite and general Terms, near Values of
the Roots of Equations of this Form, ^; namely, having the Terms alternately
Plus and Minus.
1. THE following is one method more, to be added to the many we are already
possessed of, for determining the roots of the higher equations. By means of it
we readily find a root, which is sometimes accurate; and when not so, it is at
least near the truth, and that by an easy finite formula, which is general for
all equations of the above form, and of the same dimension, provided that root
be a real one. This is of use for depressing the equation down to lower
dimensions, and thence for finding all the roots one after another, when the
formula gives the root sufficiently exact; and when not, it serves as a ready
means of obtaining a near value of a root, by which to commence an
approximation still nearer, by the previously known methods of Newton, or
Halley, or others. This method is farther useful in elucidating the nature of
equations, and certain properties of numbers; as will appear in some of the
following articles. We have already easy methods for finding the roots of
simple and quadratic equations. I shall therefore begin with the cubic
equation, and treat of each order of equations separately, in ascending
gradually to the higher dimensions.

2. Let then the cubic equation x3 - px2 + qx - r = o be proposed. Assume the
root x = a, either accurately or approximately, as it may happen, so that x - a
= o, accurately or nearly. Raise this x - a = o to the third power, the same
dimension with the proposed equation, so shall x3 - 3 a x2 + 3 a2 x - a3 = o;
but the proposed equation is x3 - p x2 + q x - r = o; therefore the one of
these is equal to the other. But the first term ( x3) of each is the same; and
hence, if we assume the second terms equal between themselves, it will follow
that the sum of the two remaining terms will also be equal, and give a simple
equation by which the value of x is determined. Thus, 3 a x2 being = px2, or a
= p, we shall have 3 a2 x - a3 = qx - r, and hence ^, by substituting p, the
value of a, instead of it.

3. Now this value of x here found, will be the middle root of the proposed
cubic equation. For because a is assumed nearly or accurately equal to x, and
also equal to p, therefore x is = p nearly or accurately, that is, of the sum
of the three roots, to which the coefficient p of the second term of the
equation, is always equal; and thus, being a medium among the three roots, it
will be either nearly or accurately equal to the middle root of the proposed
equation, when that root is a real one.

4. Now this value of x will always be the middle root accurately, whenever the
three roots are in arithmetical progression; otherwise, only approximately. For
when the three roots are in arithmetical progression, p or of their sum, it is
well known, is equal to the middle term or root. In the other cases, therefore,
the above-found value of x is only near the middle root.

5. When the roots are in arithmetical progression, because the middle term or
root is then = p, and also ^, therefore ^, or ^, an equation expressing the
general relation of p, q, and r; where p is the sum of any three terms in
arithmetical progression, q the sum of their three rectangles, and r the
product of all the three. For, in any equation, the coefficient p of the second
term, is the sum of the roots; the coefficient q of the third term, is the sum
of the rectangles of the roots; and the coefficient r of the fourth term, is
the sum of the solids of the roots, which in the case of the cubic equation is
only one: -- Thus, if the roots, or arithmetical terms, be 1, 2, 3. Here p = 1
+ 2 + 3 = 6, q = 1 x 2 + 1 x 3 + 2 x 3 = 2 + 3 + 6 = 11, r = 1 x 2 x 3 = 6;
then 2 p3 = 2 x 63 = 432, and ^ also.

6. To illustrate now the rule ^ by some examples; let us in the first place
take the equation x3 - 6 x2 + 11 x - 6 = 0. Here p = 6, q = 11, and r = 6;
consequently ^. This being substituted for x in the given equation, makes all
the terms to vanish, and therefore it is an exact root, and the roots will be
in arithmetical progression. Dividing therefore the given equation by x - 2 =
0, the quotient is x2 - 4 x + 3 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are
3 and 1, the other two roots of the proposed equation x3 - 6 x2 + 11 x - 6 = 0.

7. If the equation be x3 - 39 x2 + 479 x - 1881 = 0; we shall have p = 39, q =
479, and r = 1881; then ^. Then, substituting 11 2/7 for x in the proposed
equation, the negative terms are sound to exceed the positive terms by 5,
thereby showing that 11 2/7 is very near, but something above, the middle root,
and that therefore the roots are not in arithmetical progression. It is
therefore probable that 11 may be the true value of the root, and on trial it
is found to succeed.

Then dividing x3 - 39 x2 + 479 x - 1881 by x - 11, the quotient is x^ - 28 x +
171 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are 9 and 19, the two other
roots of the proposed equation.

8. If the equation be x2 - 6 x2 + 9 x - 2 = 0; we shall have p = 6, q = 9, and
r = 2; then ^. This value of x being substituted for it in the proposed
equation, causes all the terms to vanish, as it ought, thereby showing that 2
is the middle root, and that the roots are in arithmetical progression.

Accordingly, dividing the given quantity x3 - 6 x2 + 9 x - 2 by x - 2, the
quotient is x^ - 4 x + 1 = 0, a quadratic equation, whose roots are 2 + 2 and 2
- 2, the two other roots of the equation proposed.

9. If the equation be x3 - 5 x2 + 5 x - 1 = 0; we shall have p = 5, q = 5, and
r = 1; then ^. From which one might guess the root ought to be 1, and which
being tried, is found to succeed.

But without such trial, we may make use of this value 1 4/45, or 1 1/^^
nearly, and approximate with it in the common way.

Having found the middle root to be 1, divide the given quantity x3 - 5 x2 + 5
x - 1 by x - 1, and the quotient is x2 - 4 x + 1 = 0, the roots of which are 2
+ 2 and 2 - 2, the two other roots, as in the last article.

10. If the equation be x3 - 7 x2 + 18 x - 18 = 0; we shall have p = 7, q = 18,
and r = 18; then ^ or 3 nearly. Then trying 3 for x, it is found to succeed.
And dividing x3 - 7 x2 + 18 x - 18 by x - 3, the quotient is x^ - 4 x + 6 = 0,
a quadratic equation whose roots are 2 + -2 and 2 - -2, the two other roots of
the proposed equation, which are both impossible or imaginary.

11. If the equation be x3 - 6 x2 + 14 x - 12 = 0; we shall have p = 6, q = 14,
and r = 12; then ^. Which being substituted for x, it is found to answer, the
sum of the terms coming out = 0. Therefore the roots are in arithmetical
progression. And, accordingly, by dividing x3 - 6 x2 + 14 x - 12 by x - 2, the
quotient is x2 - 4 x + 6 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are 2 + -2
and 2 - -2, the two other roots of the proposed equation, and the common
difference of the three roots is -2.

12. But if the equation be x3 - 8 x2 + 22 x - 24 = 0; we shall have p = 8, q =
22, and r = 24; then ^. Which being substituted for x in the proposed equation,
the sum of the terms differs very widely from the truth, thereby showing that
the middle root of the equation is an imaginary one, as it is indeed, the three
roots being 4, and 2 + -2, and 2 - -2.

13. In Art. 2 the value of x was determined by assuming the second terms of
the two equations equal to each other. But a like near value might be
determined by assuming either the two third terms, or the two sourth terms
equal.

Thus the equations being x3 - 3 ax2 + 3 a2 x - a3 = 0, x3 - px2 + qx - r = 0,
if we assume the third terms 3 a2 x and qx equal, or a = q, the sums of the
second and fourth terms will be equal, namely, 3 ax2 + a3 = px2 + r; and hence
we find ^ by substituting q the value of a instead of it.

And if we assume the fourth terms equal, namely a3 = r, or 3 r, then the sums
of the second and third terms will be equal, namely, 3 ax - 3 a2 = px - q; and
hence ^, by substituting r instead of a. And either of these two formulas will
give nearly the same value of the root as the first formula, at least when the
roots do not differ very greatly from one another.

But if they differ very much among themselves, the first formula will not be
so accurate as these two others, because that in them the roots were more
complexly mixed together; for the second formula is drawn from the coefficient
of the third term, which is the sum of all the rectangles of the roots; and the
third formula is drawn from the coefficient of the last term, which is equal to
the continual product of all the roots; while the first formula is drawn from
the coefficient of the second term, which is simply the sum of the roots. And
indeed the last theorem is commonly the nearest of all. So that when we suspect
the roots to be very wide of each other, let either the second or third be used.

Thus, in the equation x3 - 23 x2 + 62 x - 40 = 0, whose three roots are 1, 2,
and 20. Here p = 23, q = 62, r = 40; and by the 1st theor. ^ nearly, 2d theor.
^ nearly, 3d theor. ^ nearly.
Where the two latter are much nearer the middle root (2) than the first. And
the mean between these two is 2 1/42, which is very near to that root. And this
is commonly the case, the one being nearly as much too great as the other is
too little.

14. To proceed now, in like manner, to the biquadratic equation, which is of
this general form x4 - px3 + qx2 - rx + s = 0.

Assume the root x = a, or x - a = 0, and raise this equation x - a = 0 to the
fourth power, or the same height with the proposed equation, which will give x4
- 4 ax3 + 6 a2 x2 - 4 a3 x + a4 = 0; but the proposed equation is x4 - px3 +
qx2 - rx + s = 0; therefore these two are equal to each other. Now if we assume
the second terms equal, namely 4 a = p, or a = p, then the sums of the three
remaining terms will also be equal, namely, ^; and hence ^, or ^ by
substituting p instead of a: then, resolving this quadratic equation, we find
its roots to be thus ^; or if we put A = 3/2 p2 - 4 q, B = p2 - 16 r, C = p4 -
256 s, the two roots will be ^.

15. It is evident that the same property is to be understood here, as for the
cubic equation in Art. 3, namely, that the two roots above found, are the
middle roots of the four which belong to the biquadratic equation, when those
roots are real ones; for otherwise the formulae are of no use. But however
those roots will not be accurate, when the sum of the two middle roots, of the
proposed equation, is equal to the sum of the greatest and least roots, or when
the four roots are in arithmetical progression; because that, in this case, p,
the assumed value of a, is neither of the middle roots exactly, but only a mean
between them.

16. To exemplify this formula ^, let the proposed equation be x4 - 12 x3 + 49
x2 - 78 x + 40 = 0. Then A = 3/2 p2 - 4 q = 122 x 3/2 - 4 x 49 = 216 - 196 =
20, B = p3 - 16 r = 123 - 16 x 78 = 1728 - 1248 = 480, C = p4 - 256 s = 124 -
256 x 40 = 20736 - 10240 = 10496. Hence ^ nearly, or 4 and 1 nearly, or nearly
4 and 2, whose sum is 6. And trying 4 and 2, they are both found to answer, and
therefore they are the two middle roots.

Then ^, by which dividing the given equation x4 - 12 x3 + 49 x2 - 78 x + 40 =
0, the quotient is x2 - 6 x + 5 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are
5 and 1, and which therefore are the greatest and least roots of the equation
proposed.

17. If the equation be x4 - 12 x3 + 47 x2 - 72 x + 36 = 0; then A = 3/2 p2 - 4
q = 122 x 3/2 - 4 x 47 = 216 - 188 = 28, B = p3 - 16 r = 123 - 16 x 72 = 1728 -
1152 = 576, C = p4 - 256 s = 124 - 256 x 36 = 20736 - 9216 = 11520. Hence ^ and
2 1/7, or 3 and 2 nearly; both of which answer on trial; and therefore 3 and 2
are the two middle roots.

Then ^, by which dividing the given quantity x4 - 12 x3 + 47 x2 - 72 x + 36 =
0, the quotient is x2 - 7 x + 6 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are
6 and 1, which therefore are the greatest and least roots of the equation
proposed.

18. If the equation be x4 - 7 x3 + 15 x2 - 11 x + 3 = 0; we have A = 3/2 p2 -
4 q = 72 x 3/2 - 4 x 15 = 73 - 60 = 13, B = p3 - 16 r = 73 - 16 x 11 = 343 -
176 = 167, C = p4 - 256 s = 74 - 256 x 3 = 2401 - 768 = 1633. Hence ^ or nearly
2 and 1; both which are found, on trial, to answer; and therefore 2 and 1 are
the two middle roots sought.

Then ^, by which dividing the given equation x4 - 7 x3 + 15 x2 - 11 x + 3 = 0,
the quotient is x2 - 4 x + 1 = 0, the roots of which quadratic equation are 2 +
2 and 2 - 2, and which therefore are the greatest and least roots of the
proposed equation.

19. But if the equation be x4 - 9 x3 + 30 x2 - 46 x + 24 = 0; we have A = 3/2
p2 - 4 q = 92 x 3/2 -4 x 30 = 121 - 120 = 1, B = p3 - 16 r = 93 - 16 x 46 = 729
- 736 = - 7, C = p4 - 256 s = 94 - 256 x 24 = 6561 - 6144 = 417.
Hence ^, an imaginary quantity, showing that the two middle roots are
imaginary, and therefore the formula is of no use in this case, the four roots
being 1, 2 + -2, 2 - -2, and 4.

20. And thus in other examples the two middle roots will be found when they
are rational, or a near value when irrational, which in this case will serve
for the foundation of a nearer approximation, to be made in the usual way.

We might also find another formula for the biquadratic equation, by assuming
the last terms as equal to each other; for then the sum of the 2d, 3d, and 4th
terms of each would be equal, and would form another quadratic equation, whose
roots would be nearly the two middle roots of the biquadratic proposed.

21. Or a root of the biquadratic equation may easily be found, by assuming it
equal to the product of two squares, as ^. For, comparing the terms of this
with the terms of the equation proposed, in this manner, namely, making the
second terms equal, then the third terms equal, and lastly the sums of the
fourth and fifth terms equal, these equations will determine a near value of x
by a simple equation. For those equations are ^, ^, ^. Then the values of ab
and a + b, found from the first and second of these equations, and substituted
in the third, this gives ^, a general formula for one of the roots of the
biquadratic equation x4 - px3 + qx2 - rx + s = 0.

22. To exemplify now this sormula, let us take the same equation as in Art.
17, namely, x4 - 12 x3 + 47 x2 - 72 x + 36 = 0, the roots of which were there
found to be 1, 2, 3, and 6. Then, by our last formula we shall have ^, or
nearly 1, which is the least root.

23. Again, in the equation x4 - 7 x3 + 15 x - 11 x2 + 3 = 0, whose roots are
1, 2, 2 + 2, and 2 - 2, we have ^ nearly, which is nearly a mean between the
two least roots 1 and 2 - 2 or nearly.

24. But if the equation be x4 - 9 x3 + 30 x2 - 46 x + 24 = 0, which has
impossible roots, the four roots being 1, 2 + -2, 2 - -2, and 4; we shall have
^ nearly, which is of no use in this case of imaginary roots.

25. This formula will also sometimes fail when the roots are all real. As if
the equation be x4 - 12 x3 + 49 x2 - 78 x + 40 = 0, the roots of which are 1,
2, 4, and 5. For here ^, which is of no use.

26. For equations of higher dimensions, as the 5th, the 6th, the 7th, etc. we
might, in imitation of this last method, combine other forms of quantities
together. Thus, for the 5th power, we might compare it either with ^, or with
^, or with ^, or with ^. And so for the other powers.

TRACT VI. Of the Binomial Theorem. With a Demonstration of the Truth of it in
the General Case of Fractional Exponents.
1. IT is well known that this famous theorem is called binomial, because it
contains a proposition of a quantity consisting of two terms, as a radix, to be
expanded in a series of equal value. It is also called emphatically the
Newtonian theorem, or Newton's binomial theorem, because he has commonly been
reputed the author of it, as he was indeed for the case of fractional
exponents, which is the most general of all, and includes all the other
particular cases, of powers, or divisions, etc.

2. The binomial, as proposed in its general form, was, by Newton, thus
expressed ^; where P is the first term of the binomial, Q the quotient of the
second term divided by the first, and consequently PQ is the second term
itself; or PQ may represent all the terms of a multinomial, after the first
term, and consequently Q the quotient of all those terms, except the first
term, divided by that first term, and may be either positive or negative; also
m/ n represents the exponent of the binomial, and may denote any quantity,
integral or fractional, positive or negative, rational or surd. When the
exponent is integral, the denominator n is equal to 1, and the quantity then in
this form ^, denotes a binomial to be raised to some power; the series for
which was fully determined before Newton's time, as I have shown in the
historical introduction to my Mathematical Tables, lately published. When the
exponent is fractional, m and n may be any quantities whatever, m denoting the
index of some power to which the binomial is to be raised, and n the index of
the root to be extracted of that power: and to this case it was first extended
and applied by Newton. When the exponent is negative, the reciprocal of the
same quantity is meant; as ^ is equal to ^.

3. Now when the radical binomial is expanded in an equivalent series, it is
asserted that it will be in this general form, namely ^. where the law of the
progression is visible, and the quantities P, m, n, Q, include their signs + or
-, the terms of the series being all positive when Q is positive, and
alternately positive and negative when Q is negative, independent however of
the effect of the coefficients made up of m and n: also A, B, C, D, etc. in the
latter form, denote each preceding term. This latter form is the easier in
practice, when we want to collect the sum of the terms of a series; but the
former is the fitter for showing the law of the progression of the terms.

4. The truth of this series was not demonstrated by Newton, but only inferred
by way of induction. Since his time however, several attempts have been made to
demonstrate it, with various success, and in various ways; of which however
those are justly preferred, which proceed by pure algebra, and without the help
of fluxions. And such has been esteemed the difficulty of proving the general
case independent of the doctrine of fluxions, that many eminent mathematicians
to this day account the demonstration not fully accomplished, and still a thing
greatly to be desired. Such a demonstration I think I have effected. But before
I deliver it, it may not be improper to premise somewhat of the history of this
theorem, its rise, progress, extension, and demonstrations.

5. Till very lately the prevailing opinion has been, that the theorem was not
only invented by Newton, but first of all by him; that is, in that state of
perfection in which the terms of the series for any assigned power whatever,
can be found independently of the terms of the preceding powers; namely, the
second term from the first, the third term from the second, the fourth term
from the third, and so on, by a general rule. Upon this point I have already
given an opinion in the history to my logarithms, above cited, and I shall here
enlarge somewhat farther on the same head.

That Newton invented it himself, I make no doubt. But that he was not the
first inventor, is at least as certain. It was described by Briggs, in his
Trigonometria Britannica, long before Newton was born; not indeed for
fractional exponents, for that was the application of Newton, but for any
integral power whatever, and that by the general law of the terms as laid down
by Newton, independent of the terms of the powers preceding that which is
required. For as to the generation of the coefficients of the terms of one
power from those of the preceding powers, successively one after another, it
was remarked by Vieta, Oughtred, and many others, and was not unknown to much
more early writers on arithmetic and algebra, as will be manifest by a slight
inspection of their works, as well as the gradual advance the property made,
both in extent and perspicuity, under the hands of the successive masters in
arithmetic, every one adding somewhat more toward the perfection of it.

6. Now the knowledge of this property of the coefficients of the terms in the
powers of a binomial, is at least as old as the practice of the extraction of
roots; for this property was both the foundation, the principle, and the means
of those extractions. And as the writers on arithmetic became acquainted with
the nature of the coefficients in powers still higher, just so much higher did
they extend the extraction of roots, still making use of this property. At
first it seems they were only acquainted with the nature of the square, which
consists of these three terms, 1, 2, 1; and accordingly extracted the square
roots of numbers by means of them; but went no farther. The nature of the cube
next presented itself, which consists of these four terms, 1, 3, 3, 1; and by
means of these they extracted the cubic roots of numbers, in the same manner as
we do at present. And this was the extent of their extractions in the time of
Lucas de Burgo, an Italian, who, from 1470 to 1500, wrote several tracts on
arithmetic, containing the sum of what was then known of this science, which
chiefly consisted in the doctrine of the proportions of numbers, the nature of
figurate numbers, and the extraction of roots, as far as the cubic root
inclusively.

7. It was not long however before the nature of the coefficients of all the
higher powers became known, and tables formed for constructing them
indefinitely. For in the year 1543 came out, at Norimberg, an excellent
treatise of arithmetic and algebra, by Michael Stifelius, a German divine, and
an honest, but a weak, disciple of Luther. In this work, Arithmetica Integra,
of Stifelius, are contained several curious things, some of which have been
ascribed to a much later date. He here treats pretty fully and ably, of
progressional and figurate numbers, and in particular of the following table
for constructing both them and the coefficients of the terms of all powers of a
binomial, which has been so often used since his time for these and other
purposes, and which more than a century after was, by Pascal, otherwise called
the arithmetical triangle, and who only mentioned some additional properties of
the table. 1 2 3 3 4 6 5 10 10 6 15 20 7 21 35 35 8 28 56 70 9 36 84 126 126 10
45 120 210 252 11 55 165 330 462 462 12 66 220 495 792 924 13 78 286 715 1287
1716 1716 14 91 364 1001 2002 3003 3432 15 105 455 1365 3003 5005 6435 6435 16
120 560 1820 4368 8008 11440 12870 17 136 680 2380 6188 12376 19448 24310
Stifelius here observes that the horizontal lines of this table furnish the
coefficients of the terms of the correspondent powers of a binomial; and
teaches how to use them in extracting the roots of all powers whatever. And
after him the same table was used for the same purpose, by Cardan, and Stevin,
and the other writers on arithmetic. I suspect, however, that the nature of
this table was known much earlier than the time of Stifelius, at least so far
as regards the progressions of figurate numbers, a doctrine amply treated of by
Nicomachus, who lived, according to some, before Euclid, but not till long
after him according to others; and whose work on arithmetic was published at
Paris in 1538; and which it is supposed was chiefly copied in the treatise on
the same subject by Boethius: but I have never seen either of these two works.
Though indeed Cardan seems to ascribe the invention of the table to Stifelius;
but I suppose that is only to be understood of its application to the
extraction of roots. See Cardan's Opus Novum de Proportionibus, where he quotes
it, and extracts the table and its use from Stifelius's book. Cardan also, at
page 185, et seq. of the same work, makes use of a like table to find the
number of variations of things, or conjugations as he calls them.

8. The contemplation of this table has probably been attended with the
invention and extension of some of our most curious discoveries in mathematics,
both in regard to the powers of a binomial, with the consequent extraction of
roots, the doctrine of angular sections by Vieta, and the differential method
by Briggs and others. For, one or two of the powers or sections being once
known, the table would be of excellent use in discovering and constructing the
rest. And accordingly we find this table used on many occasions by Stifelius,
Cardan, Stevin, Vieta, Briggs, Oughtred, Mercator, Pascal, etc. etc.

9. On this occasion I cannot help mentioning the ample manner in which I see
Stifelius, at fol. 35, et seq. of the same book, treats of the nature and use
of logarithms, though not under the same name, but under the idea of a series
of arithmeticals, adapted to a series of geometricals. He there explains all
their uses; such as that the addition of them, answers to the multiplication of
their geometricals; subtraction to division; multiplication of exponents, to
involution; and dividing of exponents, to evolution. And he exemplifies the use
of them in cases of the Rule-of-Three, and in finding mean proportionals
between given terms, and such like, exactly as is done in logarithms. So that
he seems to have been in the full possession of the idea of logarithms, and
wanted only the necessity of troublesome calculations to induce him to make a
table of such numbers.

10. But although the nature and construction of this table, namely of figurate
numbers, was thus early known, and employed in the raising of powers, and
extracting of roots; yet it was only by raising the numbers one from another by
continual additions, and then taking them from the table for use when wanted;
till Briggs first pointed out the way of raising any horizontal line in the
foregoing table by itself, without any of the preceding lines; and thus
teaching to raise the terms of any power of a binomial, independent of any
other powers; and so gave the substance of the binomial series in words,
wanting only the notation in symbols; as I have shown at large at page 75 of
the historical introduction to my Mathematical Tables.

11. Whatever was known however of this matter, related only to pure or
integral powers, no one before Newton having thought of extracting roots by
infinite series. He happily discovered, that, by considering powers and roots
in a continued series, roots being as powers having fractional exponents, the
same binomial series would equally serve for them all, whether the index should
be fractional or integral, or the series be finite or infinite.

12. The truth of this method however was long known only by trial in
particular cases, and by induction from analogy. Nor does it appear that even
Newton himself ever attempted any direct proof of it. But various
demonstrations of this theorem have been since given by the more modern
mathematicians, of which some are by means of the doctrine of fluxions, and
others, more legally, from the pure principles of algebra only. Some of which I
shall here give a short account of.

13. One of the first was Mr. James Bernoulli. His demonstration is, among
several other curious things, contained in his little work called Ars
Conjectandi, which has been improperly omitted in the collection of his works
published by his nephew Nicholas Bernoulli. This is a strict demonstration of
the binomial theorem in the case of integral and affirmative powers, and is to
this effect. Supposing the theorem to be true in any one power, as for
instance, in the cube, it must be true in the next higher power; which he
demonstrates. But it is true in the cube, in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh powers, as will easily appear by trial, that is by actually raising
those powers by continual multiplications. Therefore it is true in all higher
powers. All this he shows in a regular and legitimate manner, from the
principles of multiplication, and without the help of fluxions. But he could
not extend his proof to the other cases of the binomial theorem, in which the
powers are fractional. And this demonstration has been copied by Mr. John
Stewart, in his commentary on Sir Isaac Newton's quadrature of curves. To which
he has added, from the principles of fluxions, a demonstration of the other
case, for roots or fractional exponents.

14. In No. 230 of the Philosophical Transactions for the year 1697, is given a
theorem, by Mr. De Moivre, in imitation of the binomial theorem, which is
extended to any number of terms, and thence called the multinomial theorem;
which is a general expression in a series, for raising any multinomial quantity
to any power. His demonstration of the truth of this theorem, is independent of
the truth of the binomial theorem, and contains in it a demonstration of the
binomial theorem as a subordinate proposition, or particular case of the other
more general theorem. And this demonstration may be considered as a legitimate
one, for pure powers, founded on the principles of multiplication, that is, on
the doctrine of combinations and permutations. And it proves that the law of
the continuation of the terms, must be the same in the terms not computed, or
not set down, as in those that are written down.

15. The ingenious Mr. Landen has given an investigation of the binomial
theorem, in his Discourse concerning the Residual Analysis, printed in 1758,
and in the Residual Analysis itself, printed in 1764. The investigation is
deduced from this lemma, namely, if m and n be any integers, and q = v/ x, then
is ^ which theorem is made the principal basis of his Residual Analysis.

The investigation is this: the binomial proposed being ^, assume it equal to
the following series 1 + ax + bx2 + cx3 etc. with indeterminate coefficients.
Then for the same reason as ^ will ^ Then, by subtraction, ^ And, dividing both
sides by x - y, and by the lemma, we have ^ Then, as this equation must hold
true whatever be the value of y, take y = x, and it will become ^ Consequently,
multiplying by 1 + x, we have ^, or its equal by the assumption, viz. ^ ^ Then,
by comparing the homologous terms, the value of the coefficients a, b, c, etc.
are deduced for as many terms as you compare.

And a large account is given of this investigation by the learned Dr. Hales,
in his Analysis Equationum, lately published at Dublin.

Mr. Landen then contrasts this investigation with that by the method of
fluxions, which is as follows. Assume as before; ^ Take the fluxion of each
side, and we have ^ Divide by x, or take it = 1, so shall ^

Then multiply by 1 + x, and so on as above in the other way.

16. Besides the above, which are the principal demonstrations and
investigations that have been given of this important theorem, I have been
shown an ingenious attempt of Mr. Baron Maseres, to demonstrate this theorem in
the case of roots or fractional exponents, by the help of De Moivre's
multinomial theorem. But, not being quite satisfied with his own demonstration,
as not expressing the law of continuation of the terms which are not actually
set down, he was pleased to urge me to attempt a more complete and satisfactory
demonstration of the general case of roots, or fractional exponents. And he
farther proposed it in this form, namely, that if Q be the coefficient of one
of the terms of the series which is equal to ^, and P the coefficient of the
next preceding term, and R the coefficient of the next followlowing term; then,
if Q be ^, to prove that R will be ^. This he observed would be quite perfect
and satisfactory, as it would include all the terms of the series, as well
those that are omitted, as those that are actually set down. And I was, in my
demonstration, to suppose, if I pleased, the truth of the binomial and
multinomial theorems for integral powers, as truths that had been previously
and perfectly proved.

In consequence I sent him soon after the substance of the following
demonstration; with which he was quite satisfied, and which I now proceed to
explain at large.

17. Now the binomial integral is ^. where a, b, c, etc. denote the whole
coefficients of the 2d, 3d, 4th, etc. terms, over which they are placed; and in
which the law is this, namely, if P, Q, R, be the coefficients of any three
terms in succession, and if g/ b P = Q, then is ^; as is evident; and which, it
is granted, has been proved.

18. And the binomial fractional is ^. in which the law is this, namely, if P,
Q, R be the coefficients of three terms in succession; and if g/ b P = Q, then
is ^. Which is the property to be proved.

19. Again, the multinomial integral is ^ ^ etc. Or, if we put a, b, c, d, etc.
for the coefficients of the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, etc. terms, the last series, by
substitution, will be transformed into this form, ^

20. Now, to find the series in Art. 18, assume the proposed binomial equal to
a series with indeterminate coefficients, as ^ Then raise each side to the n
power, so shall ^. But it is granted that the multinomial raised to any
integral power is proved, and known to be, as in the last Art. ^ It follows
then, that if this last series be equal to 1 + x, by equating the homologous
coefficients, all the terms after the second must vanish, or all the
coefficients b, c, d, etc. after the second term, must be each = 0. Writing
therefore, in this series, 0 for each of the letters b, c, d, etc. it will
become of this more simple form, ^. Put now each of the coefficients, after the
second term, = 0, and we shall have these equations ^ ^ ^ ^ etc. The resolution
of which equations gives the following values of the assumed indeterminate
coefficients, namely, ^, etc. which coefficients are according to the law
proposed, namely, when g/ h P = Q, then g- n/ h+ n Q = R. Q. E. D.

21. Also, by equating the second coefficients, namely, 1 = a = nA, we find A =
1/ n. This being written for A in the above values of B, C, D, etc. will give
the proper series for the binomial in question, namely ^.

Of the FORM of the ASSUMED SERIES.
22. In the demonstrations or investigations of the truth of the binomial
theorem, the but or object has always been the law of the coefficients of the
terms: the form of the series, as to the powers of x, having never been
disputed, but taken for granted, either as incapable of receiving a
demonstration, or as too evident to need one. But since the demonstration of
the law of the coefficients has been accomplished, in which the main, if not
the only, difficulty was supposed to consist, we have extended our researches
still farther, and have even doubted or queried the very form of the terms
themselves, namely, 1 + A x + B x2 + C x3 + D x4 + etc. increasing by the
regular integral series of the powers of x, as assumed to denote the quantity
^, or the n root of 1 + x. And in consequence of these scruples, I have been
required, by a learned friend, to vindicate the propriety of that assumption.
Which I think is effectually done as follows.

23. To prove then, that any root of the binomial 1 + x can be represented by a
series of this form 1 + x + x2 + x3 + x4 etc. where the coefficients are
omitted, our attention being now employed only on the powers of x; let the
series representing the value of ^ be 1 + A + B + C + D + etc. where A, B, C,
etc. now represent the whole of the 2d, 3d, 4th, etc. terms, both their
coefficients and the powers of x, whatever they may be, only increasing from
the less to the greater, because they increase in the terms 1 + x of the given
binomial itself; and in which the first term must evidently be 1, the same as
in the given binomial.

Raise now ^ and its equivalent series 1 + A + B + C + etc. both to the n power
by the multinomial theorem, and we shall have, as before, ^ Then equate the
corresponding terms, and we have the first term 1 = 1.

Again, the second term of the series n/1 A, must be equal to the second term x
of the binomial. For none of the other terms of the series are equipollent, or
contain the same power of x, with the term n/1 A. Not any of the terms A2, A3,
A4, etc. for they are double, triple, quadruple, etc. in power to A. Nor yet
any of the terms containing B, C, D, etc. because, by the supposition, they
contain all different and increasing powers. It follows therefore, that n/1 A
makes up the whole value of the second term x of the given binomial.
Consequently the second term A of the assumed series, contains only the first
power of x; and the whole value of that term A is = 1/ nx.

But all the other equipollent terms of the expanded series must be equal to
nothing, which is the general value of the terms, after the second, of the
given quantity 1 + x or 1 + x + 0 + 0 + 0 + etc. Our business is therefore to
find the several orders of equipollent terms of the expanded series. And these
I say will be as I have arranged them above, in which B is equipollent with A2,
C with A3, D with A4, and so on.

Now that B is equipollent with A2, is thus proved. The value of the third term
is 0. But ^ is a part of the third term. And it is only a part of that term:
otherwise ^ would be = 0, which it is evident cannot happen in every value of
n, as it ought; for indeed it happens only when n is = 1. Some other quantity
then must be equipollent with n/1 ^ n-1/2 A2, and must be joined with it, to
make up the whole third term equal to 0. Now that supplemental quantity can be
no other than n/1B: for all the other following terms are evidently plupollent
than B. It follows therefore, that B is equipollent with A2, and contains the
second power of x; or that ^, and consequently ^.

Again, the fourth term must be = 0. But the quantities n/1 ^ n-1/2 ^ n-2/3 A3
+ n/1 ^ n-1/2 AB are equipollent, and make up part of that fourth term. They
are equipollent, or A3 equipollent with AB, because A2 and B are equipollent.
And they do not constitute the whole of that term; for if they did, then would
n1 ^ n-1/2 ^ n-2/3 A3 + n/1 ^ n-1/2 AB be = 0 in all values of n, or n-2/3 A3 +
B = 0: but it has been just shown above, that n-1/2 A2 + B = 0; it would
therefore follow that n-2/3 would be = n-1/2, a circumstance which can only
happen where n = -1, instead of taking place for every value of n. Some other
quantity must therefore be joined with these to make up the whole of the fourth
term. And this supplemental quantity can be no other than n/1 c, because all
the other following quantities are evidently plupollent than A3 or AB. It
follows therefore, that C is equipollent with A3, and therefore contains the 3d
power of x. And the whole value of C is ^.

And the process is the same for all the other following terms. Thus, then, we
have proved the law of the whole series, both with respect to the coefficients
of its terms, and to the powers of the letter x.

TRACT VII. Of the Common Sections of the Sphere and Cone. Together with the
Demonstration of some other New Properties of the Sphere, which are similar to
certain Known Properties of the Circle.
THE study of the mathematical sciences is useful and profitable, not only on
account of the benefit derivable from them to the affairs of mankind in
general; but are most eminently so, for the pleasure and delight the human mind
feels in the discovery and contemplation of the endless number of truths that
are continually presenting themselves to our view. These meditations are of a
sublimity far above all others, whether they be purely intellectual, or whether
they respect the nature and properties of material objects: they methodise,
strengthen, and extend the reasoning faculties in the most eminent degree, and
so fit the mind the better for understanding and improving every other science;
but, above all, they furnish us with the purest and most permanent delight,
from the contemplation of truths peculiarly certain and immutable, and from the
beautiful analogy which reigns through all the objects of similar inquiry. In
the mathematical sciences, the discovery, often accidental, of a plain and
simple property, is but the harbinger of a thousand others of the most sublime
and beautiful nature, to which we are gradually led, delighted, from the more
simple to the more compound and general, till the mind becomes quite enraptured
at the full blaze of light bursting upon it from all directions.

Of these very pleasing subjects, the striking analogy that prevails among the
properties of geometrical figures, or figured extension, is not one of the
least. Here we often find that a plain and obvious property of one of the
simplest figures, leads us to, and forms only a particular case of, a property
in some other figure, less simple; afterward this again turns out to be no
more than a particular case of another still more general; and so on, till at
last we often trace the tendency to end in a general property of all figures
whatever.

The few properties which make a part of this paper, constitute a small
specimen of the analogy, and even identity, of some of the more remarkable
properties of the circle, with those of the sphere. To which are added some
properties of the lines of section, and of contact, between the sphere and
cone. Both which may be farther extended as occasions may offer: like as all of
these properties have occurred from the circumstance, mentioned near the end of
the paper, of considering the inner surface of a hollow spherical vessel, as
viewed by an eye, or as illuminated by rays, from a given point.

PROPOSITION I.
All the tangents are equal, which are drawn, from a given point without a
sphere, to the surface of the sphere quite around.

DEMONS. For, let PT be any tangent from the given point P; and draw PC to the
center C, and join TC. Also let CTA be a great circle of the sphere in the
plane of the triangle TPC. Then, CP and CT, as well as the angle T, which is
right (Eucl. iii. 18), being constant, in every position of the tangent, or of
the point of contact T; the square of PT will be every where equal to the
difference of the squares of the constant lines CP, CT, and therefore constant;
and consequently the line or tangent PT itself of a constant length, in every
position, quite round the surface of the sphere.

diagram

PROP. II.
If a tangent be drawn to a sphere, and a radius be drawn from the center to
the point of contact, it will be perpendicular to the tangent; and a
perpendicular to the tangent will pass through the center.

DEMONS. For, let PT be the tangent, TC the radius, and CTA a great circle of
the sphere in the plane of the triangle TPC, as in the foregoing proposition.
Then, PT touching the circle in the point T, the radius TC is perpendicular to
the tangent PT by Eucl. iii. 18, 19.

PROP. III.
If any line or chord be drawn in a sphere, its extremes terminating in the
circumference; then a perpendicular drawn to it from the center, will bisect
it: and if the line drawn from the center, bisect it, it is perpendicular to it.

DEMONS. For, a plane may pass through the given line and the center of the
sphere; and the section of that plane with the sphere, will be a great circle
(Theodos. i. 1), of which the given line will be a chord. Therefore (Eucl. iii.
3) the perpendicular bisects the chord, and the bisecting line is perpendicular.

COROL. A line drawn from the center of the sphere, to the center of any lesser
circle, or circular section, is perpendicular to the plane of that circle. For,
by the proposition, it is perpendicular to all the diameters of that circle.

PROP. IV.
If from a given point, a right line be drawn in any position through a sphere,
cutting its surface always in two points; the rectangle contained under the
whole line and the external part, that is the rectangle contained by the two
distances between the given point, and the two points where the line meets the
surface of the sphere, will always be of the same constant magnitude, namely,
equal to the square of the tangent drawn from the same given point.

DEMONS. Let P be the given point, and AB the two points in which the line PAB
meets the surface of the sphere: through PAB and the center let a plane cut the
sphere in the great circle TAB, to which draw the tangent PT. Then the
rectangle PA.PB is equal to the square of PT (Eucl. iii. 36); but PT, and
consequently its square, is constant by Prop. 1; therefore the rectangle PA.PB,
which is always equal to this square, is every where of the same constant
magnitude.

diagram

PROP. V.
If any two lines intersect each other within a sphere, and be terminated at
the surface on both sides; the rectangle of the parts of the one line, will be
equal to the rectangle of the parts of the other. And, universally, the
rectangles of the two parts of all lines passing through the point of
intersection, are all of the same magnitude.

DEMONS. Through any one of the lines, as AB, conceive a plane to be drawn
through the center C of the sphere, cutting the sphere in the great circle ABD;
and draw its diameter DCPF through the point of intersection P of all the
lines. Then the rectangle AP.PB is equal to the rectangle DP.PF (Eucl. iii. 35).

diagram

Again, through any other of the intersecting lines GH, and the center,
conceive another plane to pass, cutting the sphere in another great circle
DGFH. Then, because the points C and P are in this latter plane, the line CP,
and consequently the whole diameter DCPF, is in the same plane; and therefore
it is a diameter of the circle DGFH, of which GPH is a chord. Therefore, again,
the rectangle GP.PH is equal to the rectangle DP.PF (Eucl. iii. 35)

Consequently all the rectangles AP.PB, GP.PH, etc. are equal, being each equal
to the constant rectangle DP.PF.

COROL. The great circles passing through all the lines or chords which
intersect in the point P, will all intersect in the common diameter DPF.

PROP. VI.
If a sphere be placed within a cone, so as to touch it in two points; then
shall the outside of the sphere, and the inside of the cone, mutually touch
quite around, and the line of contact will be a circle.

DEMONS. Let V be the vertex of the cone, C the center of the sphere, T one of
the two points of contact, and TV a side of the cone. Draw CT, CV. Then TVC is
a triangle right-angled at T (Prop. 2). In like manner, t being another point
of contact, and Ct being drawn, the triangle tVC will be right-angled at t.
These two triangles then, TVC, tVC, having the two sides CT, TV, equal to the
two Ct, tV (Prop. 1), and the included angle T equal to the included angle t,
will be equal in all respects (Eucl. i. 4), and consequently have the angle TVC
equal to the angle tVC.

diagram

Again, let fall the perpendiculars TP, tP. Then the two triangles TVP, tVP,
having the two angles TVP and TPV equal to the two tVP and tPV, and the side TV
equal to the side tV (Prop. 1), will be equal in all respects (Eucl. i. 26);
consequently TP is equal to tP, and UP equal to UP. Hence PT, Pt are radii of a
little circle of the sphere, whose plane is perpendicular to the line CV, and
its circumference every where equidistant from the point C or V. This circle is
therefore a circular section both of the sphere and of the cone, and is
therefore the line of their mutual contact. Also CV is the axis of the cone.

COROL. 1. The axis of a cone, when produced, passes through the center of the
inscribed sphere.

COROL. 2. Hence also, every cone circumscribing a sphere, so that their
surfaces touch quite around, is a right cone; nor can any scalene or oblique
cone touch a sphere in that manner.

PROP. VII.
The two common sections of the surfaces of a sphere and a right cone, are the
circumferences of circles if the axis of the cone pass through the center of
the sphere.

DEMONS. Let V be the vertex of the cone, C the center of the sphere, and S one
point of the less or nearer section; draw the lines CS, CV. Then, in the
triangle CSV, the two sides CS, CV, and the included angle SCV, are constant
for all positions of the side US; and therefore the side US is of a constant
length for all positions, and is consequently the side of a right cone having a
circular base; therefore the locus of all the points S, is the circumference of
a circle perpendicular to the axis CV, that is, the common section of the
surfaces of the sphere and cone, is that circumference.

diagram

In the same manner it is proved that, if A be any point in the farther or
greater section, and CA be drawn; then VA is constant for all positions, and
therefore, as before, is the side of a cone cut off by a circular section whose
plane is perpendicular to the axis.

And these circles, being both perpendicular to the axis, are parallel to each
other. Or, they are parallel because they are both circular sections of the
cone.

COROL. 1. Hence SA = sa, because VA = Va, and US = Us.

COROL. 2. All the intercepted equal parts SA, sa, etc. are equally distant
from the center. For, all the sides of the triangle SCA are constant, and
therefore the perpendicular CP is constant also. And thus all the equal right
lines or chords in a sphere, are equally distant from the center.

COROL. 3. The sections are not circles, and therefore not in planes, if the
axis pass not through the center. For then some of the points of section are
farther from the vertex than others.

PROP. VIII.
Of the two common sections of a sphere and an oblique cone, if the one be a
circle, the other will be a circle also.

DEMONS. Let SAas and ASVa be sections of the sphere and cone, made by a common
plane passing through the axes of the cone and the sphere; also Ss, Aa the
diameters of the two sections. Now, by the supposition, one of these, as Aa, is
the diameter of a circle. But the angle VSs = the angle VaA (Eucl. i. 13, and
iii. 22), therefore Ss cuts the cone in sub-contrary position to Aa; and
consequently if a plane pass through Ss, and perpendicular to the plane AVa,
its section with the oblique cone will be a circle, whose diameter is the line
Ss (Apol. i. 5). But the section of the same plane and the sphere, is also a
circle whose diameter is the same line Ss (Theod. i. 1). Consequently the
circumference of the same circle, whose diameter is Ss, is in the surface both
of the cone and sphere; and therefore that circle is the common section of the
cone and sphere.

diagram

In like manner, if the one section be a circle whose diameter is Sa, the other
section will be a circle whose diameter is sA.

COROL. 1. Hence if the one section be not a circle, neither of them is a
circle; and consequently they are not in planes; for the section of a sphere by
a plane, is a circle.

COROL. 2. When the sections of a sphere and oblique cone are circles, the axis
of the cone does not pass through the center of the sphere, (except when one of
the sections is a great circle, or passes through the center). For the axis
passes through the center of the base, but not perpendicularly; whereas a line
drawn from the center of the sphere to the center of the base, is perpendicular
to the base, by Cor. to Prop. 3.

COROL. 3. Hence, if the inside of a bowl, which is a hemisphere, or any
segment of the sphere, be viewed by an eye not situated in the axis produced,
which is perpendicular to the section or brim; the lower, or extreme part of
the internal surface which is visible, will be bounded by a circle of the
sphere; and the part of the surface seen by the eye, will be included between
the said circle, and the border or brim, which it intersects in two points. For
the eye is in the place of the vertex of the cone; and the rays from the eye to
the brim of the bowl, and thence continued from the nearer part of the brim, to
the opposite internal surface, form the sides of the cone; which, by the
proposition, will form a circular arc on the said internal surface; because the
brim, which is the one section, is a circle.

And hence, the place of the eye being given, the quantity of internal surface
that can be seen, may be easily determined. For the distance and height of the
eye, with respect to the brim, will give the greatest distance of the section
below the brim, together with its magnitude and inclination to the plane of the
brim; which being known, common menfuration furnishes us with the measure of
the surface included between them. Thus, if AB be the diameter in the vertical
plane passing through the eye at E, also AFB the section of the bowl by the
same plane, and AIB the supplement of that arc. Draw EAF, EIB, cutting this
vertical circle in F and I; and join IF. Then shall IF be the diameter of the
section or extremity of the visible surface, and BF its greatest distance below
the brim, an arc which measures an angle double the angle at A.

diagram

COROL. 4. Hence also, and from Proposition 4, it follows, that if through
every point in the circumference of a circle, lines be drawn to a given point E
out of the plane of the circle, so that the rectangle contained under the parts
between the point E and the circle, and between the same point E and some other
point F, may always be of a certain given magnitude; then the locus of all the
points F will also be a circle, cutting the former circle in the two points
where the lines drawn from the given point E, to the several points in the
circumference of the first circle, change from the unequal to the concave side
of the circumference. And the constant quantity, to which the rectangle of the
parts is always equal, is equal to the square of the line drawn from the given
point E to either of the said two points of intersection.

And thus the loci of the extremes of all such lines, are circles.

PROP. IX. Prob.
To place a given sphere, and a given oblique cone, in such positions, that
their mutual sections shall be circles.

Let V be the vertex, VB the least side, and VD the greatest side of the cone.
In the plane of the triangle VBD it is evident will be found the center of the
sphere. Parallel to BD draw Aa the diameter of a circular section of the cone,
so that it be not greater than the diameter of the sphere. Bisect Aa with the
perpendicular EC; with the center A and radius of the sphere, cut EC in C,
which will be the center of the sphere; from which therefore describe a great
circle of it cutting the sides of the cone in the points S, s, A, a: so shall
Ss and Aa be the diameters of circular sections which are common to both the
sphere and cone.

diagram

NOTE. The substance of the above propositions was drawn up several years ago.
And Mr. Bonnycastle and Mr. George Sanderson have this day shown me the
solution of a question in the London Magazine for April 1777, in which a
similar section of a sphere with a cone, is proved to be a circle, and which I
had never seen before. Nor do I know of any other writings on the same subject.

July 29, 1785.
TRACT VIII. Of the Geometrical Division of Circles and Ellipses into any
Number of Parts, and in any proposed Ratios.
ART. 1. IN the year 1774 was published a pamphlet in octavo, with this title,
A Dissertation on the Geometrical Analysis of the Ancients. With a Collection
of Theorems and Problems, without Solutions, for the Exercise of Young
Students. This pamphlet was anonymous; it was however well known to myself and
several other persons, that the author of it was the late Mr. John Lawson, B.
D. rector of Swanscombe in Kent, an ingenious and learned geometrician, and,
what is still more estimable, a most worthy and good man; one in whose heart
was found no guile, and whose pure integrity, joined to the most amiable
simplicity of manners, and sweetness of temper, gained him the affection and
respect of all who had the happiness to be acquainted with him. His collection
of problems in that pamphlet concluded with this singular one, "To divide a
circle into any number of parts, which shall be as well equal in area as in
circumference. -- N. B. This may seem a paradox, however it may be effected in
a manner strictly geometrical." The solution of this seeming paradox he
reserved to himself, as far as I know. I fell upon the discovery however soon
after; and other persons might do the same. My resolution of it was published
in an account which I gave of the pamphlet in the Critical Review for 1775,
vol. xl. and which the author informed me was on the same principle as his own.
This account is in page 21 of that volume, and in the following words:

2. "We have no doubt but that our mathematical readers will agree with us in
allowing the truth of the author's remark concerning the seeming paradox of
this problem; because there is no geometrical method of dividing the
circumference of a circle into any proposed number of parts taken at pleasure,
and it does not readily appear that there can be any othermethod of resolving
the problem, than by drawing radii to the points of equal division in the
circumference. However another method there is, and that strictly geometrical,
which is as follows.

"Divide the diameter AB of the given circle into as many equal parts as the
circle itself is to be divided into, at the points C, D, E, etc. Then on the
diameters AC, AD, AE, etc. as also on BE, BD, BC, etc. describe semicircles, as
in the annexed figure: and they will divide the whole circle as required.

diagram

"For, the several diameters being in arithmetical progression, of which the
common difference is equal to the least of them, and the diameters of circles
being as their circumferences, these will also be in arithmetical progression.
But, in such a progression, the sum of the extremes is equal to the sum of each
two terms equally distant from them; therefore the sum of the circumferences on
AC and CB, is equal to the sum of those on AD and DB, and of those on AE and
EB, etc. and each sum equal to the semi-circumference of the given circle on
the diameter AB. Therefore all the parts have equal perimeters, and each is
equal to the circumference of the proposed circle. Which satisfies one of the
conditions in the problem.

"Again, the same diameters being as the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and the areas
of circles being as the squares of their diameters, the semicircles will be as
the numbers 1, 4, 9, 16, etc. and consequently the differences between all the
adjacent semicircles are as the terms of the arithmetical progression 1, 3, 5,
7, etc. and here again the sums of the extremes, and of every two equidistant
means, make up the several equal parts of the circle. Which is the other
condition."

3. But this subject admits of a more geometrical form, and is capable of being
rendered very general and extensive, and is moreover very fruitful in curious
consequences. For first, in whatever ratio the whole diameter is divided,
whether into equal or unequal parts, and whatever be the number of the parts,
the perimeters of the spaces will still be equal. For since circumferences of
circles are always as their diameters, and because AB and AD + DB and AC + CB
are all equal, therefore the semi-circumferences c and b + d and a + e are all
equal, and constant, whatever be the ratio of the parts AD, DC, CB, of the
diameter. We shall presently find too that the spaces TV, RS, and PQ, will be
universally as the same parts AD, DC, CB, of the diameter.

diagram

4. The semicircles having been described as before mentioned, erect CE
perpendicular to AB, and join BE. Then I say, the circle on the diameter BE,
will be equal to the space PQ. For, join AE. Now the space P = semicircle on AB
- semicircle on AC: but the semicir. on AB = semicir. on AE + semicir. on BE,
and the semicir. on AC = semicir. on AE - semicir. on CE, theref. semic. AB -
semic. AC = semic. BE + semicir. CE, that is the space P is = semic. BE +
semicir. CE; to each of these add the space Q, or the semicircle on BC, then P
+ Q = semic. BE + semic. CE + semic. BC, that is P + Q = double the semic. BE,
or = the whole circle on BE.

5. In like manner, the two spaces PQ and RS together, or the whole space PQRS,
is equal to the circle on the diameter BF. And therefore the space RS alone, is
equal to the difference, or the circle on BF minus the circle on BE.

6. But, circles being as the squares of their diameters, BE2, BF2, and these
again being as the parts or lines BC, BD, therefore the spaces PQ, PQRS, RS,
TV, are respectively as the lines BC, BD, CD, AD, And if BC be equal to CD,
then will PQ be equal to RS, as in the first or simplest case.

7. Hence, to find a circle equal to the space RS, where the points D and C are
taken at random: From either end of the diameter, as A, take AG equal to DC,
erect GH perpendicular to AB, and join AH; then the circle on AH will be equal
to the space RS. For, the space PQ: the space RS BC CD or AG, that is as BE2:
AH2 the squares of the diameters, or as the circle on BE to the circle on AH;
but the circle on BE is equal to the space PQ, and therefore the circle on AH
is equal to the space RS.

8. Hence, to divide a circle in this manner, into any number of parts, that
shall be in any ratios to one another: Divide the diameter into as many parts,
at the points D, C, etc. and in the same ratios as those proposed; then on the
several distances of these points from the two ends A and B, as diameters,
describe the alternate semicircles on the different sides of the whole diameter
AB: and they will divide the whole circle in the manner proposed. That is, the
spaces TV, RS, PQ, will be as the lines AD, DC, CB.

9. But these properties are not confined to the circle alone, but are to be
found also in the ellipse, as the genus of which the circle is only a species.
For if the annexed figure be an ellipse described on the axis AB, the area of
which is, in like manner, divided by similar semiellipses, described on AD, AC,
BC, BD, as axes, all the semiperimeters f, ae, bd, c, will be equal to one
another, for the same reason as before in Art. 3, namely, because the
peripheries of ellipses are as their diameters. And the same property would
still hold good, if AB were any other diameter of the ellipse, instead of the
axis; describing upon the parts of it semiellipses which shall be similar to
those into which the diameter AB divides the given ellipse.

diagram

10. And, if a circle be described about the ellipse, on the diameter AB, and
lines be drawn similar to those in the second figure; then, by a process the
very same as in Art. 4, et seq. substituting only semiellipse for semicircle,
it is found that the space PQ is equal to the similar ellipse on the diameter
BE, PQRS is equal to the similar ellipse on the diameter BF, RS is equal to the
similar ellipse on the diameter AH,
or to the difference of the ellipses on BF and BE; also the elliptic spaces
PQ, PQRS, RS, TV, are respectively as the lines BC, BD, DC, AD, the same ratio
as the circular spaces. And hence an ellipse is divided into any number of
parts, in any assigned ratios, in the same manner as the circle is divided,
namely, dividing the axis, or any diameter in the same manner, and on the parts
describing similar semiellipses.

TRACT IX. New Experiments in Artillery; for determining the Force of fired
Gunpowder, the Initial Velocity of Cannon Balls, the Ranges of Pieces of Cannon
at different Elevations, the Resistance of the Air to Projectiles, the Effect
of different Lengths of Cannon, and of different Quantities of Powder, etc. etc.
Sect. 1. AT Woolwich in the year 1775, in conjunction with some able officers
of the Royal Regiment of Artillery, and other ingenious gentlemen, I first
instituted a course of experiments on fired gunpowder and cannon balls. My
account of them was presented to the Royal Society, who honored it with the
gift of the annual gold medal, and printed it in the Philosophical Transactions
for the year 1778. The object of those experiments, was the determination of
the actual velocities with which balls are impelled from given pieces of
cannon, when fired with given charges of powder. They were made according to
the method invented by the very ingenious Mr. Robins, and described in his
treatise on the new principles of gunnery, of which an account was printed in
the Philosophical Transactions for the year 1743. Before the discoveries and
inventions of that gentleman, very little progress had been made in the true
theory of military projectiles. His book however contained such important
discoveries, that it was soon translated into several of the languages on the
continent, and the late samous Mr. L. Euler honored it with a very learned and
extensive commentary, in his translation of it into the German language. That
part of Mr. Robins's book has always been much admired, which relates to the
experimental method of ascertaining the actual velocities of shot, and in
imitation of which, but on a large scale, those experiments were made which
were described in my paper. Experiments in the manner of Mr. Robins were
generally repeated by his commentators, and others, with universal
satisfaction; the method being so just in theory, so simple in practice, and
altogether so ingenious, that it immediately gave the fullest conviction of its
excellence, and the eminent abilities of the inventor. The use which our author
made of his invention, was to obtain the real velocities of bullets
experimentally, that he might compare them with those which he had computed a
priori from a new theory of gunnery which he had invented, in order to verify
the principles on which it was founded. The success was fully answerable to his
expectations, and left no doubt of the truth of his theory, at least when
applied to such pieces and bullets as he had used. These however were but
small, being only musket balls of about an ounce weight: for, on account of the
great size of the machinery necessary for such experiments, Mr. Robins, and
other ingenious gentlemen, have not ventured to extend their practice beyond
bullets of that kind, but contented themselves with ardently wishing for
experiments to be made in a similar manner with balls of a larger sort. By the
experiments described in my paper therefore I endeavored, in some degree, to
supply that defect, having used cannon balls of above twenty times the size, or
from one pound to near three pounds weight. Those are the only experiments,
that I know of, which have been made in that way with cannon balls, although
the conclusions to be deduced from such a course, are of the greatest
importance in those parts of natural philosophy which are connected with the
effects of fired gunpowder: nor do I know of any other practical method besides
that above, of ascertaining the initial velocities of military projectiles
within any tolerable degree of the truth; except that of the recoil of the gun,
hung on an axis in the same manner as the pendulum; which was also first
pointed out and used by Mr. Robins, and which has lately been practiced also by
Benjamin Thompson, Esquire. in his very ingenious and accurate set of experiments
with musket balls, described in his paper in the Philosophical Transactions for
the year 1781. The knowledge of this velocity is of the greatest consequence in
gunnery: by means of it, together with the law of the resistance of the medium,
every thing is determinable which relates to that business; for, as I remarked
in the paper abovementioned on my first experiments, it gives us the law
relative to the different quantities of powder, to the different weights of
balls, and to the different lengths and sizes of guns, and it is also an
excellent method of trying the strength of different sorts of powder. Beside
these, there does not seem to be any thing wanting to answer every inquiry that
can be made concerning the flight and ranges of shot, except the effects
arising from the resistance of the medium.

2. In that course of experiments were compared the effects of different
quantities of powder, from two to eight ounces; the effects of different
weights of shot; and the effects of different sizes of shot, or different
degrees of windage, which is the difference between the diameter of the shot
and the diameter of the bore; all of which were found to observe certain
regular and constant laws, as far as the experiments were carried. And at the
end of each day's experiments, the deductions and conclusions were made, and
the reasons clearly pointed out why some cases of velocity differ from others,
as they properly and regularly ought to do. So that I am surprised how they
could be misunderstood by Mr. Templehof, captain in the Prussian artillery,
when speaking of the irregularities in such experiments, he says, (page 126 of
Le Bombardier Prussien, printed at Berlin, 1781) "La meme chose arriva a Mr.
Hutton, il la trouva de 626 pieds, and le jour suivant de 973 pieds, tout les
circonstances etant d'ailleurs egales:" which last words show that Mr. T. had
either misunderstood, or had not read the reason, which is a very sufficient
one, for this remarkable difference: it is expressly remarked in page 71 of my
paper in the Philosophical Transactions, that all the circumstances were not
the same, but that the one ball was much smaller than the other, and that it
had the less degree of velocity, 626 feet, because of the greater loss of the
elastic fluid by the windage in the case of the smaller ball. On the contrary,
the velocities in those experiments were even more uniform and similar
thancould be expected in such large machinery, and in a first attempt of the
kind too. And from the whole, the following important conclusions were fairly
drawn and stated, viz.

"(1.) And first, it is made evident by these experiments, that powder fires
almost instantaneously, seeing that almost the whole of the charge fires,
though the time be much diminished.

"(2.) The velocities communicated to shot of the same weight, with different
quantities of powder, are nearly in the subduplicate ratio of those quantities.
A very small variation, in defect, taking place when the quantities of powder
become great.

"(3.) And when shot of different weights are fired with the same quantity of
powder, the velocities communicated to them, are nearly in the reciprocal
sub-duplicate ratio of their weights.

"(4.) So that, universally, shot which are of different weights, and impelled
by the firing of different quantities of powder, acquire velocities which are
directly as the square roots of the quantities of powder, and inversely as the
square roots of the weights of the shot, nearly.

"(5.) It would therefore be a great improvement in artillery, to make use of
shot of a long form, or of heavier matter; for thus the momentum of a shot,
when fired with the same weight of powder, would be increased in the ratio of
the square root of the weight of the shot.

"(6.) It would also be an improvement, to diminish the windage: for, by so
doing, one third or more of the quantity of powder might be saved.

"(7.) When the improvements mentioned in the last two articles are considered
as both taking place, it is evident that about half the quantity of powder
might be saved; which is a very considerable object. But important as this
saving may be, it seems to be still exceeded by that of the guns: for thus a
small gun may be made to have the effect and execution of one of two or three
times its size in the present way, by discharging a long shot of two or three
times the weight of its natural ball, or round shot: and thus a small ship
might discharge shot as heavy as those of the greatest now made use of.

"Finally, as the above experiments exhibit the regulations with regard to the
weight of powder and balls, when fired from the same piece of ordnance; so by
making similar experiments with a gun, varied in its length, by cutting off
from it a certain part before each course of experiments, the effects and
general rules for the different lengths of guns, may be certainly determined by
them. In short, the principles on which these experiments were made, are so
fruitful in consequences, that, in conjunction with the effects of the
resistance of the medium, they seem to be sufficient for answering all the
inquiries of the speculative philosopher, as well as those of the practical
artillerist."

3. Such then was the state of the first set of experiments with cannon balls
in the year 1775, and such were the probable advantages to be derived from
them. I do not however know that any use has hitherto been made of them by
authority for the public service; unless perhaps we are to except the instance
of Carronades, a species of ordnance which has since been invented, and in
some degree adopted in the public service; for in this instance the proprietors
of those pieces, by availing themselves of the circumstances of large balls,
and very small windage, with small charges of powder, have been able to produce
very considerable and useful effects with those light pieces, at a very small
expense. Or perhaps those experiments were too much limited, and of too private
a nature, to merit a more general notice. Be that however as it may, the
present additional course, which is to make the subject of this tract, will
have very great advantages over the former, both in point of extent, variety,
improvements in machinery, and in authority. His Grace the Duke of Richmond,
the present master-general of the ordnance, in his indefatigable endeavors for
the good of the public service, was pleased to order this extensive course of
experiments, and to give directions for providing guns, and machinery, and
every thing complete and fitting for the proper execution of them.

4. This course of experiments has been carried on under the direction of Major
Blomefield, inspector of artillery, an officer of great professional merit, and
whose ingenious contrivances in the machinery do him great credit. It has been
our employment for three successive summers, namely, those of the years 1783,
1784, and 1785; and indeed it might be continued still much longer, either by
extending it to more objects, or to more repetitions of experiments for the
same object.

5. The objects of this course have been various. But the principal articles of
it as follows: (1.) The velocities with which balls are projected by equal
charges of powder, from pieces of the same weight and calibre, but of different
lengths. (2.) The velocities with different charges of powder, the weight and
length of the gun being the same. (3.) The greatest velocity due to the
different lengths of guns, to be obtained by increasing the charge as far as
the resistance of the piece is capable of sustaining. (4.) The effect of
varying the weight of the piece; every thing else being the same. (5.) The
penetration of balls into blocks of wood. (6.) The ranges and times of flight
of balls; to compare them with their initial velocities, for determining the
resistance of the medium. (7.) The effect of wads; of different degrees of
ramming, or compressing the charge; of different degrees of windage; of
different positions of the vent; of chambers, and trunnions, and every other
circumstance necessary to be known for the improvement of artillery.


Of the Nature of the Experiment, and of the Machinery used in it.
6. THE effects of most of the circumstances last mentioned are determined by
the actual velocity with which the ball is projected from the mouth of the
piece. Therefore the primary object of the experiments is, to discover that
velocity in all cases, and especially in such as usually occur in the common
practice of artillery. This velocity is very great; from one thousand to two
thousand feet or more, in a second of time. For conveniently estimating so
great a velocity, the first thing necessary is, to reduce it, in some known
proportion, to a small one. Which we may conceive to be effected in this
manner: suppose the ball, projected with a great velocity, to strike some very
heavy body, such as a large block of wood, from which it will not rebound, so
that after the stroke they may both proceed forward together with a common
velocity. By this means, it is obvious that the original velocity of the ball
may be reduced in any proportion, or to any slow velocity which may
conveniently be measured, by making the body struck to be sufficiently large:
for it is well known that the common velocity, with which the ball and the
block of wood would move on together after the stroke, bears to the original
velocity of the ball before the stroke, the same ratio which the weight of the
ball has to that of the ball and block together. Thus then velocities of one
thousand feet in a second are easily reduced to those of two or three feet
only: which small velocity being measured by any convenient means, let the
number denoting it be increased in the ratio of the weight of the ball to the
weight of the ball and block together, and the original velocity of the ball
itself will thereby be obtained.

7. Now this reduced velocity is rendered easy to be measured by a very simple
and curious contrivance, of Mr. Robins, which is this: the block of wood, which
is struck by the ball, instead of being left at liberty to move straight
forward in the direction of the motion of the ball, is suspended, like the
weight of the vibrating pendulum of a clock, by a strong iron stem, having a
horizontal axis at the top, on the ends of which it vibrates freely when struck
by the ball. The consequence of this simple contrivance is evident: this large
ballistic pendulum, after being struck by the ball, will be penetrated by it to
a small depth, and it will then swing round its axis, describing an arch, which
will be greater or less according to the force of the blow struck; and from the
magnitude of the arch described by the vibrating pendulum, the velocity of any
point of the pendulum can be easily computed: for a body acquires the same
velocity by falling from the same height, whether it descend perpendicularly
down, or otherwise; therefore, having given the length of the arc described by
the center of oscillation, and its radius, the versed sine becomes known, which
is the height perpendicularly descended by that point of the pendulum. The
height descended being thus known, the velocity acquired in falling through
that height becomes known also, from the common rules for the descent of bodies
by the force of gravity. And the velocity of this center, thus obtained, is to
be esteemed the velocity of the whole pendulum itself: which being now given,
that of the ball before the stroke becomes known, from the given weights of the
ball and pendulum. Thus then the determination of the very great velocity of
the ball is reduced to the mensuration of the magnitude of the arch described
by the pendulum, in consequence of the blow struck.

8. Now this arch may be determined in various ways: in the following
experiments it was ascertained by measuring the length of its chord, which is
the most useful line about it for making the calculation by; and this chord was
measured sometimes by means of a piece of tape or narrow ribbon, the one end of
which was fastened to the bottom of the pendulum, and the rest of it made to
slide through a small machine contrived for the purpose; and sometimes it was
measured by the trace of the fine point of a stylette in the bottom of the
pendulum, made in an arch concentric with the axis, and covered with a
composition of a proper consistence; which will be particularly described
hereafter.

9. Another similar method of measuring the great velocity of the ball is, by
observing the arch of recoil of the gun, when it is hung also after the manner
of a pendulum: for, by loading the gun with adventitious weight, it may be made
so heavy as to swing any convenient extent of arch we please, which arch it is
evident will be greater or less according to the velocity of the ball, or force
of the inslamed powder, since action and re-action are equal and contrary; that
is, the velocity of the ball will be greater than the velocity of the center of
oscillation of the gun, in the same proportion as the weight of the gun exceeds
the weight of the ball. And therefore, if the velocity of the center of
oscillation of the gun be computed, from the chord of the arc described by it
in the recoil, the velocity of the ball will be found by this proportion;
namely, as the weight of the ball is to the weight of the gun, so is the
velocity of the gun to the velocity of the ball: that is, if the weight of
powder had no effect on the recoil.

10. This description may suffice to convey a general idea of the nature and
principles of the experiment, for determining the velocity with which a ball is
projected, by any charge of powder, from a piece of ordnance. But it is to be
observed that, besides the center of oscillation, and the weights of the ball
and pendulum, or gun, the effect of the blow depends also on the place of the
center of gravity in the pendulum or gun, and that of the point struck, or the
place where the force is exerted; for it is evident that the arch of vibration
will be greater or less according to the situation of these two points also. It
will therefore be necessary now to give a more particular description of the
machinery, and of the methods of finding the aforesaid requisites; and then we
shall investigate our general rules for determining the velocity of the ball,
in all cases, from them and the chord of the arch of vibration, either of the
pendulum or gun.

Of the Guns, Powder, Balls, and Machinery employed in these Experiments.
11. FIVE very fine brass one-pounder guns were cast and prepared, in Woolwich
Warren, for these experiments, and bored as true as possible; the common
diameter of their bore being 2 inches and 2/100 parts of an inch. These five
guns are exactly represented in plate 1, with the scale of their dimensions, by
which they were drawn. Three of these, namely, no. 1, 2, 3, are nearly of the
same weight, but of the respective lengths of 15, 20, and 30 calibers; in order
to ascertain the effect of different lengths of bore, with the same weight of
gun, powder, and ball. The other two, no. 4 and 5, were heavier, and of 40
calibers in length; to obtain the effects of the longest pieces. No. 5 was more
expressly to show the effect of different lengths of the same gun: and for this
purpose, it was to be fired a sufficient number of rounds with its whole
length; and then to be successively diminished, by sawing off it 6 or 12 inches
at a time, till it should be all cut away: firing a number of rounds with it at
each length. And for the convenience of suspending this gun near its center of
gravity for all the different lengths of it, a long thin slip was cast with it,
extending along the under side of it, from the breech to almost the middle of
its length. By perforating this slip through with holes immediately under the
center of gravity for each length, after being cut, a bolt was to pass through
the hole, on which the gun might be suspended. The other guns were slung by
their trunnions.

The exact weight and dimensions of all these guns are exhibited in the
following table.

Length of the Diameter at the Diam. of the bore Weight No. of the gun Piece,
in Bore, in breech muzzle calib. inch calib. inch inch inch inch lb. 1 15 30.3
13.91 28.2 7.85 6.88 2.02 290 2 19.98 40.35 18.86 38.1 7.43 5.92 2.02 289 3
29.2 60 28.4 57.37 6.73 4.68 2.02 295 4 41.04 82.9 39.55 79.9 6.1 4.31 2.02 378
5 40.84 82.5 39.83 80.47 6.47 4 2.02 502

12. As these guns were to be slung by their trunnions, to observe the relation
between the velocity of the ball and the arch of recoil described by the gun,
vibrating on an axis, certain leaden weights were cast, to fit on very exactly
about the trunnions of the gun, to render it so heavy, as that the arch of
recoil might not be inconveniently great. These consisted, first of central
pieces to fit the trunnions, and then over them cylindrical rings of different
sizes, both turned to fit exactly; the whole being held firmly together by iron
bolts put into holes bored through all the pieces. These were also of different
sizes, so as to bring all the guns exactly up to the same weight; the whole
weight of each, together with 188 lb weight of iron, about the stem and
machine, by which the gun was slung, was 917 lb; with which weight most of the
experiments were made: notice being always taken when any alteration was made
in the weights, as well as in the other circumstances. The common weight of 917
lb is made up of the different guns and leads, and the common weight of iron,
as below: No. Guns Leads Iron Total 1 290 + 439 + 188 = 917 2 289 + 440 + 188 =
917 3 295 + 434 + 188 = 917 4 378 + 351 + 188 = 917 5 502 + 227 + 188 = 917
These were the weights at first; but soon after, the braces, or strengthening
rods of the gun frame, were made longer and thicker, which added 11 lb to their
weights, and then the whole weight of each was 928 lb.

13. In these experiments, the velocity of the ball, by which the force of the
powder is determined, was to be measured both by the ballistic pendulum into
which the ball was fired, and by the arch of recoil of the gun, which was hung
on an axis by an iron stem, after the same manner as the pendulum itself, and
the arcs vibrated in both cases measured in the same way. Plates 11 and 111
contain general representations of the machinery of both; namely, a side view
and a front view of each, as they hung by their stem and axis on the wooden
supports. In plate 11, fig. 1 is the side-view of the pendulum, and fig. 2 the
sideview of the gun, as slung in their frames. And in plate 111, fig. 1 and 2
are the front-views of the same.

14. In fig. 1, of both plates, A is the pendulous block of wood, into which
the balls are fired, strongly bound with thick bars of iron, and hung by a
strong iron stem, which is connected by an axis at top; the whole being firmly
braced together by crossing diagonal rods of iron. The cylindrical ends of the
axis, both in the gun and pendulum, were at first placed to turn upon smooth
flat plate-iron surfaces, having perpendicular pins put in before and behind
the sides of the axis, to keep it in its place, and prevent it from slipping
backwards and forwards. But, this method being attended with too much friction,
the ends of the axis were supported and made to roll upon curved pieces, having
the convexity upwards, and the pins, before and behind the axis, set so as not
quite to touch it; which left a small degree of play to the axis, and made the
friction less than before. But, still farther to diminish the friction, the
lower side of the ends of the axis was sharpened off a little, something like
the axis of a scale beam, and made to turn in hollow grooves, which were
rounded down at both ends, and standing higher in the middle, like the
curvature of a bent cylinder; by which means the edge of the axis touched the
grooves, not in a line, but in one point only; when it vibrated with very great
freedom, having an almost imperceptible degree of friction. The several times
and occasions when these, and other improvements, were introduced and used,
will be more particularly noticed in the journal of the experiments.

15. At first, the chord of the arc, of vibration and recoil, was measured by
means of a prepared narrow tape, divided into inches and tenths, as before. A
new contrivance of machinery was however made for it. From the bottom of the
pendulum, or gun-frame, proceeded a tongue of iron, which was raised or lowered
by means of a screw at B; this was cloven at the bottom C, to receive the end
of the tape, and the lips then pinched together by a screw, which held the tape
fast. Immediately below this the tape was passed between two slips of iron,
which could be brought to any degree of nearness by two screws; these pieces
were made to slide vertically up and down a groove in a heavy block of wood,
and fixed at any height by a screw D. One of these latter pieces was extended
out a considerable length, to prevent the tape from getting over its ends, and
entangling in the returns of the vibrations. The extent of tape drawn out in a
vibration, it is evident, is the chord of the arc described, and counted in
inches and tenths, to the radius measured from the middle of the axis to the
bottom of the tongue.

16. This method however was found to be attended with much trouble, and many
inconveniences, as well as doubts and uncertainty sometimes. For which reasons
we afterward changed this method of measuring the chord of vibration for
another, which answered much better in every respect. This consisted in a block
of wood, having its upper surface OF formed into a circular arc, whose center
was in the middle of the axis, and consequently its radius equal to the length
from the axis to the upper surface of the block. In the middle of this arch was
made a shallow groove of 3 or 4 inches broad, running along the middle, through
the whole length of the arch. This groove was filled with a composition of
soft-soap and wax, of about the consistence of honey, or a little firmer, and
its upper side smoothed off even with the general surface of the broad arch. A
sharp spear or stylette then proceeded from the bottom of the pendulum or
gun-frame, and so low as just to enter and scratch along the surface of the
composition in the groove, without having any sensible effect in retarding the
motion of the body. The trace remaining, the extent of it could easily be
measured. This measurement was effected in the following manner: -- A line of
chords was laid down upon the upper surface of the wooden arch, on each side of
the groove, and the divisions marked with lines on a ground of white paint: the
edge of a straight ruler being then laid across by the corresponding divisions,
just to touch the farthest extent of the trace in the composition, gave the
length of the chord as marked on the arch. To make the computations by the rule
for the velocity easier, the divisions on the chords were made exact thousandth
parts of the radius, which saved the trouble of dividing by the radius at every
operation. The manner in which I constructed this line of chords on the face of
the arch was this: The radius was made just 10 feet; I therefore prepared a
smooth and straight deal rod, upon which I set off 10 feet; I then divided each
foot into 10 equal parts, and each of these into 10 parts again; by which means
the whole rod or radius was divided into 1000 equal parts, being 100th parts of
a foot. I then transferred the divisions of the rod to the face of the arch in
this manner, namely; the first division of the rod was applied to the side of
the arch at the beginning of it, and made to turn round there as a center;
then, in that position, the rod, when turned vertically round that point,
always touched the side of the arch, and the divisions of it were marked on the
edge of the arch, successively as they came into a coincidence with it.

17. In fig. 2, plate 11, G shows the leaden weights placed about the
trunnions; H a screw for raising or depressing the breech of the gun, by means
of the piece 1 embracing the cascable, and moveable along the perpendicular arm
KL, to suit the different lengths of guns, and held to it by a screw passing
through the slit made along it.

The machines and operations for finding the ranges will be described hereafter.

Of the Centers of Gravity and Oscillation.
18. It being necessary to know the position of the centers of gravity and
oscillation, without which the velocity cannot be computed; these were commonly
determined every day as follows:

The center of gravity was found by one or both of these two methods. First, a
triangular prism of iron AB, being placed on the ground with one edge upwards,
the pendulum or gun-frame was laid across it, and moved backward or forward, on
the stem or block, as the case required, till the two parts exactly balanced
each other in a horizontal position. Then, as it lay, the distance was measured
from the middle of the axis to the part which rested on the edge of the prism,
or the place of the center of gravity, which is the distance g of that center
below the axis.

diagram

19. The other method is this: The ends of the axis being supported on fixed
uprights, and a chord fastened to the lower end of the block, or of the gun
frame, and passed over a pulley at P, different weights w were fastened to the
other end of it, till the body was brought to a horizontal position. Then,
taking also the whole weight of the body, and its length from the axis to the
bottom, where the chord was fixed, the place of the center of gravity is found
by this proportion: As p the weight of the pendulum: is to w the appended
weight so is d the whole length from the axis to the chord: to dw / p the
distance from the axis to the center of gravity.
Either of these two methods gave the place of the center of gravity
sufficiently exact; but the agreement of the results of both of them was still
more satisfactory.

20. To find the center of oscillation, the ballistic pendulum, or the gun, was
hung up by its axis in its place, and then made to vibrate in small arcs, for 1
minute, or 2, or 5, or 10 minutes; the more the better; as determined either by
a half second pendulum, or a stop watch, or a peculiar time-piece, measuring
the time to 40th parts of a second; and the number of vibrations performed in
that time carefully counted. Having thus obtained the time answering to a
certain number of vibrations, the center of oscillation is easily found: for if
n denote the number of vibrations made in s seconds, and l the length of the
second pendulum, then it is well known that n2 s2 l s2l / n2 the distance from
the axis of motion to the center of oscillation. And here if s be 60 seconds,
or one minute, and n the number of vibrations performed in 1 minute, as found
by dividing the whole number of vibrations, actually performed, by the whole
number of minutes; then is n2 602 l 3600 l/ nn the distance to the center of
oscillation. But, by the best observations on the vibration of pendulums, it is
found that l = 39 inches is the length of the second pendulum for the latitude
of London, or of Woolwich; and therefore ^ or 140850/ nn = 0, will be the
distance, in inches, or = 11737.5/ nn in feet, of the center of oscillation
below the axis. And by this rule the place of that center was found for each
day of the experiments.

Of the Rule for Computing the Velocity of the Ball.
21. Having described the methods of obtaining the necessary dimensions and
weights, I proceed now to the investigation of the theorem by which the
velocity of the ball is to be computed: and first by means of the pendulum.

The several weights and measures being found, let b denote the weight of the
ball, p the weight of the pendulum, g the distance to its center of gravity, o
the distance to its center of oscillation, i the distance to the point of
impact, or point struck, c the chord of the arch described by the pendulum, r
its radius, or distance to the tape or arch, v the initial or original velocity
of the ball.

Then, from the nature of oscillatory motion, bii will express the sum of the
forces of the ball acting at the distance i from the axis, and pgo the sum of
the forces of the pendulum, and consequently pgo + bii the sum for both the
ball and pendulum together; and if each be multiplied by its velocity, biiv
will be the quantity of motion of the ball, and ( pgo + bii) x z the quantity
for the pendulum and ball together; where z is the velocity of the point of
impact. But these quantities of motion, before and after the blow, must be
equal to each other, therefore ( pgo + bii) x z = biiv, and consequently z =
biiv/ pgo+ bii is the velocity of the point of impact. Now because of the
accession of the ball to the pendulum, the place of the center of oscillation
will be changed; and the distance y of the new or compound center of
oscillation will be found by dividing pgo + bii the sum of the forces, by pg +
by the sum of the momenta, that is y = pgo+ bii/ pg+ by is the distance of the
new or compound center of oscillation below the axis. Then, because biiv/ pgo+
bii is the velocity of the point whose distance is i, by similar figures we
shall have this proportion, as i pgo+ bii/ pg+ by (or y) biiv/ pgo+ bii biv/
pg+ by the velocity of this compound center of oscillation.

Again, by the property of the circle, 2 r c c cc/2 r, which will be the versed
sine of the described arc, to the chord c and radius r; and hence, by similar
figures, r: y or pgo+ bii/ pg+ by cc/2 r cc/2 rr x pgo+ bii/ pg+ by the
corresponding versed sine to the radius y, or the versed sine of the arc
described by the compound center of oscillation; which call v. Then, because
the velocity lost in ascending through the circular arc, or gained in
descending through the same, is equal to the velocity acquired in descending
freely by gravity through its versed sine, or perpendicular height, therefore
the velocity of this center of oscillation will also be equal to the velocity
generated by gravity in descending through the space v or cc2 rr x pgo+ bii/
pg+ by. But the space described by gravity in one second of time, in the
latitude of London, is 16.09 feet, and the velocity generated in that time
32.18; therefore, by the nature of free descents, 16.09 v 32.18 5.6727 c/ r
pgo+ bii/ pg+ by, the velocity of the same center of oscillation, as deduced
from the chord of the arc which is actually described.

Having thus obtained two different expressions for the velocity of this
center, independent of each other, let an equation be made of them, and it will
express the relation of the several quantities in the question: thus then we
have biv/ pg+ by = 5.6727 c/ r pgo+ bii/ pg+ by. And from this equation we get
^ the true expression for the original velocity of the ball the moment before
it strikes the pendulum. And this theorem agrees with those of Messrs. Euler
and Antoni, and also with that of Mr. Robins nearly, for the same purpose, when
his rule is corrected by the paragraph which was by mistake omitted in his book
when first published; which correction he himself gave in a paper in the
Philosophical Transactions for April 1743, and where he informs us that all the
velocities of balls, mentioned in his book, except the first only, were
computed by the corrected rule. Though the editor of his works, published in
1761, has inadvertently neglected this correction, and printed his book without
taking any notice of it. And that remark, had M. Euler observed it, might have
saved him the trouble of many of his animadversions on Mr. Robins's work.

22. But this theorem may be reduced to a form much more simple and fit for
use, and yet be sufficiently near the truth. Thus, let the root of the compound
factor ( pgo + bii) x ( pg + by) be extracted, and it will be equal to ( pg +
by ^ o+ i/20) x 0, within the 100000th part of the true value, in such cases as
commonly happen in practice. But since by ^ o+ i/20, in our experiments, is
usually but about the 500th, or 600th, or 800th part of pg, and since by
differs from by ^ o+ i/20 only by about the 100th part of itself, therefore pg
+ by is within the 50000th part of pg + by ^ o+ i/20. Consequently v = 5.6727 c
^ pg+ by/ bir o very nearly. Or, farther, if g be written for i in the last
term by, then finally v = 5.6727 gc ^ p+ b/ bir o; which is an easy theorem to
be used on all occasions; and being within the 5000th part of the true
quantity, it will always give the velocity true within less than half a foot,
even in the cases of the greatest velocity. Where it must be observed, that c,
g, i, r, may be taken in any measures, either feet or inches, etc. provided
they be but all of the same kind; but o must be in feet, because the theorem is
adapted to feet.

23. As the balls remain in the pendulum during the time of making one whole
set of experiments, both its weight and the position of the centers of gravity
and oscillation will be changed by the addition of each ball which is lodged in
the wood; and therefore p, g, o must be corrected after every shot, in the
theorem for determining the velocity v. Now the succeeding value of p is always
p + b; or p is to be corrected by the continual addition of b: and the
succeeding value of g is ^, or g + i- g/ p b nearly; or g is corrected by
adding always i- g/ p b to the next preceding value of g: and lastly, o is to
be corrected by taking for its new values successively ^, or by adding always
^, or i- o/ p b nearly, to the preceding value of o: so that the three
corrections are made by adding always, b to the value of p, i- g/ p x b to the
value of g, i- o/ p x b to the value of o.
That is, when b is very small in respect of p.

24. But as the distance of the center of oscillation o, whose square root is
concerned in the theorem for the velocity v, is found from the number of
vibrations n performed by the pendulum; it will be better to substitute, in
that theorem, the value of o in terms of n. Now by Art. 20, the value of o is
11737.5/ nn feet, and consequently o = 108.3398/ n; which value of o being
substituted for it in the theorem v = 5.6727 gc x p+ b/ bir o, it becomes v =
614.58 gc x p+ b/ birn, or 59000/96 x p+ b/ birn gc, the simplest and easiest
formula for the velocity of the ball in feet: where c, g, i, r may be taken in
any one and the same measure, either all inches, or all feet, or any other
measure.

25. It will be necessary here to add a correction for n instead of that for o
in Art. 23. Now, the correction for o being ^, and the value of n = 375.3/ o
inches, the correction for n will be ^ by substituting the value of o instead
of it: Which correction is negative, or to be subtracted from the former value
of n. The corrections for p and g being b and ^, as in Art. 23; which are both
additive. But the signs of these quantities must be changed when b is negative.

26. Before we quit this rule, it may be necessary here to advert to three or
four circumstances which may seem to cause some small error in the initial
velocity, as determined by the formula in Art. 24. These are the friction on
the axis, the resistance of the air to the back of the pendulum, the time which
the ball employs in penetrating the wood of the pendulum, and the resistance of
the air to the ball in its passage between the gun and the pendulum.

As to the first of these, namely, the friction on the axis, by which the
extent of its vibration is somewhat diminished; it may be observed, that the
effect of this cause can never amount to a quantity considerable enough to be
brought into account in our experiments; for, besides that care was taken to
render this friction as small as possible, the effect of the small part which
does remain is nearly balanced by the effect it has on the number n of
vibrations performed in a minute; for the friction on the axis will a little
retard its motion, and cause its vibrations to be slower, and sewer; so that c
the length of a vibration, and n the number of vibrations, being both
diminished by this cause, nearly in an equal degree, and c being a multiplier,
and n a divisor, in our formula, it is evident that the effect of the friction
in the one case operates against that in the other, and that the difference of
the two is the real disturbing cause, and which therefore is either equal to
nothing, or very nearly so.

27. The second cause of error is the resistance of the air against the back of
the pendulum, by which its motion is somewhat impeded. This resistance hinders
the pendulum from vibrating so far, and describing so large an arch, as it
would do if there was no such resistance; therefore the chord of the arc which
is actually described and measured, is less than it really ought to be; and
consequently the velocity of the ball, which is proportional to that chord,
will be less than the real velocity of the ball at the moment it strikes the
pendulum. And although the pendulum be very heavy, and its motion but slow, and
consequently the resistance of the air against it very small, it will yet be
proper to investigate the real effect of it, that we may be sure whether it may
safely be neglected or not.

In order to this, let the annexed figure represent the back of the pendulum,
moving on its axis; and put p = weight of the pendulum, a = DE its breadth, r =
AB the distance to the bottom, e = AC the distance to the top, x = AF any
variable distance, g = distance of the center of gravity, o = distance of the
center of oscillation, v = velocity of the center of oscillation, in any part
of the vibration, h = 16.09 feet, the descent of gravity in 1 second, c = the
chord of the arc actually described by the center of oscillation, and c = the
chord which would be described by it if the air had no resistance.

diagram

Then o x v vx/ o the velocity of the point F of the pendulum; and 4 h2 h v2
x2/ o2 v2 x2/4 ho2 the height descended by gravity to generate the velocity vx/
o. Now the resistance of the air to the line DFE is equal to the pressure of a
column of air upon it, whose height is the same v2 x2/4 ho2, and therefore that
pressure or weight is nav2 x2/4 ho2, where n is the specific gravity, or weight
of one cubic measure of air, or n = 62 / 850lb = 5/68lb. Hence then nav2 x2 x/4
ho2 is the pressure on DEed, and nav2 x3 x/4 ho2 the momentum of the pressure
on the same De, or the fluxion of the momentum on the block of the pendulum;
and the correct fluent gives ^ for the momentum of the air on the whole
pendulum, supposing that on the stem AC to be nothing, as it is nearly, both on
account of its narrowness, and the diminution of the momentum of the particles
by their nearness to the axis. Put now A = the compound coefficient ^, so shall
A v2 denote the momentum of the air on the back of the pendulum.

But the motion of the pendulum is also obstructed by its own weight, as well
as by the resistance of the air; and that weight acts as if it were all
concentered in the center of gravity, whose distance below the axis is g;
therefore pg is its momentum in its natural or vertical direction, and pgs its
momentum perpendicular to the motion of the pendulum, when s is the sine of the
angle which it makes at any time with the vertical position, to the radius 1.
Hence pgs + A v2 is the momentum of both the resistances together, namely that
of the pressure of the air, and of the weight of the pendulum. And consequently
pgs+A v2/ pg = s + A / pg v2 is the real retarding force to the motion of the
pendulum, at the center of oscillation; which force call f.

Now if z denote the arc described by the center of oscillation, when its
velocity is v, or z/ o the arc whose fine is s; we shall have ^, and, by the
doctrine of forces, ^.

But cc/ 2o is the versed sine or height of the whole arc whose chord is c, and
^ is the versed sine or height of the part whose sine is os, therefore ^ is
their difference, or the height of the remaining part, and is nearly equal to
the height due to the velocity v; therefore ^ nearly. Then by substituting this
for v2 in the value of vv, we have ^; and the fluents give ^; where Q is a
constant quantity by which the fluent is to be corrected. Now, substituting v2
for v2, and o for s, their corresponding values at the commencement of motion,
the above fluent becomes v2 = 4 ho + Q; from which the former subtracted, gives
^. And when v = o, or the pendulum is at the full extent of its ascent, then ^,
at which point os is the sine of the whole arc whose chord is c, and
consequently ^.

But the value of s being commonly small in respect of c/ o, we shall have
these following values nearly true, namely, ^, ^, z = os + os3, and 2 o2- c2/2
o2 z - os = - c2 s/2 o + 2 o2- c2/12 o s3, which values, by substitution, give
v2 = 2 hc2/ o + 16 h2 oA / pq ( c2 s/2 o - 2 o2- c2/12 o s3).

But c2/2 o is the versed sine or height to the chord c, and v2 = 4 h ^ c2/2 o
= 2 hc2/ o the square of the velocity due to that height; therefore 2 hc2/ o =
2 hc2/ o + 16 h2 oA / pq ( c2 s/2 o - 2 o2- c2/12 o s3, and c2 = c2 + 8 hoA /
pq ( c2 s/2 - 2 o2- c2/12 s3), or c2 = c2 + 8 hA / pq ( c3/3 + c^/12 o2), and c
= c + 4 c2 hA / 3 pq nearly, or substituting for A, c = c + nac2/12 pg ^ r4-
c4/ o2 = c (1 + nac/12 pg ^ r4- e4/ o2). So that the chord of the arc which is
actually described, is to that which would be described if the air had no
resistance, as 1 is to 1 + nac/12 pg ^ r4- e4/ o2; and therefore nac/12 pg ^
r4- e4/ o2 is the part of the chord, and consequently of the velocity, lost by
means of the resistance of the air. And the proportion is the same for the
chords described by the lowest point, or any other point, of the pendulum.

28. Now, to give an example, in numbers, of this effect of the resistance of
the air; the ordinary mean values of the literal quantities are as here below,
namely, therefore p = 700 nac = 25/102 a = z r = 8 12 pg = 56000 e = 6 r4 =
5220 g = 6 e4 = 1785 o = 7 r4 - e4 = 3435 n = 5/68 o2 = 484/9 c = 1 nac/12 pg ^
r4- e4/ o2 = 1/3577 So that the part of the chord, or velocity, lost by this
cause, namely, the resistance of the air on the back of the pendulum, is but
about the 1/3577, or about the 1/4000 part of the whole; and therefore this
effect scarcely ever amounts to so much as half a foot. Being indeed about of a
foot when the velocity of the ball is 2000 feet, when it is 1000 when it is
1500 and so on in proportion to the whole velocity of the ball.

And even this small effect may be supposed to be balanced by the method of
determining the center of oscillation, or the number of vibrations made in a
second. So that the number of oscillations, and the chord of the arc described,
being both diminished by the resistance of the air; and the one of these
quantities being a multiplier, and the other a divisor, in the formula for the
velocity; the one of those small effects will nearly balance the other; much in
the same way as the effects of the first cause, or the friction on the axis. So
that, these effects may both of them be safely neglected, as in no case
amounting to any sensible quantity.

In the beginning of this investigation, it is supposed that the resistance of
the medium is equal to the weight of a column of the medium, whose base is the
moving surface, and its altitude equal to that from whence a heavy body must
fall to acquire the velocity of that surface. But some philosophers think the
altitude should be only one half of that, and consequently the pressure only
one half: which would render the resistance still less considerable. But if the
altitude and resistance were even double of that above found, it might be still
safely neglected.

28. The third seeming cause of error in our rule is the time in which the ball
communicates its motion to the pendulum, or the time employed in the
penetration. The principle on which the rule is founded supposes the momentum
of the ball to be communicated in an instant; but this is not accurately the
case, because this force is communicated during the time in which the ball
makes the penetration. And although that time be evidently very small, scarcely
amounting to the 500th part of a second, it will be proper to enquire what
effect that circumstance may have on the truth of our theorem, or on the
velocity of the ball, as computed by it.

In order to this, let the notation employed in Art. 21 be supposed here; and
let ABC be a side-view of the pendulum moved out of the vertical position AD by
the perpendicular blow of the ball against the point D or C. Also let x = DC
the space moved by the point of impact C, z = CB the depth penetrated by the
ball, v = velocity of the ball at B, u = velocity of the point C of the
pendulum, and R = the uniform resisting force of the wood.


diagram

Then is R/ b the retarding force of the ball, which is constant. Again, as the
motion of the pendulum arises from the resisting force R of the wood, Ri will
be its momentum; and as the sum of the forces in the pendulum was found to be =
pgo, the accelerating force of the point c will be Rii/ pgo, which force is
constant also. But in the action of forces that are constant, the time t is
equal to the velocity divided by the force, and by 2 h or 2 x 16.09 feet, and
the space is equal to the square of the velocity divided by the force and by 4
h; consequently t = pgou/2 hiiR, x = pgouu/4 hiiR, and t = - bv / 2 hR, x + z =
- bvv / 4 hR, or by correc. t = b/2 hR x ( v - v), x + z = b/4 hR x ( v2 - v2).
The two values of the time t being equated, we obtain pgou = bii( v - v), or
pgou + biiv = biiv.

And when v = u, or the action of the ball on the pendulum ceases, this
equation becomes pgoU + biiU = biiv, and hence u = biiv/ pgo+ bii is the
greatest velocity of the point C at the instant when the ball has penetrated to
the greatest depth, and ceases to urge the pendulum farther. So that this
velocity is the same, whatever the resisting force of the wood is, and
therefore to whatever depth the ball penetrates, and the same as if the wood
were perfectly hard, or the ball made no penetration at all. And this velocity
of the point of impact also agrees with that which was found in Art. 21. So
that the velocity communicated to the point of impact is the same, whether the
impulse is made in an instant, or in some small portion of time. And hence, in
the usual case of a penetration, because the block will have moved some small
distance before it has attained its greatest velocity, it might at first view
seem as if it would swing or rise higher than when that velocity is
communicated in an instant, or when the pendulum is yet in its vertical
position, and so might describe a longer chord, and show a greater velocity of
the ball than it ought. But on the other hand it must be considered, that in
the small part of its swing, which the pendulum has made before the penetration
is completed, or has attained its greatest velocity, just as much velocity will
be lost by the opposing gravity or weight of the pendulum, as if it had set out
from the vertical position with the said greatest velocity; and therefore the
real velocity at that height will be the same in both cases. Hence then it may
safely be concluded, that the circumstance of the ball's penetration causes no
alteration in the velocity of it, as computed by our formula. And as it was
before found that no sensible error is incurred by the two first circumstances,
namely, the friction on the axis, and the resistance of the air to the back of
the pendulum, we may be well assured that our formula brings out the true
velocity with which the ball strikes the pendulum, without any sensible error.

29. Since biiv/ pgo+ bii denotes the greatest velocity which the point c of
the pendulum acquires by the stroke, dividing by i, we shall have biv/ pgo+ bii
for the angular velocity of the pendulum, or that of a radius 1. From which it
appears that the vibration will be very small when i or the distance AD is
small, and also when i is very great. And if we take this expression a maximum,
and make its fluxion = 0, i only being variable, we shall obtain pgo = bii, and
i = pgo/ b for the distance of the center of percussion, or the point where the
ball must strike so as to cause the greatest vibration in the pendulum; which
point, in this case, is neither the center of gravity nor the center of
oscillation; but will be at a great distance below the axis when p is great
respect of b, as in the case of our experiments, in which p is 600 or 800 times
b.

30. It may not be improper here, by the way, to enquire a little into the time
of the penetration, its extent or depth, and the measure of the resisting force
of the wood.

It was found above that x = pgouu/4 hiiR, and x + z = b/4 hR x ( v2 - v2). Now
substituting in these biiv/ pgo+ bii, the greatest value of u, for u and v, we
have ^, ^. The latter of these being the greatest depth penetrated by the ball
into the wood, and the former the distance moved by the point C of the pendulum
at the instant when the penetration is completed. Both of which, it is evident,
are directly as the square of the original velocity of the ball, and inversely
as the resisting force of the wood; the other quantities remaining constant.

Hence also it appears that, other things remaining, the penetration will be
less, as i is greater, or as the point of impact is farther below the axis. It
is farther evident that the penetration will diminish as the sum of the forces
pgo diminishes.

Now, for an example in numbers, a ball fired with a velocity of 1500 feet per
second, has been found to penetrate about 14 inches into a block of sound dry
elm, when the dimensions of the pendulum were as below: p = 660 lb the ball
being cast iron, g = 78 inches or 6 feet, its diameter 1.96 inches, o = 84
inches or 7 feet, and its weight 1 3/64 or 67/64 lb. i = 90 inches or 7 feet,
and the value of z is 14 inch. or 7/6 feet.

Here the value of v is 1500, and z = 14 inches or 7/6 feet. Hence ^ nearly,
which is the value of R for a ball of that size and weight. Or the resistance
in this instance is 32000 times the force of gravity. Hence also ^ part of a
foot, or 1/39 part of an inch, is the space moved by the point C of the
pendulum when the penetration is completed.

Also ^ part of a second, is the time of completing the penetration of 14
inches deep.

31. Upon the whole then it appears, that our rule will give, without sensible
error, the true velocity with which the ball strikes the pendulum. But this is
not, however, the same velocity with which the ball issues from the mouth of
the gun, which will indeed be something greater than the former, on account of
the resistance of the air which the ball passes through in its way from the gun
to the pendulum. And although this space of air be but small, and although the
elastic fluid of the powder pursue and urge the ball for some distance without
the mouth of the piece, and so in some degree counteract the resistance of the
air, yet it will be proper to enquire into the effect of this resistance, as it
will probably cause a difference between the velocity of the ball, as computed
from the vibration of the pendulum and the vibration of the gun; which
difference will, by the bye, be no bad way of measuring the resistance of the
air, especially if the gun be placed at a good distance from the pendulum; for
the vibration of the gun will measure the velocity with which the ball issues
from the mouth of it; and the vibration of the pendulum the velocity with which
it is struck by the ball.

32. To find therefore the resistance of the air against the ball in any case:
it is first to be considered that the resistance to a plane moving
perpendicularly through a fluid at rest, is equal to the weight or pressure of
a column of the fluid whose altitude is the height through which the body must
fall by the force of gravity to acquire the velocity with which it moves
through the fluid, the base of the column being equal to the plane. So that, if
a denote the area of the plane, v the velocity, n the specific gravity of the
fluid, and h = 16.09 feet; the altitude due to the velocity v being vv/4 h, the
whole resistance or motive force m will be a x n x vv/4 h = anvv/4 h.

Now if d denote the diameter of the ball, and k =.7854, then shall a = kd2 be
a great circle of the ball; and consequently ^ the motive force on the surface
of a circle equal to a great circle of the ball.

But the resistance on the hemispherical surface of the ball is only one half
of that on the flat circle of the same diameter; therefore ^ is the motive
force on the ball; and if w denote its weight, ^ will be equal to f the
retarding force.

Since kd3 is the magnitude of the sphere, if N denote its density or specific
gravity, its weight w will be = kd3 N; consequently the retarding force f or m
/ w will be ^.

But by the laws of forces vv = 2 hfx = -3 nvv/8 dN x, and v/ w = -3 n/8 dN x =
- ex, where x is the space passed over, putting e = 3 n/8 dN, and making the
value negative because the velocity v is decreasing. And the correct fluent of
this is log. v - log. v or log. v / w = ex, where v is the first or greatest
velocity of projection. Or if A be = 2.718281828 etc. the number whose
hyperbolic logarithm is 1, then is v / v = Aex, and hence the velocity v = v /
Aex = VA-ex. So that the first velocity is to the last velocity, as Aex to 1.
And the velocity lost by the resistance of the medium is (Aex - 1) v or
Aex-1/Aex V.

33. Now to adapt this to the case of our balls, which weighed on a medium 16
ounces when the diameter was 1.96 inches; we shall have 1.963 x.5236 = the
magnitude of the ball; and as 1 cubic foot, or 1728 cubic inches, of water,
weighs 1000 ounces, therefore ^ is the specific gravity of the iron ball; which
is very justly something less than the usual specific gravity of solid cast
iron, on account of the small air bubble which is in all cast metal balls. Also
the mean specific gravity of air is.0012, which is the value of n. Hence ^.

Now the common distance of the face of the pendulum from the trunnions of all
the guns, was 35 feet; and the distance of the muzzles of the four guns, was
nearly 34 for the 1st or shortest gun, 34 for the 2d, 33 for the 3d, and 31 for
the 4th. But as the elastic fluid pursues and urges the ball for a few feet
after it is out of the gun, it may be supposed to counter-balance the
resistance of the air for a few feet, the number of which cannot be certainly
known, and therefore we shall suppose 32 feet to be the common distance, for
each of the guns, which the ball passes through before it reach the pendulum.
Hence then the distance x = 32; and consequently ex = 32/2666 = 16/1333.

Then Aex - 1 =.01207 = 1/83 nearly. That is, the ball loses nearly the 83d
part of its last velocity, or the 84th part of its first velocity, in passing
from the gun to the pendulum, by the resistance of the air. Or the velocity at
the mouth of the gun, is to the velocity at the pendulum, as 84 to 83; so that
the greater diminished by its 84th part gives the less, and the less increased
by its 83d part gives the greater. But if the resistance to such swift
velocities as ours be about three times as great as that above, computed from
the nature of perfect and infinitely compressed fluids, as Mr. Robins thinks he
has found it to be, then shall the velocity at the gun lose its 28th part, and
the greater velocity will be to the less, as 28 to 27. This however is a
circumstance to be discovered from our experiments, or otherwise.

Of the Velocity of the Ball, as found from the Recoil of the Gun.
34. It has been said by more than one writer on this subject, that the effect
of the inflamed power on the recoil of the gun, is the same whether it be
charged with a ball, or fired by itself alone; that is, that the excess of the
recoil when charged with a ball, over the recoil when fired without a ball, is
exactly that which is due to the motion and resistance of the ball. And this
they say they have found from repeated experiments. Now supposing those
experiments to be accurate, and the deductions from them justly drawn; yet as
they have been made only with small balls and small charges of powder, it may
still be doubted whether the same law will hold good when applied to such
cannon balls, and large charges of powder, as those used in our present
experiments. Which is a circumstance that remains to be determined from the
results of them. And this determination will be easily made, by comparing the
velocity of the ball as computed from this law, with that which is computed
from the vibration of the ballistic pendulum. For if the law hold good in such
cases as these, then the velocity of the ball, as deduced from the vibration of
the gun, will exceed that which is deduced from the vibration of the pendulum,
by as much as the velocity is diminished by the resistance of the air between
the gun and the pendulum.

35. Taking this for granted then in the mean time, namely, that the effect of
the charge of powder on the recoil of the gun, is the same either with or
without a ball, it will be proper here to investigate a formula for computing
the velocity of the ball from the recoil of the gun. Now upon the foregoing
principle, if the chord of vibration be found for any charge without a ball,
and then for the same charge with a ball, the difference of those chords will
be equal to the chord which is due to the motion of the ball. This follows from
the property of a circle and a body descending along it, namely, that the
velocity is always as the chord of the arc described in a semivibration.

Let then c denote this difference of the two chords, that is c = the chord of
arc due to the ball's velocity, G = weight of the gun and iron stem, etc. b =
weight of the ball, g = distance of center of gravity of G, o = distance of its
center of oscillation, n = its No. of oscillations per minute, i = distance of
the gun's axis, or point of impact, r = radius of arc or chord c, v = velocity
of the ball, v = velocity of the gun, or of the axis of its bore.

Then because biiv is the sum of the momenta of the ball, and Ggov the sum of
the momenta of the gun, and because action and re-action are equal, these two
must be equal to each other, that is biiv = G gov: But because v is the
velocity of the distance i, therefore by similar figures i o v DV / i the
velocity of the center of oscillation. And because the velocity of this center,
is equal to the velocity generated by gravity, in descending perpendicularly
through the height or versed sine of the arc described by it, and because 2 r c
c cc/2 r = versed sine to radius r, and r o cc/2 r cco/2 rr = verse. sine to
radius o, therefore h cco/2 rr 2 h c/ r 2 ho, the velocity of the center of
oscillation as deduced from the chord c of the arc described, where h = 16.09
feet; which velocity was before found = ov / i.

Therefore oV / i = c/ r 2 ho, or oV = ci/ r 2 ho. Then this value of ov being
substituted in the first equation biiv = G gov, we have biiv = G gci/ r 2 ho,
and hence the velocity v = G gc/ bir 2 ho = 5.6727G gc/ bir o, being the
formula by which the velocity of the ball will be found in terms of the
distance of the center of oscillation and the other quantities. Which is
exactly similar to the formula for the same velocity, by means of the pendulum
in Art. 22, using only G, or the weight of the gun, for p + b or the sum of the
weights of the ball and pendulum.

And if, instead of o be substituted its value 11737.5/ nn or 108.3398/ n, from
Art. 20, it becomes v = 614.58 x G gc/ birn, or = 59000/96 x G gc/ birn, the
formula for the velocity of the ball in terms of the number of vibrations which
the gun will make in one minute, and the other quantities.

36. Farther, as the quantities G, g, b, i, r, n commonly remain the same, the
velocity will be directly as the chord c. So that if we assume a case in which
the chord shall be 1, and call its corresponding velocity u; then shall v = cu;
or the velocity corresponding to any other chord c, will be found by
multiplying that chord c by the first velocity u answering to the chord 1.

Now, by the following experiments, the usual values of those literal
quantities were as follows: viz. G = 917 g = 80.47 b = 1.047, sometimes a
little more or less. i = 89.15 r = 1000 n = 40.0, for the gun no 2, (but the
400th part more for no 1, and the 400th part less for no 3, and the 200th part
less for no 4.)

Then, writing these values in the theorem, instead of the letters, it becomes
v = 12.15 c. So that the number 12.15 multiplied by the difference between two
chords described with any charge, the one with and the other without a ball,
will give the velocity of the ball when the dimensions are as stated above. And
when the values of any of the letters vary from these, it is but increasing or
diminishing that product in the same proportion, according as the letter
belongs to the numerator or denominator in the general formula 59000/96 x Ggc/
birn. When such variations happen, they will be mentioned in each day's
experiments. And farther when only the values of G, g, i, n are as before
specified, the same formula will become 12718 x c/ br.

But note that these rules are adapted to the gun no 2 only; therefore for no 1
we must subtract the 400th part, and add the 400th part for no 3, and add the
200th part for no 4.

OF THE EXPERIMENTS.
37. WE shall now proceed to state the circumstances of the experiments for
each day separately as they happened; by this means showing all the processes
for each set of experiments, with the failure or success of every trial and
mode of operation; and from which also any person may recompute all the
results, and otherwise combine and draw conclusions from them as occasion may
require. Making but a very few cursory remarks on each day's experiments, to
explain them when necessary; and reserving the chief philosophical deductions,
to be drawn and stated together, after the close of the experiments, in a more
connected and methodical way.

The machinery having been made as perfect as the circumstances would permit,
20 barrels of government powder were procured, all by the best maker, and
numbered from 1 to 20. A great number of iron balls were also cast on purpose,
very round, and their accidental asperities ground off: they were a little
varied in their size and weight, but most of them almost equal to the diameter
of the bore, so as to have but little windage. The powder was uniformly mixed,
and every day exactly weighed off by the same careful man, and put up in very
thin flannel bags, of a size just to fit the bore of the gun; a thread was tied
round close by the powder, after being shaken down, and the flannel cut off
close by the thread, so as to leave as short a neck as possible to the bag. The
charge of powder was pushed gently down to the lower or breech end of the bore,
and the same quantity of powder always made to occupy nearly the same extent,
by means of the divisions of inches and tenths marked on the ramrod. The ball
was then put in, without using any wads, and set close to the charge of powder,
and kept in its place by a fine thread crossed two or three times about it,
which by its friction gave it a hold of the sides of the bore, as the windage
was very small. The gun was directed point blank, or horizontal, and
perpendicular to the face of the pendulum block, 35 feet distant from the
trunnions, and was well wiped and cleaned out after each discharge, which was
made by piercing the bottom of the charge through the vent, and firing it by
means of a small tube. An account was kept of the barometer and thermometer,
placed within a house adjoining, and shaded from the sun.

The machinery having been all prepared and set up in a convenient place in
Woolwich Warren, Major Blomefield and I went out on the 6th of June 1783, with
a sufficient party of men, to try the effects of them for the first time, which
were as follows.

38. Friday, June 6, 1783; from 10 till 12 A. M.
The weather was warm, dry, and clear.

The barometer at 30.17, and thermometer at 60.

The intention of this day's experiments, was to try and adjust the apparatus;
to ascertain the proper distance of the pendulum; as also the comparative
strength of the different barrels of powder, by firing several charges of it,
without balls or wads. Out of the 20 barrels of powder, were selected the 6
which had been found to be most uniform, and nearest alike, by the different
eprouvettes at Purfleet, which were no^ 2, 5, 13, 15, 18, 19; of which the
first two only were tried this day, as below. The gun was the short one, no 1,
and weighed this day, with leaden weights and iron stem, 906 lb: the distance
of the tape, by which the chord of its recoil was measured, was not taken, and
it was probably a little more than the usual length, 110 inches, employed in
most of the experiments of this year.

Here it appears that the quantity of recoil increased in a higher ratio than
the quantity of powder.

The pendulum was not moved by the blast of the powder in these experiments.

Powder No. of Experim. sort weight Chord of recoil Medium of recoil oz inches
1 no 2 2 2.25 2.30 2 no 2 2 2.35 2.30 3 no 2 2 2.30 2.30 4 no 5 2 2.55 2.50 5
no 5 2 2.40 2.50 6 no 5 2 2.55 2.50 7 no 5 8 13.00 12.88 8 no 5 8 12.75 12.88 9
no 2 8 12.50 12.50 10 no 2 8 12.50 12.50

39. Saturday, June 7, 1783; from 9 A. M. till 12.
The weather cloudy or hazy, but it did not rain.

Barometer 30.25, Thermometer 60.

To try all the 6 sorts of powder, and the effect of the blast on the pendulum,
when high charges are used.

The first 14 rounds were with the same apparatus and gun no 1, as the former
day.

The other four rounds with the gun no 4, but without the leaden weights; it
weighed with the iron 561 lb.

These recoils are very uniform, and there appears to be but little difference
in the quality of the powder among the several sorts.

Powder No. sort weight Recoil Mediums oz inches 1 2 8 13.35 13.38 2 2 8 13.40
13.38 3 5 8 13.50 13.28 4 5 8 13.05 13.28 5 13 8 13.50 13.23 6 13 8 12.95 13.23
7 15 8 13.50 13.35 8 15 8 13.20 13.35 9 18 8 13.25 13.38 10 18 8 13.50 13.38 11
19 8 12.95 12.95 12 19 8 12.95 12.95 13 13 2 2.25 14 13 16 26.00 vibr. of
pendulum 15 13 2 4.5 0 16 13 4 10.8 0 17 13 8 24.7 0.25 18 13 16 53.3 1.10

All the charges were in flannel bags, except no^ 14 and 18, of 16 oz each, for
want of bags large enough provided to put it in. Each charge was rammed with
two or three slight strokes. A considerable quantity of the powder of no 14 was
blown out unfired; many of the grains were found on the ground, and on the top
of the pendulum block, and many were found sticking in the face of it. By the
force of these striking it, and by the blast of the powder, or motion of the
air, the pendulum was observed visibly to vibrate a little: but the measuring
tape had not been put to it. This was therefore now added, to measure the
vibration by. And, to try to what degree the pendulum would be affected by the
explosion of the powder, the 7 feet amusette was suspended, and pointed
opposite the center of the pendulum for the last 4 rounds. The pendulum was
accordingly observed to move with the 8 ounces, but more with the 16 ounces, as
appears at the bottom of the last column of the table above. The pendulum being
thus much affected, we were convinced of the necessity of making a paper screen
to place between the gun and the pendulum; which we accordingly did, and used
it in the whole course of experiments, at least in the larger charges. At the
last charge, which was 16 ounces of loose powder, much sewer grains were blown
out than with the like charge at no 14 with the short gun. The recoil at no 14
is evidently less than it ought to be; owing to the quantity of unfired powder
that was blown out. It is remarkable that the recoil of the two guns, with the
same charge, both for 2 ounces and 8 ounces, are nearly in the reciprocal ratio
of the weights of the guns; a small excess only, over that proportion, taking
place in favor of the long gun, as due to its superior length. The recoils are
each visibly in a higher proportion than the charges of powder: for, in the
last four experiments, the charges of 2, 4, 8, 16 ounces, are in the continued
proportion of 1 to 2; which their recoils 4.5, 10.8, 24.7, 53.3, are all in a
higher ratio than that of 1 to 2; for, dividing the 2d by the 1st, the 3d by
the 2d, and the 4th by the 3d, the three successive quotients are 2.40, 2.29,
2.16, which are all above the double ratio, but approximating, however, toward
it as the charge is increased. And farther, if we divide these quotients
successively one by another, the two new ratios or quotients will be nearly
equal. So that, ranging those recoils in a column under each other, and their
two successive orders of ratios in the adjacent columns, we shall have in one
view the law which they observe, as here below, where they always tend to
equality.

4.5 2.40.954.99 10.8 2.29.944 24.7 2.16 53.3

Again, if we take successive differences between the same recoils, and between
these differences, and then between the second differences, and so on, thus 4.5
6.3 7.6 7.1 10.8 13.9 14.7 24.7 28.6 53.3 the columns, as well as the lines,
ascending obliquely from left to right, have their numbers approaching, and at
length ending in the ratio of 2 to 1, the same as the quantities of powder.

40. Friday, June 13, 1783; from 11 till 1 o'clock.
The air moist, with small rain at intervals.

The gun no 2 was mounted, and loaded with all the leaden weights: it was
charged with the following quantities of powder; sometimes with a ball, and
sometimes without one, as denoted by the cipher o, in the columns of weight and
diameter of ball. The radius to the tape was --. As these experiments were made
only to discover if the leaden weights would render the gun sufficiently heavy,
that the recoil might not be too large with the high charges of powder and
ball, the pendulum block was removed, to let the balls enter and lodge in the
bank which was behind it

Here again it appears that the recoils, without balls, are always in a greater
ratio than the charges of powder. It also appears that the recoils, when balls
are employed, are nearly in the ratio of the quantities of powder, when the
charges are small; but gradually decreasing more and more below that ratio, as
the charge of powder is increased. And if we subtract each recoil without a
ball, from the corresponding recoil No. Powder Ball's Rceoil sort with diameter
with oz inches oz dr inches 1 19 2 0 0 2.5 2 19 2 0 0 2.5 3 19 4 0 0 5.2 4 19 8 0
0 13.5 5 19 16 0 0 28.1 6 18 16 0 0 28.0 7 19 2 1.9 15 4 8.9 8 19 4 1.9 15 4
16.15 9 19 8 1.9 15 4 26.5 10 19 16 1.9 15 4 41.75 11 18 16 1.9 15 4 34.3 12 18
16 1.9 15 4 35.15 13 19 16 1.975 16 13 36.0 14 19 16 1.965 16 13 33.5 with a
ball, for the same charge of powder, taking the differences as here below,
Weight of powder oz 2 4 8 16 Recoils with a ball 8.9 16.2 26.5 34.7 Recoils
without 2.5 5.2 13.5 28.0 Differences 6.4 11.0 13.0 6.7 it will appear that
those differences increase as far as to the charge of 8 ounces, and then
decrease again.

There must have been some mistake in the 10th round, as the recoil, which is
41.75 inches, is greater than can well be expected with that charge of powder.
Probably the tape had entangled, and been drawn farther out in the return of
the gun from the recoil.

41. Monday, June 23, 1783.
We went with the workmen, and took the weight and dimensions of the several
parts of the machinery, both of the pendulum with its stem, and of the guns
with their frame or iron stem, and the leaden weights to fit on about the
trunnions.

OF THE PENDULUM.
Total weight with all the iron work about it 559 lb Distance from its axis to
the center of gravity 75.2 inches Ditto from its axis to the tape or lowest
point 115.1 inches Ditto from its axis to the top of the block 76.3 inches
Dimensions of the wooden block 18, 22, and 24 inches

That is, breadth of the face 18, height of the face 24, and length from front
to back 22.

THE GUN FRAME OR STEM.
Total weight of all the iron work 188 lb Distance from its axis to the center
of gravity (without gun) 44.25 inches Ditto from its axis to the tape or lowest
point 110 inches Ditto from its axis to center of the trunnions 90.3 inches
Ditto from its axis to the perpendicular arm 75.75 inches

The following figure is a side-view of the gun-frame or stem, as it hung on
its axis with the gun, A being the point through which the axis passes, G the
point in the stem where it rests in equilibrio, showing the distance AG of the
center of gravity below the axis, G g C perpendicular to A G, A P a plumb-line
cutting G C in g, g the center of gravity of the iron work, B D a fixed
perpendicular arm, E F a sliding piece to support the gun, T the center of the
trunnions, t the place of the tape or lowest point.
And the dimensions or measures to these points are as follows: inches AG 44.25
AB 75.75 AT 90.3 At 110.0 Be 5.6 Gg 3.3 Breadth of stem AT 3.5, and from the
middle of this breadth the distances Be and Gg are measured.

diagram

42. The following are also the measures taken to settle the position of the
compound center of gravity of the gun with its leaden weights and iron stem all
together.

No of the gun Diameter of the trunnions Diameter of the gun at the center of
the trunnions Center of gravity or axis of the gun alone Center of gravity of
the whole below axis behind the above cent. of the trun. below axis of
vibration muzzle center of trunnions 1 2.2 7.00 18.5 1.4 1.24 89.06 80.47 2 2.2
5.89 24.5 1.8 1.24 89.06 80.47 3 2.25 5.06 37.4 4.2 1.11 89.19 80.50 4 2.2 4.84
51.3 3.0 1.02 89.28 80.44

The numbers in the last column of this table, are the values of the letter g,
in the formula for the velocity by means of the recoil of the gun. This letter
may always be supposed to have the value 80.47 inches, as the two last numbers
of the column differ from it but.03 only, or about the 2700 part of the whole,
inducing an error of only about half a foot in the velocity of the ball.

The values of g, in this last column of the table, were computed in the
following manner.

Suppose the centers of gravity of the stem, gun, and leads to be all reduced
to the line of the stem AT connecting the axis and center of the trunnions T,
in which they are situated, very nearly; diagram so that G be the center of
gravity of the stem, C be the center of gravity of the gun, T be the center of
gravity of the leads;
also the numbers on the right hand side of these points, namely, 44.25 and
89.06 and 90.3, are the measured distances below the axis at A; and the numbers
on the left hand side, namely, 188, 290, and 439, are the weights of the bodies
belonging to those centers of gravity. Then, from the property of the center of
gravity, we shall have these operations ^ where D is the center of gravity of
the bodies at the points C and T, or of the gun and leads; and E the center of
gravity of the two bodies placed at the points G and D, or of all the three
bodies at the points G, C, T; that is, E is the compound center of gravity for
both gun, iron, and leads in one mass. And the some operation is to be repeated
for the other guns.

43. It may here be also remarked, that the mean number of vibrations per
minute, for every gun, weighing in all 917lb, taken among the actual vibrations
of each day, is for no 1 no 2 no 3 no 4 40.1 40.0 39.9 39.8 which number must
be used as the true value of n, in the formula for the velocity of the ball by
means of the recoil of the gun. The number of the gun's vibrations was commonly
tried every day, and they were found to vary but little, and among them all the
numbers abovementioned, are the arithmetical mediums.

44.Moreover the mean numbers for the pendulum, among all the daily
measurements of its weight, center of gravity, and oscillations per minute, are
thus: weight g n 660lb 77.3 40.2

Of the great number of these measures that were taken, the variations among
them would be sometimes in excess and sometimes in defect; and therefore the
above numbers, which are the means among the whole, as long as the iron work
remains the same, will probably be very near the truth. And by using always
these, with proportional alterations in g and n for any alteration in the
weight p, the computations of the velocity of the ball will be made by a rule
that is uniform, and not subject at least to accidental single errors. When the
weight of the pendulum varies by the wood alone of the block, or the straps
about it, the alteration is to be made at the center of the block, which is
exactly 88.3 inches below the axis; that is, in that case the value of i is
88.3 in the formula ^, or the correction for g; and in ^, the correction of n.
But when the alteration of the weight p arises from the balls and plugs lodged
in the same block, then the value of i in those corrections is the medium among
the distances of the point struck. And when the iron work is altered, the
middle of the place altered gives the value of i in the same theorems.

In these corrections too p denotes 660, g 77.3, n 40.2, and b the difference
between 660 and any other given weight of the pendulum; which value of b will
be negative when this weight is below 660, otherwise positive; so that p + b is
always equal to this weight of pendulum.

And if these values of p, g, n be substituted for them in those corrections,
they will become ^ or i-77.3/ p b, the correction for g, and ^ the correction
for n.

And farther, when i = 88.3, the same become 11 b/660+ b or 11 - 7260/ p the
correction for g, and b/1263+2.2 b or.4545 - 261/ p-86 the correction for n, as
adapted to an alteration at the center of the pendulum.

And in that case G = 88.3 - 7260/ p is the new value of g, and N = 39.7454 +
261/ p-86 is the new value of n. But those corrections will have contrary signs
when b is negative, as well as the second term in each of the denominators.

45. Monday, June 30, 1783; from 9 A. M. to 2 P. M.
The air clear, dry, and hot.

Barometer 30.34, and Thermometer 74.

We began this day for the first time to fire with balls against the pendulum
block. The powder of the six barrels beforementioned, had been all well mixed
together for the use of our experiments, that they might be as uniform as
possible, in that, as well as in other respects.

The GUN was no 1, with the leaden weights.

Its weight and the distance of its center of gravity, were as beforementioned;
the distance of the tape it was forgotten this day to measure, but from
circumstances judged to be 106.

PENDULUM. Its weight 559 = p Distance to the tape 115.1 = r


No Powder Ball's Vibration of Struck below axis Plugs Values of Veloc. of the
ball with diam. gun pend. p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb
inches feet 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 8 11.2 4 16 23.4 5 16 16 13 1.95 34 23 87.9 559.0
75.30 40.30 1392 6 16 16 13 1.95 35.4 25 86.8 560.1 75.32 40.30 1534 7 16 16 13
1.95 34.8 23.7 88.8 561.1 75.35 40.29 1426 8 16 16 13 1.95 35.1 25 87.6 15
562.2 75.37 40.29 1530 9 16 16 13 1.95 35.7 23.7 88.2 10 564.6 75.39 40.28 1445
10 16 16 13 1.95 35.2 23.1 88.3 566.5 75.42 40.28 1412 medium 35.0 medium 1456

The first 4 rounds were with powder only; the other 6 with balls, all of the
same size and weight.

The diameter of the gun bore being 2.02, and the diameter of the ball 1.95,
consequently the windage was 0.07 Mean length of the charge of powder 10.6

The two oaken plugs which were driven in, to fill up the holes, after the 8th
and 9th rounds, weighed about 1 oz. to each inch of their length. The whole
weights of these plugs, and the weights of the balls lodged in the block, were
continually added to the weight of the pendulum, to complete the numbers for
the values of p in the 9th column; and from these numbers the correspondent
values of g and n, in the next two columns, are computed by their proper
corrections in Art. 23 and 25. After which the velocities contained in the last
column are computed by the formula in Art. 24. And the medium among all these
velocities, as well as that of the recoils of the gun, are placed at the bottom
of their respective columns.

From the mean recoil with ball 35.0 take the recoil without a ball 23.4 there
remains c = 11.6

Then, having b = 1.051, and r = 106.5, by the rule 12718 x c/ br in Art. 36,
we have only 1315 feet, for the velocity of the ball as deduced from the recoil
of the gun; which is 141 less than the velocity found by the vibration of the
pendulum, or about 1/10th of the whole velocity.

The powder blown out unfired was not much. The apparatus performed all very
well, except only that the wood of the pendulum seemed not to be very sound, as
it was pierced quite through by the end of this day's experiments; though the
sheet lead with which the back was covered, as well as the face, just prevented
the balls and pieces of the wood from falling out at the back of the pendulum.

46. Saturday, July 5, 1783; from 9 till 2 o'clock.
The weather clear, dry, and hot. Barometer 30.27, and Thermometer 74.

GUN, no 3.
Weight 917 To center of gravity 80.47 To the tape 109.7 PENDULUM.
Weight 846 To center of gravity 79.6 To the tape 117.3 No Powder Ball's Chord
of vibrat. Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. of the ball with diam gun pend p g
n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches lbs inches 1 2 2.3 2 2 2.3 3 8 13.0 4 8
14.1 5 8 13.6 6 16 26.3 7 16 28.7 9.5 8 16 26.5 0.3 9 16 16 13 1.95 39.0 24.2
89.0 846.0 79.3 41.48

A large piece had been cut out of the middle part of the pendulum, from the
face almost to the back, to clear away the damaged part of the wood; and the
vacuity was run full of lead, from an idea that the pendulum would not so soon
be spoiled, and consequently that it would need less repairs. But this did not
succeed at all; for the only shot we discharged, namely, no 9, would not lodge
in the lead, but broke into a thousand small pieces, many of which stuck in the
lead, and formed a curious appearance; but the greater number rebounded back
again, to the great danger of the bystanders. The ball made a large round
excavation in the face of the lead, of 5 inches diameter in the front, and 3
inches deep in the center of the hole.

Length of the charge of 16 oz was 11 inches.

47. Friday, July 11, 1783; from 9 A. M. till.
Fine, clear, hot weather.

GUN, no 3.
Weight 917 To center of gravity 80.47 To the tape 110 PENDULUM.
Weight 610 To center of gravity 76.4 To the tape 118 No Powder Ball's Chord of
vibrat. Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. of the ball with diam gun pend p g n
oz oz dr inches inches inches inches 1 2 2.5 2 2 2.5 3 16 28.4 4 16 25.7 5 16
28.3 6 16 16 13 1.95 44.6 34.0 89.1

Length of the charge of 16 oz was 11.2 inches.

The pendulum had been altered since the former day. The core of lead being
taken out, some layers of rope were laid at the bottom of the hole, then the
remainder up to the front filled with a piece of sound elm, and the face
covered with sheet lead.

At the last round, or that with ball, the iron tongue which held the tape of
the pendulum, having slipped down by the loosening of a screw, was strained and
bent. Which stopped the experiments till it could be repaired.

48. Saturday, July 12, 1783; from 9 A. M. till.
Fine, clear, hot weather.

The pendulum, gun no 3, and apparatus, were in every respect the same as in
the last day's experiments, excepting that the radius of the tape, in the gun,
was 110.2 inches instead of 110.

No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches lb inches feet 1 2 2.5 2 2
2.5 3 16 28.0 4 16 29.0 5 16 28.6 6 16 16 13 1.96 44.1 33.7 89.6 607.0 76.34
40.25 2151 7 16 16 13 1.96 42.6 30.9 90.3 608.1 76.36 40.25 1960 8 16 16 13
1.96 46.8 32.3 89.3 609.1 76.38 40.24 2076 9 16 16 13 1.96 44.4 30.5 89.6 610.2
76.39 40.24 1958 10 16 16 13 1.96 43.9 31.4 89.2 611.2 76.41 40.24 2028 11 16
16 13 1.96 42.3 31.5 90.7 612.3 76.43 40.23 2005 medium 44.0 medium 2030

The mean length of the charge of 16 oz was 11.7 inches. But this height was
always taken when the cartridge was uncompressed: so that the powder lay looser
than in former experiments. By a small pressure it occupied about of an inch
less space.

The value of p at beginning this day is made a little less than the pendulum
weighed at first, for reasons to be mentioned hereafter.

The mean recoil with a ball is 44.0, and without a ball 28.5, the difference
of which is 15.5 = c. Also, in the formula for the velocity by means of the
gun, we have b = 1.051, and r = 110.2. Consequently v = 401/400 x 12718 x c /
br = 1706 for the velocity by that method. But the mean velocity by the
pendulum is 2030, which exceeds the former by 324, or almost of the whole
velocity.

49. Thursday, July 17, 1783; from 12 till 3 P. M.
Fine, clear, hot weather. Barometer 30.23, Thermometer 72 at 9 o'clock.

GUN, no 1.
Weight 917 To center of gravity 80.47 To the tape 110.2

It swung very freely, and would have continued its vibrations a long time;
owing to the ends of the axis being made to turn or roll upon a unequal iron
support, and kept from going backward and forward, with the vibrations, by two
upright iron pins, placed so as not quite to touch the axis, but at a very
small or hair-breadth distance from it.

PENDULUM.
Weight 657 To center of gravity 77.26 To the tape 118

The pendulum would not vibrate longer than 1 minute before the arcs became
imperceptible, owing to the friction of the upright pins, which touched and
bore hard against the sides of the axis, unlike those of the gun, although they
had the same kind of round support to roll upon. The pendulum had been well
repaired, and strengthened with iron bars, and straps going round it in several
places, except over the face. Also thick iron plates were let into, and across
it, near the back part, then over them was laid a firm covering of rope, after
which the rest of the hole was filled up with a block of elm, and sinally the
face covered over with sheet lead.

No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.3
2 2 2.4 3 8 12.3 4 8 13.8 5 8 11.9 6 8 13.0 7 8 13.2 8 8 16 13 1.96 26.3 20.5
88.6 10 657.0 77.26 40.20 1450 9 8 16 13 1.96 27.2 21.9 89.7 9 658.5 77.28
40.20 1534 10 8 16 13 1.96 25.9 20.3 89.9 9 660.1 77.30 40.20 1423 11 8 16 13
1.96 26.8 20.5 88.6 8 661.6 77.33 40.20 1462 12 8 16 13 1.96 26.3 20.4 88.5 8
663.2 77.35 40.20 1460 13 8 16 13 1.96 26.8 20.9 88.6 8 664.7 77.37 40.20 1497
mean 1471

The mean length of the charge of 8 oz was 5.9.

The pendulum, having been so well secured, suffered but little by this day's
firing, only bulging or swelling out a little at the back part. All the balls
were left in it, and all the holes were successively plugged up with oaken pins
of near 2 inches diameter, which weighed 11 oz to every 10 inches in length. --
The arcs described, both by the gun and pendulum, are pretty regular. And the
whole forms a good set of experiments.

The mean recoil of the gun with ball 26.55 without ball 12.84 difference c =
13.71

Then v = 199/200 x 12718 x c/ br = 399/400 x 12718 x 13.71/1.051x110.2 = 1501,
the velocity of the ball as deduced from the recoil of the gun; which exceeds
that deduced from the pendulum by 30, or nearly 1/49th part of this latter.

50. Friday, July 18, 1783; from 9 A. M. till 12.
Fine and warm weather. Barometer 30.28, and Thermometer 68 at 9 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.5
2 2 2.55 3 4 6.45 4 4 6.05 5 8 13.8 6 8 13.9 7 8 13.55 8 8 16 13 1.96 28.35
24.35 87.8 9 664.7 77.37 40.19 1764 9 8 16 13 1.96 28.7 24.35 88.0 8 666.3
77.40 40.19 1765 10 8 16 13 1.96 28.3 24.3 87.9 7 667.8 77.42 40.19 1768 11 4
16 13 1.96 18.3 18.9 87.8 6 669.4 77.44 40.19 1380 12 4 16 13 1.96 18.0 18.4
87.3 6 670.9 77.47 40.19 1352 13 4 16 13 1.96 16.7 16.8 87.8 5 672.5 77.49
40.19 14 4 16 13 1.96 18.4 18.0 87.7 4 674.0 77.51 40.19 1327

A fresh barrel of the mixed powder was opened for use this morning; and in the
first 7 rounds, which were with powder only, that of the old and new barrel
were used alternately, but no difference was observed. -- The length of the
charge of 4 oz was 3.2, and that of 8 oz was 5.9 inches.

The GUN was no; 3. -- Its weight 917 To center of gravity 80.47 To the tape
110
It swung so freely, that after many hundred vibrations the arcs were scarce
sensibly diminished. This gun heated more at the muzzle than no; 1 did, being
much thinner in metal there: but it was never very hot to the hand in that
part, and very little indeed about the place of the charge; for the heat was
gradually less and less all the way from the muzzle to the breech, where it was
not sensible to the hand. The PENDULUM. Its weight at first round 664.7 The
PENDULUM. To the tape 117.8


It had remained hanging since the last day's experiments, with all the balls
and plugs in it, which increased its weight by 10 lb, except an allowance for
evaporation, and increased the distance of the center of gravity by little more
than 1/10th of an inch. It vibrated with great freedom; for it had this day
been made to turn very freely on its axis, by placing the upright pins, which
confine it side-ways, so as not quite to touch the axis, like those of the gun
yesterday; and the effect was very great indeed, for it appeared as if it would
have vibrated for a great length of time; whereas on the former days it stopped
motion in about 1 minute, or at least after that the arcs soon became too small
to be counted. -- By this day's firing the pendulum seemed not to be much
injured, the back part not appearing to be altered, and the fore part only a
little swelled out, the piece of wood, that had been fitted in there, starting
a little forward, and bulging out the facing of lead.

of the plugs every 10 inches in length weighed 11 oz 4 oz 8 oz The mean recoil
of gun with ball 18.23 28.45 without 6.25 13.75 the difference or c = 11.98
14.70 Hence the velocity by the recoil is 1321 1620 Mean ditto by the pendulum
1353 1766 Which exceeds that by recoil by 32 146 Or the 42d 12th part.

This appears to be a good set, being very uniform, except the 13th round,
which has been omitted, as evidently defective in the arc described both by the
gun and pendulum, from some undiscovered and unaccountable cause.

51. Saturday, July 19, 1783; from 9 till 3.
A fine and warm day. Barometer 30.12, Thermometer 70 at 9 o'clock.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.3
2 2 2.4 3 4 5.8 4 4 5.8 5 4 5.8 6 4 16 13 1.96 15.9 14.8 89.8 5 674.0 77.51
40.19 1065 7 4 16 13 1.96 16.3 15.4 89.8 5 675.3 77.54 40.19 1111 8 4 16 13
1.96 16.4 15.8 90.2 5 676.6 77.56 40.19 1137 9 4 16 13 1.96 16.3 15.4 89.3 5
677.9 77.58 40.19 1122 10 2 16 13 1.96 9.8 10.7 89.1 3 679.2 77.61 40.19 783 11
2 16 13 1.96 9.9 11.0 89.5 2 680.5 77.63 40.18 803 12 2 16 13 1.96 10.1 11.1
90.3 3 681.8 77.66 40.18 805 13 2 2.55 14 2 2.55 15 2 16 13 1.96 11.1 12.6 88.8
3 683.1 77.68 40.18 930 16 2 16 13 1.96 10.7 12.0 89.4 3 684.4 77.71 40.18 881
17 2 16 12 1.96 11.0 12.3 89.8 3 685.7 77.73 40.18 901 18 2 16 12 1.96 10.8
11.9 89.0 687.0 77.76 40.18 881

Of the plugs every 10 inches weighed 11 ounces.

Length of the charge of 2 oz was 1.7; and that of 4 oz was 3.2.

The GUN was no; 1 for the first 12 no^;, and no; 3 for the rest; in order to
complete the comparison between these two guns with 2, 4, 8, and 16 oz of
powder. The radius to the tape 110 inches, and the other circumstances as
before.

The PENDULUM had been left hanging since yesterday, and the radius to the tape
was 117.8 as before. It became however so full of balls and plugs today, that
no more plugs could be driven in, all the iron straps being bent and forced out
to their utmost stretch. It was therefore ordered to be gutted and repaired.

This is a good set of experiments; all the apparatus having performed well;
and the arcs described, both by the gun and pendulum, being very uniform.

Gun 1 Gun 3 2 oz 4 oz 2 oz Mean recoil with ball 9.93 16.23 10.90 Ditto
without 2.35 5.80 2.55 The difference or c = 7.58 10.43 8.35 Hence velocity by
recoil 832 1145 921 Mean ditto by pendulum 797 1109 898 Which are below recoil
35 36 23 Or nearly the part 1/23 1/31 ^^/39

52. Wednesday, July 23, 1783; from 10 till 3.
Fine weather. Barometer 29.85, Thermometer 70 at 4 P. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.5
2 2 2.5 3 4 5.7 4 4 5.7 5 8 13.0 6 8 12.9 7 16 25.9 8 16 26.6 9 16 24.9 10 16
26.5 11 16 16 13 1.96 39.9 22.4 87.7 12 690.0 77.78 40.18 1693 12 16 16 12 1.96
39.0 21.3 88.3 12 691.6 77.80 40.18 1610 13 16 16 13 1.96 41.2 23.1 88.7 9
693.2 77.82 40.18 1736 14 16 16 12 1.96 38.3 21.2 88.7 9 694.9 77.85 40.18 1603
15 8 16 13 1.96 27.9 21.4 89.2 8 696.5 77.88 40.18 1607 16 8 16 12 1.96 27.1
20.2 88.6 7 698.1 77.90 40.17 1538 17 8 16 13 1.96 27.3 20.5 88.9 8 699.8 77.92
40.17 1553 18 4 16 13 1.96 16.8 15.1 88.0 7 701.4 77.94 40.17 1159 19 4 16 13
1.96 16.7 14.7 88.3 6 703.0 77.96 40.17 1127 20 4 16 13 1.96 16.6 14.6 88.5 5
704.7 77.99 40.17 1120 21 2 16 13 1.96 9.5 9.4 88.6 4 706.3 78.01 40.16 722 22
2 16 13 1.96 10.7 10.9 87.8 6 707.9 78.03 40.16 847 23 2 16 13 1.96 9.6 9.4
88.5 5 709.6 78.05 40.16 727 24 2 16 13 1.96 10.8 11.2 87.7 711.2 78.08 40.16
878

Length of charge of 2 oz was 2.1 inches 4 3.3 8 6.1 16 10.9

Of the plugs every 10 inches weighed 12 ounces.

The GUN was no 2. -- Its weight 917 To center of gravity 80.47 To the tape 110
Oscillation per min. 40.6, as before.


It heated very little by firing.

The PENDULUM. -- Its weight 690 To the tape 117.8


It had been gutted, and repaired, by placing a stratum of lead, of 2 inches
thick, before the iron plate, then the lead was covered with a block of wood,
and the whole faced with sheet lead.

2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz Mean recoil with ball 10.15 16.7 27.43 39.60 Ditto
without 2.50 5.7 12.95 25.98 The difference or c = 7.65 11.0 14.48 13.62 Hence
velocity by recoil 840 1207 1592 1499 Mean ditto by pendulum 793 1135 1566 1660
Difference + 47 + 72 + 26 - 161 Or the part 1/17 1/16 1/60 1/10

So that the recoil gives the velocity with 2, 4 and 8 ounces of powder
greater, but with 16 ounces much less, than the velocity shown by the pendulum.

53. Monday, July 28, 1783; from 10 till 2.
A very hot day. Barometer 29.74; Thermometer 77 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz inches 1 2 2.6 2 2 2.45 3 2 2.4 4 2 2.45 5 2 2.7 6 2 2.65 7 2
2.6 8 4 6.3 9 4 6.35 10 4 6.35 11 8 13.8 12 8 14.0 13 8 14.1 14 16 28.1 15 16
27.9 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz Mean length of charge 1.9 3.3 6.2 11.0 Mean recoil of
gun 2.65 6.33 13.97 28.0 Ditto with greater with 2.48

The GUN no 4. -- Its weight in first 4 rounds 1003 Ditto in all the rest 917
Other circumstances as before.


The gun was very hot before firing, with the heat of the sun. But heated
little more with firing. It was hottest at the muzzle, where the hand could not
long bear the heat of it.

The PENDULUM had been gutted and repaired since the last day.

It weighed 702 To the tape 117.8
No balls were fired this day.

54. Tuesday, July 29, 1783; from 12 till 3.
A fine and warm day. Barometer 29.90; Thermometer 72 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 3.0
2 2 2.7 3 2 2.8 4 2 2.75 5 4 6.45 6 4 6.25 7 4 6.35 8 8 14.4 9 8 14.3 10 8 14.5
11 16 29.15 12 16 28.25 13 16 29.2 14 16 28.3 15 8 16 13 1.96 29.6 25.8 89.5 12
700.0 77.92 40.17 1946 16 8 16 13 1.96 29.1 25.0 89.0 11 702.0 77.95 40.17 1902
17 8 16 13 1.96 29.1 25.8 89.5 10 704.0 77.98 40.17 1959 18 16 16 13 1.96 44.5
29.1 89.4 13 706.0 78.01 40.16 2219 19 16 16 13 1.96 43.0 27.0 89.7 9 708.0
78.03 40.16 2058 20 16 16 12 1.96 43.6 28.8 89.7 9 710.0 78.05 40.16 2207

Of the plugs every 10 inches weighed 13 ounces.

The GUN no 4. -- Its weight and other circumstances as usual. It did not
become near so hot as yesterday.

The PENDULUM was as weighed and measured yesterday, having hung unused.

The tape drawn out in the last three rounds, both of the gun and pendulum, was
rather doubtful, owing to the wind blowing and entangling it.

2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz Mean length of charge 1.8 3.4 5.6 10.8 Mean recoil with
ball 29.27 43.70 Ditto without 2.81 6.35 14.40 28.72 Difference or c = 14.87
14.98 Hence velocity by recoil 1643 1656 Mean ditto by pendulum 1936 2161
Difference, very great, 293 505 Or the part

55. Wednesday, July 30, 1783; from 10 till 12.
A fine day, moderately warm. Barometer 30.06; Thermometer 69 at 12 o'clock.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.7
2 2 2.6 3 4 6.2 4 4 6.0 5 4 16 13 1.96 17.8 17.8 88.7 8 709.8 78.04 40.16 1376
6 4 16 13 1.96 17.8 17.4 86.7 9 711.3 78.07 40.16 1380 7 4 16 13 1.96 17.75
17.3 87.2 10 712.9 78.10 40.16 1368 8 2 16 13 1.96 11.0 12.2 87.8 7 714.4 78.12
40.15 960 9 2 16 12 1.96 11.25 12.4 86.8 7 715.9 78.15 40.15 993 10 2 16 12
1.96 10.9 11.9 87.3 5 717.5 78.18 40.15 951

The GUN was again no 4, and every circumstance about it as before.

The PENDULUM the same as left hanging since yesterday, with the addition of
the balls and plugs in it.

This day's experiments a good set.

2 oz 4 oz Mean length of charge 1.7 3.24 Mean recoil with ball 11.05 17.78
Ditto without 2.65 6.10 Difference, or c 8.40 11.68 Hence velocity by the
recoil 929 1295 Mean ditto by the pendulum 968 1375 Difference, gun less 39 80
Or the part 1/24 1/17

56. Thursday, July 31, 1783; from 10 till 12.
Fine warm weather. Barometer 30.3; Thermometer 69 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.5
2 16 23.8 3 16 25.9 4 16 23.8 5 16 23.5 6 16 16 13 1.96 37.3 17.8 89.6 6 717.2
78.18 40.15 1379 7 16 16 13 1.96 37.3 18.9 90.5 6 718.6 78.20 40.15 1453 8 16
16 13 1.96 34.5 16.4 90.2 6 720.1 78.22 40.15 1268 9 12 16 13 1.96 31.7 17.7
89.2 5 721.6 78.24 40.15 1387 10 12 16 12 1.96 33.2 18.9 89.8 8 723.0 78.26
40.14 1477 11 12 16 12 1.96 30.8 17.5 89.8 8 724.5 78.28 40.14 1371 12 12 21.0
13 12 18.3 14 12 18.8

The GUN no 1. -- Weight and every thing else as usual. -- The annular leaden
weights, which fit on about the trunnions, have gradually been knocked much out
of form by the shocks of the sudden recoils; so that, not fitting closely, they
are subject to shake, a circumstance which probably has occasioned the
irregularities in the recoils of this day.

The PENDULUM continued hanging still. It is suspected that its vibrations are
not to be strictly depended on with the high charges of powder; owing to the
striking of the balls against the iron plate within the block, and so perhaps
causing them to rebound within it, and disturb the vibrations, which are not
regular this day. After it was taken down, the pendulum was found to weigh
726lb. But, from the weight of the balls and plugs lodged in it, it ought to
have weighed 732 lb. It is therefore likely that the 6 lb had been lost, by
evaporation of the moisture, in the 4 days, which is 1lb per day. At the
beginning of each day's experiments therefore 1lb is deducted from the weight
of the pendulum, or 2lb before each of the last three days. And the like was
done on some former days, for the same reason, when it appeared necessary.

Of the plugs, 10 inches weighed 10 ounces.
12 oz 16 oz Mean length of the charge 8.4 11.1 Mean recoil with ball 31.9 36.4
Ditto without 19.4 24.25 Difference, or c = 12.5 12.15 Hence velocity by the
recoil 1374 1334 Mean ditto by the pendulum 1412 1367 Difference, the gun less
38 33 Or nearly the part 1/37 1/41

57. Tuesday, August 12, 1783; from 10 till 2.
The weather variable. Sometimes flying and thunder showers. Barometer 30.0;
Thermometer 64 at 3 P. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2
2.55 2 2 2.50 3 2 2.50 4 16 24.6 5 16 21.8 6 16 24.5 7 16 16 12 1.96 36.0 19.6
88.3 8 663.0 77.35 40.20 1411 8 16 16 12 1.96 36.7 19.8 88.6 10 664.6 77.38
40.19 1424 9 2 2.5 10 16 28.25 11 16 26.4 12 16 24.7 13 16 16 12 1.96 39.1 23.2
87.8 11 666.3 77.41 40.19 1689 14 16 16 12 1.96 35.8 21.7 88.5 10 667.9 77.44
40.19 1572 15 16 16 12 1.96 37.9 23.3 91.1 11 669.6 77.47 40.19 1644 16 16 16
12 1.96 40.7 24.8 90.6 11 671.2 77.50 40.19 1765 17 16 16 12 1.96 42.4 24.2
91.3 10 672.9 77.53 40.18 1714

The GUN was no 1 in the first 8 rounds; and no 2 in the rest to the end. The
weight, etc. as before.
The PENDULUM was a new block, made of sound dry elm, painted, and hung in the
same frame as the former; but turned end-ways, or the ends of the fibers
toward the gun; whereas the former was side-ways. It was firmly bound round
with strong iron bars; but neither plates of iron nor lead were put within it.
The dimensions of the block are, Length from front to back 26 inches Depth of
the face 24 Breadth of the same 18 Its weight with iron 664 lb Radius to tape
as before 117.8 inches To center of gravity 77.35 Oscillations per minute 40.20

At the 7th and 15th rounds the balls struck both in firm and solid wood, when
their penetrations, to the hinder part of the ball, measured 10 and 11 inches;
so that the fore part penetrated 12 inches in the first case, and 13 inches in
the latter.

Gun 1 Gun 2 Mean length of the charge 11.4 11.3 Mean recoil with ball 36.35
40.03 omitting no 14 Ditto without 23.63 26.45 Difference, or c = 12.72 13.58
Hence velocity by the recoil 1399 1497 Mean ditto by the pendulum 1419 1676
Difference, the recoil less 20 179 Or nearly the part 1/71 1/9

58. N. B. In this day's experiments, and those that follow, as long as the
same block of wood is used, the theorems for correcting the place of the center
of gravity, and the number of oscillations per minute, as laid down at Art. 44,
will be a little altered, when the weight of the pendulum is varied at the
center of the block. The reason of which is, that now the distance to the
center is 88.7, which before was only 88.3. And by using 88.7 for 88.3 in the
theorems in that article, those theorems will become G = 88.7 - 7524/ p for the
new value of g, and N = 39.646 + 314/ p-93 for the new value of n.


Had i been = 89.3, the new value of g and n would have been G = 89.3 - 7920/
p, and N = 39.51 + 386/ p-100.
And these last are the proper theorems for this day's experiments, the mean
distance of the points struck being nearly 89.3.

59. Wednesday, August 13, 1783; from 10 till 2.
The weather cloudy and misty, but it did not rain. Barometer 30.17;
Thermometer 64 at 5 P. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.5
2 2 2.6 3 16 27.6 4 16 27.9 5 16 16 12 1.96 41.8 26.8 87.0 12 672.9 77.53 40.18
1992 6 16 16 12 1.96 36.3 23.1 86.2 13 674.5 77.55 40.18 D 7 16 16 12 1.96 42.3
11 8 16 16 12 1.96 41.0 25.2 84.7 11 677.8 77.58 40.18 1940 9 8 14.2 10 8 13.5
11 8 13.6 12 8 16 12 1.96 27.6 22.4 84.4 10 679.4 77.60 40.18 1735 13 8 16 12
1.96 28.8 25.8 90.3 681.0 77.63 40.18 1872

The GUN was no 3. In the 5, 6, 7, 8, and 12th rounds, the gun had from 15 to
20 elevation. At the 6th round an uncommon large quantity of powder came out
unfired, so as to scatter a great way over the ground, and bespatter the face
of the screen and pendulum very much; which was not the case in any other
round. And this may account for the smaller arcs described at that number.

The PENDULUM was in the same condition as it had been left hanging after the
last day's experiments, with all the balls and plugs in it. After this day's
experiments, its weight was found to be 681 lb, including all the balls and
plugs, except one which flew out behind the pendulum at the 7th round,
occasioned by this ball striking in the same hole as no 6, and knocking it out.
This ball, which came out, was quite whole and perfect; it was black on the
hinder part with the powder, but rubbed bright before with the friction in
passing through the wood. The tape of the pendulum also broke at this round, so
that the vibration could not be measured.

The value of i, or the mean among the distances of the point struck this day
and the last is 88.

Of the plugs, this day and the last, 10 inches weighed 9 oz.

8 oz 16 oz Mean length of the charge 6.0 11.1 Mean recoil with ball 28.2 41.7
Ditto without 13.77 27.75 Difference, or c = 14.43 13.95 Hence velocity by the
recoil 1594 1542 Mean ditto by the pendulum 1803 1966 Difference, the recoil
less 209 424 Or nearly the part 1/9

60. Monday, September 8, 1783; from 10 till 1 P. M.
Weather windy and cloudy, with some drops of rain. Barometer 30.03;
Thermometer 61 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.7
2 2 2.55 3 2 2.6 4 4 6.55 5 4 6.1 6 4 6.8 7 4 16 13 1.96 17.4 17.8 88.1 10
663.0 77.35 40.20 1281 8 4 16 13 1.96 18.3 19.0 88.3 9 664.7 77.37 40.19 1369 9
4 16 13 1.96 18.2 18.8 88.0 8 666.3 77.40 40.19 1363 10 4 16 13 1.96 17.9 18.0
87.2 9 667.8 77.42 40.19 1321 11 2 16 13 1.96 10.9 12.4 87.8 8 669.4 77.44
40.19 906 12 2 16 13 1.96 11.2 12.5 85.8 7 670.9 77.47 40.19 937 13 2 16 13
1.96 11.0 12.5 86.1 7 672.4 77.49 40.19 936

The GUN no 3, with every circumstance as usual; except that in the last four
rounds it had 15 elevation.

The PENDULUM had been repaired, the balls and plugs taken out, a square hole
cut quite through, and a sound piece fitted in; and the face covered with sheet
lead as before.

Its weight at the beginning 663 lb To the center of gravity 77.35 inches To
the tape 117.8

The vibration at no 8 a little doubtful, as the tape broke.

The plugs weighed 1 oz per inch.

The value of i, or the mean distance of the points struck, 87.3.

Weight of Powder 2 oz. 4 oz. Mean length of the charge 1.9 3.2 Mean recoil
with ball 11.03 17.95 Ditto without 2.62 6.48 Difference, or c = 8.41 11.47
Hence velocity by the recoil 928 1266 Mean ditto by the pendulum 926 1334
Difference, recoil less, -2 -68 Or nearly the part 1/4^^ 1/^9

61. Wednesday, September 10, 1783; from 10 till 12.
The weather was fine. Barometer 29.7; Thermometer 60 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 2.5
2 2 2.2 3 2 2.45 4 4 5.8 5 4 5.8 6 4 5.7 7 8 12.1 8 8 12.1 9 8 12.2 10 8 16 12
1.96 24.5 18.0 88.3 5 671.4 77.48 40.19 1315 11 8 16 12 1.96 25.1 19.3 89.5 8
672.8 77.50 40.19 1394 12 8 16 12 1.96 24.8 18.1 86.8 6 674.3 77.52 40.19 1351
13 4 16 12 1.96 15.85 14.65 88.5 7 675.7 77.54 40.19 1075 14 4 16 12 1.96 15.7
14.1 87.4 6 677.2 77.56 40.19 1050 15 4 16 12 1.96 16.35 15.4 88.5 3 678.6
77.59 40.18 1136 16 2 16 12 1.96 10.0 10.75 89.3 4 679.8 77.61 40.18 787 17 2
16 12 1.96 9.9 10.6 89.8 3 681.1 77.63 40.18 774 18 2 16 12 1.96 10.1 10.65
88.0 3 682.3 77.65 40.18 795

The GUN, no 1. Weight and other circumstances as usual.

The PENDULUM as left hanging since Monday. Its radius, etc. as usual. -- The
value of i, or the mean distance among the points struck this day and the
former, is 88.0.

The plugs weighed 1 oz per inch.

Weight of Powder 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz Mean length of the charge 1.9 3.2 5.7 Mean
recoil with ball 10.00 15.97 24.8 Ditto without 2.38 5.77 12.1 Difference, or c
= 7.62 10.20 12.7 Hence velocity by the recoil 838 1122 1396 Mean ditto by the
pendulum 785 1087 1353 Difference, the recoil more, 53 35 43 Or nearly the part
1/15 1/31 1/31

62. Thursday, September 11, 1783; from 10 till 12.
The weather was fine. Barometer 29.93; Thermometer 60 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with diam
gun pend p g n oz oz dr inches inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2
2.65 2 2 2.7 3 2 2.65 4 4 6.2 5 4 6.1 6 4 6.0 7 8 13.7 8 8 13.1 9 8 14.1 10 8
16 12 1.96 27.0 21.2 87.4 4 681.2 77.63 40.18 1590 11 8 16 12 1.96 27.1 21.3
88.1 6 682.5 77.65 40.18 1589 12 8 16 12 1.96 26.3 20.2 86.7 12 683.9 77.67
40.18 1535 13 4 16 12 1.96 17.3 16.6 87.5 9 685.7 77.70 40.18 1253 14 4 16 12
1.96 17.1 16.7 89.9 8 687.3 77.72 40.18 1230 15 4 16 12 1.96 17.1 16.7 89.9 7
688.8 77.75 40.17 1233 16 2 16 12 1.96 10.3 11.5 90.1 4 690.4 77.77 40.17 849
17 2 16 12 1.96 10.45 11.7 90.3 3 691.7 77.80 40.17 864 18 2 16 12 1.96 10.3
11.5 89.9 2 692.9 77.82 40.17 855

The GUN no 2. In the last 5 rounds it had about 10 depression.

The PENDULUM the same as left hanging since yesterday. After the experiments
were concluded today, it weighed 694 lb. -- The plugs weighed 1 oz per inch.

The weight of balls and plugs lodged in the block, these last three days, was
36 lb; which added to 663, the weight at the beginning, makes 699: but it
weighed at the end only 694; so that it lost 5 lb of its weight in the 4 days,
or 1 lb per day on a medium.

The value of i, or the mean among the distance of the points struck these
three days, is 88.3.

2 oz 4 oz 8 oz Mean length of the charge 1.8 3.1 5.7 Mean recoil with ball
10.35 17.17 26.80 Ditto without 2.67 6.10 13.63 Difference or c = 7.68 11.07
13.17 Hence velocity by the recoil 846 1220 1452 Mean ditto by the pendulum 856
1239 1571 Difference, the gun less, 10 19 119 Or nearly the part 1/86 1/65 1/13

63. Tuesday, September 16, 1783; from 12 till 2.
The weather was rainy. Barometer 29.9; Thermometer 64 at noon.
No Powder Vibration of gun oz 1 2 2.3 2 2 2.5 3 2 2.35 4 4 5.25 5 4 5.05 6 4
5.4 7 8 11.65 8 8 11.9 9 8 12.05 10 12 17.3 11 12 19.3 12 12 18.7 13 12 17.1 18
16 25.3 15 16 23.3 16 16 24.0 17 20 28.5 18 20 28.2 19 20 24.8

The GUN was no 1.

The last no very uncertain; the tape, being very wet, twisted, and was
entangled.

2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 12 oz 16 oz 20 oz Mean length of charge 1.9 3.2 5.6 8.2 10.6
13.2 Mean recoil, omitting no 19, 2.38 5.23 11.9 18.1 24.2 28.2

64. Thursday, September 18, 1783; from 10 till 3 P. M.
The weather fair and mild. Barometer 30.08; Thermometer 64 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's with Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Velocity of the
ball with ht gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inches inches lbs inches feet
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 24 14.5 16 12 38.6 17.3 90.8 14 655.0 77.21 40.21 1194 8 32 21.6
16 12 44.0 13.0 92.9 8 656.8 77.24 40.20 880 9 36 24.4 16 12 45.8 12.3 92.5 7
658.3 77.27 40.20 838 10 39 27.2 16 12 47.5 went over 659.7 77.29 40.20 11 20
13.3 16 12 36.7 15.5 85.8 11 660.8 77.29 40.20 1144 12 12 8.1 16 12 29.9 18.75
86.8 11 662.5 77.32 40.20 1371 13 14 9.3 16 12 27.3 16.2 85.8 11 664.2 77.35
40.20 1202 D 14 10 6.9 16 13 28.5 19.15 86.6 10 665.9 77.37 40.20 1409 15 14
10.1 16 13 31.2 19.0 89.5 10 667.5 77.40 40.19 1357 16 16 11.1 16 13 32.7 18.0
91.4 5 669.1 77.43 40.19 1262 D 17 8 5.7 16 13 26.4 20.05 89.7 9 670.4 77.45
40.19 1436 18 6 4.6 16 13 20.7 17.0 88.5 9 671.9 77.48 40.19 1237 19 12 8.4 16
13 29.0 18.55 89.9 7 673.4 77.51 40.19 1333 20 10 6.9 16 13 28.8 20.05 90.5 6
674.8 77.53 40.19 1434 21 14 9.6 16 13 32.2 18.5 91.1 6 676.2 77.56 40.19 1318
22 8 5.5 16 13 25.3 18.8 89.9 6 677.6 77.59 40.18 1360 23 12 8.4 16 13 31.1
19.8 90.9 6 678.9 77.61 40.18 1420 24 10 7.0 16 13 28.6 19.35 89.7 6 680.2
77.64 40.18 1409 25 8 5.7 16 13 25.4 18.5 89.5 5 681.5 77.67 40.18 1354 26 16
10.7 16 13 31.2 16.75 89.3 5 682.8 77.69 40.18 1231 D 27 16 11.1 16 13 31.5
17.2 91.4 5 684.1 77.72 40.18 1238 D 28 14 9.7 16 13 33.4 20.0 90.5 4 685.4
77.75 40.17 1457

The GUN no 1. The charge of powder was gradually increased till the gun became
quite full at no 10, when there was just room for half the ball to lie within
the muzzle; which being too short a length to give a direction to the ball, it
missed the pendulum, going over and just striking the top of the screen frame,
about 21 inches above the line of direction, which, though a very slender piece
of wood, turned the ball up into a still higher direction, in which it struck
the bank over the pendulum, and entered it sloping, though but a little way:
all which circumstances show that the force of the ball was but small. And even
at the 9th round, when the center of the ball was about 3 inches within the
gun, the ball struck the pendulum 5 inches out of the line of direction. The
gun was scarce ever sensibly heated.

The diameter of the balls 1.96 inches.

The PENDULUM had been gutted, and had received a new core. It was hung up in
the morning of the day before yesterday, when it weighed 659 lb. And when taken
down this evening it weighed only 686 lb, which is near 4 lb less than the
balls and plugs ought to make it; and which 4 pounds must have evaporated in
the 3 days.

The plugs weighed of an ounce to the inch.

The value of i, or mean point struck, 89.7.

All the three rounds with 16 oz are very doubtful, and seem to be too low,
from some unknown cause.

Mean velocity by the pendulum, etc.
Powder Recoil Veloc. with ht gun ball 8 5.6 25.7 1383 10 6.9 28.6 1417 12 8.3
30.0 1375 14 9.7 32.3 1333 16 11.0 31.8 D 1243 D 20 13.3 36.7 24 14.5 38.6 32
21.6 44.0 36 24.4 45.8 39 27.2 47.5

65. Thursday, September 25, 1783; from 10 A. M. till 3 P. M.
Fine, clear, and warm weather. Barometer 29.93; Thermometer 59 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's with Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with
ht gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 8
5.9 16 13 27.6 23.8 89.3 14 643.0 77.00 40.22 1632 2 10 7.2 16 13 29.5 23.0
88.7 15 644.9 77.03 40.22 1593 3 12 8.4 16 12 32.0 22.0 88.7 15 646.8 77.06
40.21 1532 4 14 9.4 16 12 32.2 21.3 88.5 15 648.8 77.09 40.21 1491 D 5 16 11.3
16 12 39.4 23.6 88.3 13 650.8 77.12 40.21 1662 6 18 12.3 16 12 37.1 21.0 89.0
12 652.6 77.16 40.21 1472 7 20 13.2 16 12 39.8 21.9 91.6 17 654.4 77.19 40.21
1499 8 22 15.1 16 12 41.5 21.7 91.5 11 656.5 77.22 40.20 1492 D 9 24 15.8 16 12
42.6 21.3 91.6 10 658.2 77.25 40.20 1468 10 28 18.9 16 12 44.2 18.1 90.5 10
659.8 77.28 40.20 1266 D 11 32 22.1 16 12 52.8 20.3 90.8 9 661.5 77.31 40.20
1419 12 8 5.5 16 12 27.0 22.2 90.5 8 663.1 77.35 40.20 1562 13 10 7.0 16 12
30.5 22.9 90.0 7 664.6 77.38 40.20 1624 14 12 8.1 16 12 32.4 21.8 85.2 15 666.1
77.41 40.19 1638 15 14 9.3 16 12 32.9 20.4 86.4 15 668.0 77.44 40.19 1517 16 16
10.9 16 12 39.0 22.2 85.8 13 670.0 77.47 40.19 1667 17 8 5.5 16 12 25.2 19.6
87.9 15 671.8 77.50 40.19 1441 D 18 8 5.5 16 12 26.3 20.8 89.2 13 673.6 77.53
40.19 1512 19 10 6.7 16 12 26.3 19.6 89.1 13 675.4 77.56 40.18 1431 D 20 12 8.2
16 12 32.7 22.8 88.8 11 677.2 77.59 40.18 1675 21 14 9.1 16 12 35.1 17.7 89.0
11 678.9 77.63 40.18 1302 D 22 16 10.4 16 12 32.8 15.6 89.1 8 680.6 77.66 40.18
1149 D 23 6 4.4 16 12 22.8 14.5 89.1 682.1 77.69 40.18 1070 D

The GUN was no 2.

The diameter of the balls 1.96 inches.

The PENDULUM had been repaired with a new core, but of very soft and damp
wood. It was hung up yesterday morning, when it weighed 653 lb. And when taken
down this evening it weighed only 678 lb with all the balls and plugs, the
whole ball which came out behind, as well as the broken pieces of the wood and
balls which flew out in the latter rounds, being collected and weighed with it;
which is about 15 lb less than it ought to be; so that about 15 lb has been
lost by evaporation in the space of 30 hours, or about half a pound an hour.

At nos 4, 8, 10 the tape of the pendulum entangled and broke, which rendered
those vibrations doubtful, as marked D. Some other rounds are marked doubtful,
from some other cause, perhaps the badness of the wood in the pendulum, which
split very much; from which circumstance part of the force of the ball might be
lost by the lateral pressure.

The plugs weighed 14 oz to 15 inches.

The value of i, or the mean point struck, 89.5 inches.

The penetration at the 1st and 7th rounds, which were made in fresh parts of
the wood, were from 19 to 20 inches; so that the fore part of the ball
penetrated about 21 inches in this soft wood.

Mean recoil and velocity by the pendulum.
Powder Recoil Veloc. 8 26.7 1569 10 30.0 1608 12 32.4 1615 14 33.4 D 1517 D 16
36.8 D 1664 D 18 37.1 20 39.8 22 41.5 24 42.6 28 44.2 32 52.8 D

But these mediums are not much to be depended on, as the velocities are all
very irregular. It is, in particular, highly probable that the velocity here
found for 14 oz of powder is too small, and that for 16 oz too great.

66. Monday, September, 29, 1783; from 10 A. M. till 1 P. M.
The weather fine, clear, and warm. Barometer 30.28; Thermometer 64 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's with Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball with
ht gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inches inches inch lb inches feet 1 2
2.8 2 2 2.75 3 6 4.5 16 11 22.6 20.5 88.9 7 654.0 77.20 40.21 1448 4 8 5.6 16
11 26.9 22.1 89.1 10 655.4 77.22 40.21 1561 5 10 6.9 16 11 30.2 23.4 91.3 8
656.9 77.25 40.20 1618 6 12 8.3 16 11 33.3 23.9 90.6 9 658.3 77.27 40.20 1669 7
14 9.5 16 11 37.4 24.7 88.9 10 659.8 77.30 40.20 1763 8 16 10.7 16 11 35.9 21.5
87.3 9 661.3 77.32 40.20 1566 D 9 16 11.0 16 11 40.1 23.5 87.8 8 662.8 77.35
40.20 1707 10 18 12.1 16 11 32.7 18.3 87.1 6 664.2 77.37 40.20 1343 D 11 18
12.2 16 11 39.5 21.9 87.7 12 665.5 77.40 40.20 1598 12 20 13.0 16 11 42.7 23.4
91.8 10 667.1 77.43 40.19 1639 13 14 9.6 16 11 21.6 89.3 9 668.6 77.46 40.19
1561

The GUN no 2. -- At the last round the tape broke, so the recoil could not be
measured. No^ 8 and 10 are plainly both irregular, the recoils being greatly
deficient: the vibrations of the pendulum might perhaps be defective by the
balls being resisted sideways by the wood, or by changing their direction
within the block; but there is no cause which I can suspect for the defective
recoils of the gun, as all the circumstances were alike in every case, and the
heights of the charges show that there was no mistake in the quantity of
powder. -- At the last firing the vent had a small channel blown in it, though
the gun was no where very hot.

The PENDULUM had received a new core of sound dry elm, and weighed this
morning, when it was hung up, 654 lb.

The diameter of the balls 1.96 inches.

The plugs weighed 6 oz to 8 inches.

The value of i, or mean point struck, 89.1.

The first penetration was 12 inches, measured behind the ball, and
consequently the fore part penetrated 14 inches.

Mean recoil of gun and velocity of ball: Powder Recoil Veloc. 6 22.6 1448 8
26.9 1561 10 30.2 1618 12 33.3 1669 14 37.4 1662 16 38.0 1637 18 39.5 1598 20
42.7 1639

67. Thursday, September 30, 1783; from 10 A. M. till 1 P. M.
Fine, clear, and warm weather. Barometer 30.25; Thermometer 64 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Balls with Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. of the
ball with ht gun pend. p g n oz inches oz dr inches inches inches inch lb inches
feet 1 2 1.9 2.4 2 2 1.9 2.6 3 10 7.1 16 14 27.5 19.4 89.6 6 669.0 77.46 40.19
1383 4 12 8.4 16 14 31.9 20.4 88.7 6 670.3 77.48 40.19 1472 5 8 5.8 16 14 25.3
18.7 88.8 6 671.6 77.51 40.19 1351 6 14 9.3 16 14 32.7 19.4 88.9 7 672.9 77.53
40.19 1403 7 6 4.6 16 14 21.6 18.5 90.3 6 674.3 77.55 40.19 1320 8 10 6.9 16 14
27.5 19.8 91.2 7 675.6 77.58 40.19 1403 9 12 8.3 16 14 29.5 19.9 92.2 5 677.0
77.60 40.18 1398 10 8 5.7 16 14 25.3 18.9 90.2 6 678.3 77.62 40.18 1360 11 14
9.6 16 14 32.6 19.7 91.2 6 679.6 77.65 40.18 1405 12 6 4.4 16 14 21.9 18.0 87.0
7 680.9 77.67 40.18 1349 13 10 6.9 16 14 28.7 18.8 86.5 7 682.3 77.69 40.18
1420 14 12 8.4 16 14 31.7 20.0 87.9 6 683.7 77.71 40.18 1490 15 8 6.0 16 14
26.4 19.4 88.0 7 685.0 77.74 40.17 1447 16 14 9.3 16 14 32.2 18.4 86.5 7 686.4
77.76 40.17 1399 17 6 4.3 16 14 21.7 17.9 89.2 5 687.8 77.78 40.17 1323

The GUN no 1. -- The vent blew a little, though the gun was never very warm.
The PENDULUM was the same as it hung since yesterday, with all the balls in
it; but the other end of it was turned, which bore the fi^ings very well, the
core being of sound dry wood. At the end of the experiments this day the
pendulum weighed 689 lb, which is only 1 lb less than it ought to be by the
addition of the balls and plugs to the first weight; so little was it less of
weight by evaporation, owing to the dryness of the wood.

The diameter of the balls 1.96 inches.

The plugs weighed 6 oz to 8 inches.

The value of i, or mean point struck, 89.1 inches.

The first penetration, being in sound wood, was 14 inches to the fore part of
the ball.

This set of experiments, as well as those of the three preceding days, were
made to determine the best charge, or that which gives the greatest velocity.

This is a good set of experiments, and the Mean recoil, and velocity of the
ball by the pendulum, are as follows: Powder Recoil Veloc. 6 21.7 1331 8 25.6
1386 10 27.9 1402 12 31.0 1453 14 32.5 1402 which velocities, as well as the
recoils, are found by adding those of each sort together, and dividing by the
number of them, as below: 6 8 10 12 14 1320 1351 1383 1472 1403 1349 1360 1403
1398 1405 1323 1447 1420 1490 1399 3) 3992 4158 4206 4360 4207 means 1331 1386
1402 1453 1402 where the velocity with 12 oz is greatest.

The end of Experiments in 1783.
THE EXPERIMENTS OF 1784.
68. Wednesday, July 21, etc. 1784.
IN the course of last year's operations we experienced several inconveniences
from some parts of our apparatus, which we determined to remedy if possible.
These regarded chiefly the time-pieces, the axes of vibration, and the method
of measuring by the tape. For measuring the time of a certain number of
vibrations, we united the use of a second stop watch with a simple half-second
pendulum, made of a leaden bullet suspended by a silken thread, which did not
always agree together. Again, the axes of the gun and pendulum frames were not
found to be so devoid of friction as might be wished. But, above all, the chief
cause of dissatisfaction, was the method of measuring the extent of the
vibrations by means of the tape; which was, notwithstanding all possible care
and precaution, still subject to much irregularity, by being wetted by rain, or
blown aside by the wind, or otherwise entangled, which rendered the
measurements doubtful and irregular.

The preceding part of this year therefore was employed in correcting these and
other smaller imperfections in the apparatus. To our time-pieces we added a
peculiar one, which measures time to 40th parts of a second. -- Next, by a
happy contrivance, the friction of the axes was almost entirely taken off. This
was effected by means of sockets of a peculiar construction, for the axes to
work in. First imagine the half of a short cylinder, of 2 or 3 inches long, cut
lengthways through the axis, and of a diameter a very little more than the ends
of the axis that are intended to work in it: if this were all, it is evident
that the axis, in vibrating, would touch this socket in one line only, because
their diameters were unequal. Next imagine the inside of this socket to be
gradually ground down toward each end, from nothing in the middle; so that the
inside resembled a tube having its two ends bent downwards, and rising highest
in the middle. Then it is evident that the axis will touch the socket in this
one middle point only. And farther, the under sides of the axis itself were
ground a little, to bring the undermost line to an edge, something like the
pivots of a scale beam. The consequence was, that the friction was not sensible
in a great number of vibrations; and hereafter we commonly made the gun and
pendulum vibrate for just 10 minutes, and divided the counted number of
vibrations by 10, for the mean number per minute -- And for measuring the arcs
of vibration more certainly and accurately, we have constructed a strong wooden
circular arch, of about 4 feet in length, cut out to a radius of just 10 feet.
This arch is divided into chords of equal parts, each the 1000th part of the
radius, or 12/100th parts of an inch, as before described in Art. 16. This arch
being placed 10 feet below, and concentric with the axis, and the groove in the
middle of it filled with the soft composition of soap and wax, the stylette, or
small sharp spear, traces in the groove the extent of the vibration, and the
corresponding divisions on each side of the groove show the length of the chord
vibrated. And as these chords are in 1000th parts of the radius, the value of
r, in the theorem for the velocity of the ball, will be 1000 for all the
following experiments; and then that theorem will become v = 59/96 x p+ b/ bin
gc by the pendulum, and v = 59/96 x G gc/ bin by the recoil of the gun. Or v =
12.742 x c / b or 51/4 x c / b by the gun no 2, when we substitute the values
of G, g, i, n, specified in Art. 36. And farther, when b = 1.047, it is v = 12
c.

The apparatus having been prepared, we employed the three days, July 21, July
26, and August 3, in hanging it up, and in weighing, measuring, and adjusting
all the parts, and trying them by firing a few rounds with powder only. The 4
rounds fired on the first of those days, of 4 ounces each, with the gun no 1,
weighing 917 lb, gave 56 at the first round, and at each of the other three 57
divisions on the measuring arc, for the recoil of the gun.

69. Wednesday, August 4, 1784.
Frequent showers of rain.
No Powder Weight of Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball ball
gun gun pend p g n oz oz dr lb inches inch lb inches feet 1 2 478 55 2 2 478 55
3 2 478 57 4 2 478 57 5 4 478 122 6 8 478 122 7 6 16 14 478 426 166 88.9 9
631.5 76.79 40.23 1313 8 6 16 14 478 387 151 89.3 5 632.8 76.81 40.23 1192D 9 6
16 14 478 426 164 88.9 8 634.0 76.83 40.23 1303 10 6 16 14 650 279 158 89.2 7
635.3 76.85 40.23 1254 11 6 16 14 650 290 160 88.0 8 636.6 76.87 40.23 1291 12
6 16 14 917 193 157 87.3 9 637.9 76.90 40.22 1280 13 6 16 14 917 199 162 86.9 9
639.1 76.92 40.22 1329 14 6 0 0 917 85 0 15 6 1 10 917 104 20 82.3 640.1 76.94
40.22 omitting no 8, the mean is 1295

Here, and in all the future days, the chords of vibration, of both gun and
pendulum, are expressed in 1000th parts of the radius.

The GUN was no 1. -- We began this day with the weight of the gun and its iron
frame only, without any of the leaden weights. Then the one set of weights was
put on at no 10, and the other at no 12. This was done to try the effects of
different weights of gun on the velocity of the ball, experimentally to correct
a common error which had been adopted from time immemorial, by professional
men, namely, that heavier guns, caeteris paribus, give the greater velocities.
The erroneousness of which opinion is proved by the experiments of this and
some of the following days. And it is needless to prove a priori to scientific
men, that the difference in the effects cannot be rendered sensible by any
measurements which we can make of the velocity.

The PENDULUM was the block of last year, with a new core, and a facing of
sheet lead. Its weight, taken this morning, was 627 lb.

The plugs weighed 7 ounces to 11 inches, on an average; which proportion may
always be used in future, at least till another be mentioned.

The 8th no is doubtful, and is omitted in the medium.

The 14th was with powder only, like the first six. And the 15th was without
ball, having only a wad made of junk, weighing 10z 10dr. This made a small
impression, of about half an inch deep, in the face of the pendulum, and
rebounded back. And it struck the pendulum at more than 6 inches above the line
of direction.

Note, the center of the pendulum, as before, is at 88.7 inches below the axis.
And the value of i, for the mean distance of the points struck, is 88.4.

By comparing together the first 6 rounds, which are all with the same weight
of gun, we find that the mean proportion of the recoil, with the different
charges, without balls, is as follows: 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 56 122 252 the recoils
being rather in a higher proportion than the charge of powder.

If we compare the mean of the first 4, with 2 oz of powder and 478 lb weight
of gun, with the mean of July 21, with 4 oz of powder and 917 lb weight of gun,
we shall obtain as follows: Charge 20z 40z Weight of gun 478 lb 917 lb Recoil
56 57 So that, in this instance, the less charge gives a recoil in proportion
to the greater charge, a little above the direct ratio of the weight of powder,
and inverse ratio of the weight of the gun. For that ratio, or 2 x 917 to 4 x
478, is as 56 to 58.

If we compare no 5 with the mean of July 21, which are both with 4 oz of
powder, they will stand thus: Weight of gun 478 915 Recoil 122 57 which shows
that, in this instance, the same charge gives more than double the recoil to
half the weight of the gun.

Lastly, if we compare the means of each pair of velocities with the several
weights of gun, we shall have as follows: 1313 1308 mean with 478 lb with of gun
1303 1308 mean with 478 lb with of gun 1254 1273 mean with 650 lb with of gun 1291
1273 mean with 650 lb with of gun 1280 1305 mean with 917 lb with of gun 1329 1305
mean with 917 lb with of gun
which differences are neither regular, nor greater than happen from different
trials with the weight and all other circumstances the same.

for the 6 oz charge the Mean recoil with ball 196 Ditto without 85 Difference,
or c = 111 Hence velocity by recoil 1339 Ditto by the pendulum 1295 Difference
44 Or the part 1/30

70. Thursday, August 5, 1784.
A fine warm day. Barometer 29.98; Thermometer 68 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Weight of Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball ball
gun gun pend p g n oz oz dr lb inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 485 127 2 6 485
176 3 6 16 14 485 460 195 86.8 9 640.4 76.94 40.22 1606 4 6 16 14 485 459 197
87.2 8 641.7 76.96 40.22 1619 5 6 16 14 655 312 196 88.1 7 642.9 76.99 40.22
1598 6 6 16 14 655 319 196 88.3 7 644.2 77.01 40.22 1598 7 6 16 14 917 218 200
87.3 9 645.5 77.03 40.21 1653 8 6 16 14 917 216 196 88.3 9 646.7 77.06 40.21
1605 9 6 16 14 1170 174 202 89.4 7 648.0 77.08 40.21 1637 10 6 16 14 1170 168
198 89.1 8 649.3 77.11 40.21 1614 mean of all 1616

The GUN was no 3. -- Began first with its own weight only; then at no 5 put on
one pair of the usual weights; at no 7 the other pair; and lastly at no 9 fixed
on some extra weights. But the result shows that the velocity of the ball is
the same with all of them.

The PENDULUM as left hanging since yesterday.

The value of i, or medium among the points struck these last two days, is 88.2.

1606 1613 mean velocity with 485 lb weight of gun 1619 1613 mean velocity with
485 lb weight of gun 1598 1598 mean velocity with 655 lb weight of gun 1598
1598 mean velocity with 655 lb weight of gun 1653 1629 mean velocity with 917
lb weight of gun 1605 1629 mean velocity with 917 lb weight of gun 1637 1625
mean velocity with 1170 lb weight of gun 1614 1625 mean velocity with 1170 lb
weight of gun 1616 mean for 6 oz with gun 3.
71. Saturday, August 7, 1784; from 11 till 2.
The weather fair, but cloudy at times. Barometer 29.92; Thermometer 64 at 2 P.
M.
No Powder Weight of Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball ball
wad gun pend p g n oz oz dr oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 58 2 6 2 10
119 31 93.0 3 6 2 9 120 20 78.0 4 6 93 5 6 93 6 6 2 10 225 206 89.7 4 651.6
77.14 40.21 7 6 16 14 2 8 228 212 89.4 652.9 77.16 40.21 8 6 16 14 2 9 230 206
87.6 5 654.1 77.19 40.21 9 6 16 14 2 9 232 217 89.8 12 655.4 77.21 40.21 10 6
16 14 2 8 231 206 88.8 10 656.7 77.23 40.20 11 6 16 14 219 199 89.2 6 657.9
77.26 40.20 12 6 16 14 4 14 236 205 89.7 8 659.2 77.28 40.20 13 6 16 14 4 12
235 220 89.5 5 660.5 77.30 04.20

The GUN, no 3, with the usual leads, weighed 917 lb.

The mean height of the charge of 6 ounces was 4.5 inches.

The PENDULUM, as left hanging since the last day.

The value of i, or the mean among the points struck these last three days,
88.5.

The object of this day's business, was to try the effect of different degrees
of ramming the charge of powder, with the effect of wads placed in different
positions. Sometimes the powder was only set up without being compressed, and
sometimes it was rammed with a different number of strokes, and pushed with
various degrees of force: but no sensible difference was produced in the
velocity. The wads, which were of 2 inches length, firmly made of junk or
rope-yarn, and made large to be with difficulty pushed into the gun, were
diversely placed and varied in number, being sometimes introduced between the
powder and ball, and sometimes over both. But no effect was perceived from them
on the velocity of the ball; this being indifferently the same, either with one
wad, or two, or none at all. The reason of which is probably because the balls
had very little windage. At the last two numbers two wads were used; in most of
the others only one; weighing on an average about 2 oz 9 dr.

When balls were used with the wads, it was common for them both to enter the
pendulum by the same hole. But it is remarkable that, when the wads were
discharged without balls, they commonly struck wide of the line of the gun by 6
or 8 inches, and indifferently either too high or too low, or to the right or
left; and sometimes they flew in pieces before they struck the block.

The velocities of the ball in these experiments are not computed, as the
effects of the blow from the ball and the wad are compounded together, and that
in an unknown degree, as the wad sometimes slies in pieces, and sometimes not,
or strikes the pendulum with diverse degrees of force at different times; and
also sometimes the wads enter the pendulum, and sometimes they rebound from it.

72. Tuesday, August 10, 1784; from 12 till 2.
The weather thick and cloudy.
No Powder Weight of Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball ball
wad gun pend p g n oz oz dr oz dr inches inch lb inches 1 4 56 2 4 56 3 6 14 2
203 170 89.4 7 674.8 76.62 40.26 4 6 14 3 195 159 89.8 8 676.1 76.64 40.26 5 6
14 2 4 12 214 161 89.5 5 677.3 76.67 40.26 6 6 14 3 4 10 215 163 89.3 6 678.6
76.69 40.26 7 6 14 4 2 5 208 171 89.3 6 679.9 76.72 40.26 8 6 14 2 2 4 208 171
89.1 6 681.1 76.75 40.25 9 6 13 15 2 10 208 176 89.5 5 689.4 76.77 40.25 10 6
14 3 4 10 230 187 90.3 8 683.7 76.80 40.25 11 6 14 3 4 12 232 218 90.8 7 683.0
76.82 40.25

The mean diameter of the ball was 1.875; so that the windage was 15.

The mean height of the charge of powder was 4.4.

The GUN no 3; its weight 917 lb.

The object this day was the effect of windage with low balls, and the effect
of wads, both high and low ones. The wads struck variously, either above or
below or with the ball. The two wads in the last round were made of
well-twisted twine, and firmly bound: they struck the pendulum very hard blows.
The other wads were of junk, and did not strike so hard.

Here, the balls being smaller, and consequently the windage more, the
vibrations are much smaller, although wads were used. So that it seems the wads
do not prevent the escape of the inflamed powder by the windage, nor make any
sensible alteration in the velocity of the ball.

The velocities are not computed, for the same reason as specified in the last
day's experiments.

73. The PENDULUM block had not been altered since the last day's experiments.
But the iron stays of the stem had been changed for others that are stronger,
and which weigh 10 lb more than the old ones did. And this additional 10 lb of
iron must be added to the weight of the pendulum; and new theorems must be made
out for determining the change in the center of gravity and the number of
vibrations per minute. Now this rod, of uniform thickness, reached from the
lower side of the axis to within 24 inches of the top of the block;
consequently its length was 51.4 inches, and its middle point, or center of
gravity, was at 26.6 inches below the middle of the axis of vibration. And this
number 26.6 will be the value of i in the theorem ^ for the place of the new
center of gravity, where the value of b is 10; which theorem gives G = 77.3 -
0.76 = 76.54 for the center of gravity.

And the same values of i and b, substituted in the theorem ^, give N = 40.2
+.07 = 40.27 for the number of oscillations.

Hence then, in this new state of the pendulum, the value of g is 76.54, and
the value of n 40.27, corresponding to the value 670 of p, or weight of the
pendulum. That is p g n 670 76.54 40.27 are the new radical corresponding
values of p, g, n. And these values, being substituted in the two general
theorems, namely, ^, and ^, they become ^, and ^, or ^ nearly. Which are the
theorems to be used now and hereafter for the values of g and n. And where the
distance of the center of oscillation, answering to the number 40.47, is 86.

The value of i this day, or the mean distance of the points struck, is 89.7.

74. Wednesday, August 11, 1784; from 10 till 2.
The air was warm, close, and thick. Barometer 30.25; Thermometer 65 at 10 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 D 65 2 10 1.97 16
15 272 183 89.4 7 686.7 76.87 40.25 1561 3 8 240 176 89.7 6 688.0 76.89 40.24
1499 4 12 297 183 89.5 6 689.3 76.91 40.24 1566 5 10 258 168 88.8 7 690.6 76.93
40.24 1452 6 10 263 168 88.1 6 691.8 76.95 40.24 1466 7 12 293 177 88.2 8 693.1
76.97 40.24 1546 8 14 327 182 89.8 10 694.3 76.99 40.24 1565 9 14 310 175 89.8
9 695.5 77.01 40.24 1508 10 8 240 172 88.6 8 696.9 77.03 40.23 1505 11 8 232
164 89.7 8 698.1 77.05 40.23 1421 12 6 1.96 16 14 151 89.5 6 699.4 77.07 40.23
1319 13 6 200 157 88.6 6 700.7 77.09 40.23 1388 14 12 283 157 85.1 9 702.0
77.11 40.23 1448 15 14 318 169 88.0 7 703.2 77.13 40.23 1510 16 6 202 149 84.0
8 704.5 77.15 40.23 1398

The GUN was no 1, weighing, with the usual leads, 917 lb.

The PENDULUM as left hanging since yesterday.

The mean value of i, for the last two days, is 88.91.

After the experiments were ended this day, the pendulum was weighed, and found
to be 706 lb. Now the original weight, when weighed at first on the 26th of
July, seemingly with as much care as now, was 627 lb; to this add 61 lb weight
of balls and plugs lodged in it, and 10 lb of iron added on the 8th of August,
and they make together 698 lb; from this take 1.6 lb, for the diminution of the
leaden facing of the pendulum, by the balls striking and piercing it, and there
will remain only 697 lb, which the pendulum ought to weigh, and which is 9 lb
less than it is actually found to weigh. I cannot imagine any cause to which
this difference of weight may be attributed, as it is contrary to the effect
heretofore experienced, the pendulum having always been found to lose in weight
by hanging up; unless it arise from the moisture imbibed by the block in the 17
days it was up, and during all or the most part of which time it was very rainy
weather, and the pendulum hung uncovered. And the probability of this will be
heightened by considering that the block had lain by all the preceding winter,
and till after midsummer this year, under cover, in the carpenter's shop, a
circumstance which would make it very dry, and so render it apt to imbibe
moisture from the continually foggy atmosphere and rain which have taken place
ever since it was exposed. This increase of weight then, being 9 lb in the 17
days, or nearly half a pound per day, I have thought it safest to divide
equally among all the days, by adding half a pound for each day it hung up,
from the beginning of this year to the end of this day's experiments.

The object of this course was again to search out the maximum of the gun's
charge; but it is not a good set of experiments, the velocities being not
regular, perhaps owing to the bad state of the pendulum, which was very much
shattered. However it sufficiently appears that there is but little difference
among the velocities due to 8, 10, 12, and 14 ounces of powder.

Weight of Powder 6 oz 8 oz 10 oz 12 oz 14 oz Mean height of charge 4.4 5.7 7.0
8.1 9.5 Mean recoil of gun 201 237 264 291 318 Velocities by the pendulum 1319
1499 1561 1566 1565 Velocities by the pendulum 1388 1505 1452 1546 1508
Velocities by the pendulum 1398 1421 1466 1448 1510 Mean ditto 1368 1475 1493
1520 1528

75. Thursday, September 9, 1784.
Since the last experiments, the steadying-rods of the gun-frame having been
lengthened, and the pendulum block repaired with a new core, etc. we attended
to weigh and measure the several parts; the circumstances of which were as
follows: Weight of the pendulum 638 = p Theref. to its center of gravity 75.93
= g And its vibrations per minute 40.30 = n

The new stay-rods of the gun-frame weigh 17 lb more than the old ones, so that
now lb The weight of iron in the frame is 205 Weight of gun and iron together
495 Weight of gun, iron, and leads 934 = G

By this additional 17 lb weight of iron, the values of g and n, or the center
of gravity and number of oscillations, will be altered; which will cause an
alteration in our theorem v = 59/96 x G gc/ bin, by which the velocity of the
ball is determined from the recoil of the gun, in Art. 36. The values of those
two letters were, at Art. 42 and 43, found to be g = 80.47, and n = 40.0 for
the gun no 2; but the former will now become something less, and the latter
something greater.

Now the old and new iron stay-rods were nearly of equal thickness. But the old
rods extended only 29 inches, and the new ones 58 inches below the axis; the
difference is 29; and the half difference, or 14 added to the old length 29,
gives 43 inches below the axis, where the middle or center of gravity of the
additional length is situated, the weight of which part is 17 lb. But the
center of gravity was found to be 80.47 below the axis, when the whole weight
was 917 lb. Here, the difference of the two distances, or the distance between
the two weights 17 and 917, being 37 inches, and the sum of the weights 934, we
shall have 934 17 37 0.67 the change of the distance of the center of gravity;
which being subtracted from 80.47, leaves 79.8 for the distance of the new
compound center of gravity.

Also the correction of the value of n will be determined by the usual formula
^, in which b = 17, i = 43.5, n = 40.0, p = 917, and g = 80.47; which values,
being used in that formula, give 0.1 for the correction of n; to which add
40.0, and we shall have 40.1 for the new value of n, or number of oscillations
per minute, for the gun no 2; and consequently 40.2 for no 1, and 40.0 for no
3, and 39.9 for no 1. Hence then the new values for the gun no 2 are thus: G g
n i r 934 79.8 40.1 89.15 1000

Then, using these values of G, g, n, i, r, in the formula v = 59000/96 x G gc/
birn abovementioned, it becomes v = 205/16 x c / b for the velocity by the
recoil of the gun; where b is the weight of the ball, and c the difference
between the chords of recoil with and without a ball.

And when b = 1.047 lb = 16 oz 12 dr, the same theorem is v = 12 c for the gun
no 2. And every dram in the value of b will alter this theorem by the 1/525th
part nearly.

Also for the gun no 1 the above velocity must be decreased by the 400th part,
and for no 3 increased by the 400th part, and for no 4 increased by the 200th
part.

76. Friday, September 10, 1784; from 10 till 1.
The weather fair; but not warm.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 115 2 4 116 3 6
194 4 6 190 5 6 193 6 4 1.96 16 12 143 88.0 8 638.0 75.93 40.30 1148 7 4 322
140 88.3 7 639.2 75.95 40.30 1123 8 4 324 144 89.3 7 640.3 75.97 40.30 1144 9 4
318 138 88.4 6 641.5 75.99 40.30 1110 10 6 433 173 88.5 7 642.7 76.02 40.30
1393 11 6 432 173 89.9 6 643.8 76.04 40.30 1374 12 6 430 172 90.1 7 645.0 76.06
40.30 1366 13 6 427 168 89.6 6 646.1 76.09 40.30 1345 14 8 519 188 90.0 7 647.3
76.11 40.30 1501 15 8 498 172 88.9 8 648.5 76.13 40.30 1394 D 16 8 529 190 89.6
6 649.6 76.15 40.30 1530 17 2 92 89.4 3 650.8 76.17 40.29 744 18 2 197 98 90.3
3 652.0 76.19 40.29 786 19 2 187 91 89.8 3 653.1 76.21 40.29 736

The GUN, no 1, without the leaden weights, weighed 495 lb.

The PENDULUM as specified the last day.

The plugs weigh 6 ounces to 7 inches long, not being of so dry wood as before.
And this rate of the weight of the plugs to be continued till an alteration is
announced.

The mean value of i, or point struck, is 89.29.

Here 439 lb weight of lead being taken off, at the distance 90.3 below the
axis; and the center of gravity yesterday being at 79.8 distance, when the
whole weight was 934 lb; therefore 495 439 10.5 9.3 the change of the center of
gravity; and consequently 79.8 - 9.3 = 70.5 = g is the distance of the new
center of gravity for this day.

Also the new number of oscillations per minute for this day will be found by
this formula ^; where the values of the letters are thus, namely: G = 934 g =
79.8 b = 439 i = 90.3 n = 40.2 Now in this day's experiments, the Charge or
weight of Powder 2 oz 4 oz 6 oz 8 oz Mean height of ditto 1.8 3.1 4.3 5.8 Mean
recoil with ball 192 321 431 515 Ditto without 115 192 Difference, or c = 206
239 Hence velocity by recoil 1170 1358 Mean ditto by the pendulum 755 1131 1370
1475 Difference, + 39 - 12 Or nearly the part 1/30 1/114

These velocities from the recoil are found by the theorem 59/96 x G gc/ bin,
where the values of the letters are thus: G = 495 g = 70.5 b = 1.047 i = 89.15
n = 40.5

77. Saturday, September 11, 1784; from 10 till 1.
Very hot and clear weather.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 58 2 8 1.97 16 14
249 D 225 89.6 10 654.3 76.23 40.29 1814 3 8 1.92 16 4 248 206 89.6 6 655.4
76.25 40.29 1730 4 8 1.87 15 2 241 185 88.7 8 656.6 76.27 40.29 1693 5 8 1.97
16 14 262 224 89.7 3 657.8 76.29 40.29 1815 6 8 1.92 16 2 249 201 88.9 7 658.9
76.32 40.28 1725 7 8 1.87 15 2 236 177 88.6 7 660.1 76.34 40.28 1631 8 4 1.97
16 14 165 165 90.0 7 661.3 76.36 40.28 1341 9 4 1.92 16 2 155 146 89.3 6 662.4
76.39 40.28 1255 10 4 1.87 15 2 149 134 89.7 7 663.6 76.41 40.28 1228 11 4 1.97
16 14 165 165 89.9 6 664.8 76.43 40.28 1351 12 4 1.92 16 1 153 142 89.3 5 665.9
76.45 40.27 1233 13 4 1.87 15 2 146 132 89.3 5 667.1 76.48 40.27 1222

The GUN was no 3, and weighed 934 lb.

At no 2 the recoil 249 of the gun is too small; owing to the stylette, which
ought to trace the arc, not marking all the way.

The PENDULUM as left yesterday.

The mean value of i, or point struck these two days, is 89.34.

The object this day was the effect of different sizes and weights of balls,
and different degrees of windage.

The mean weight of balls and velocity, for the two weights of powder 4 and 8
ounces, are as follow: Ball's Powder's with diam Recoil Veloc. with ht oz dr inches
gun ball 4 3.4 15 2 1.87 148 1225 16 2 1.92 154 1244 16 14 1.97 165 1346 8 5.9
15 2 1.87 239 1662 16 3 1.92 249 1728 16 14 1.97 262 1815

Here the decrease of the velocity is uniformly observable with the decrease of
weight in the ball, and that in a very considerable degree, instead of
increasing, which it ought to do, if the windage were the same, or the balls
had the same diameter, and that in the reciprocal sub-duplicate ratio of the
weight of the ball. Now that ratio is the ratio of 15 to 16, or of 11 to 11
7/11. Therefore as 11 11 7/11 1346 1424 the velocity the least ball would have
had, if its diameter had been equal to the heaviest. But its velocity was
actually no more than 1225; and therefore the difference 199, or 1/7 of the
whole, or 1/6 of the experimented velocity, is the velocity lost by the
difference of windage; although this difference was only 1/10 of an inch, or
1/20 of the caliber, which is no more than the usual windage allowed in
service. But the force, or inflamed powder, lost by the same cause, will be
2/7, or a double part of the velocity, because the velocity is as the square of
the force or quantity of powder. Hence then, in charges with 4 ounces of
powder, and a windage of 1/20 of the caliber, 2/7 of the charge is lost, or
nearly a mean between and.

And if the computation be made in like manner for the above charges of 8
ounces of powder, it will be found that the part of the charge lost by the same
windage, will be, in the case of 8 ounces, 4/13 of the whole; which is still
more than the part, though somewhat less than in the case of 4 ounces. The
reason of which is, that the ball is sooner out of the gun with the 8 oz
charge, and so the fluid has less time to escape in.

78. Thursday, September 16, 1784.
To try the effect of firing the charge of powder in different parts of it.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n inches oz dr 1 4 1.96 16 9 347 160 88.0 4 668.3 76.50 40.27 1373
2 4 348 161 87.8 7 669.4 76.52 40.27 1387 3 4 353 165 88.5 6 670.6 76.54 40.27
1413 4 4 350 161 87.5 6 671.8 76.57 40.27 1398 5 4 346 157 87.3 5 672.9 76.59
40.27 1369 6 4 352 159 87.2 5 674.0 76.61 40.27 1390

The GUN was no 3; its weight 500 lb.

The PENDULUM as left yesterday.

The mean value of i, or point struck these 3 days, 89.03.

Powder Recoil Mean veloc. of the ball with ht gun 4 3.1 34.9 1388

The cartridge of no 1, 2, and 4 was fired at the fore part; no 3 and 5 behind;
and no 6 in the middle: but there does not appear to be any difference among
them.

79. Tuesday, September 21, 1784; from 10 till 1.
The weather moderately warm.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 1.97 16 12 166 2
4 457 132 89.7 5 683.0 76.66 40.28 1125 3 4 451 132 91.3 4 684.1 76.68 40.28
1107 4 4 458 136 91.5 4 685.2 76.70 40.28 1140 5 6 157 88.9 4 686.3 76.72 40.28
1357 6 6 613 162 91.0 4 687.5 76.74 40.28 1371 7 6 591 153 90.1 4 688.6 76.76
40.28 1310 D 8 6 617 162 90.2 5 689.7 76.78 40.28 1388 9 8 16 10 163 89.6 5
690.8 76.80 40.27 1420 10 8 1.96 16 12 168 88.6 4 691.9 76.82 40.27 1471

The GUN was no 1, without any of the leaden weights. The gun itself now weighs
only 179 lb, as it has been lightened 111 lb, by turning it down, to try if the
velocity of the ball would be any less by making the gun lighter: but no
difference appears, as the iron work is 205, the gun and iron together this day
weigh 384 lb.

80. The PENDULUM as left yesterday, except that it had received a
strengthening strap of iron, weighing 7 lb 13 oz, which, reduced to its center
of gravity, is placed at 79 inches below the axis. With this strap it weighed
this morning, before the experiments commenced, 683 lb; which is 6.2 lb less
than it ought to be by adding all the balls and plugs to the first weight; of
which 6.2 lb difference, about 1.6 lb is for waste of the leaden facing, and
the rest 4.6 lb is probably by evaporation: and as the time the pendulum has
hung up is 11 days, the rate of evaporation is about 3/7 of a pound per day.
The 6.2 lb loss is divided equally among all the 32 experiments that have been
made.

On account of the iron strap of 7.8 lb added at 79 inches, as above, the
formula last given, for the variation in the center of gravity and number of
oscillations, will need correction, namely the formula ^, ^.
Now these formulae, by making i = 79, and b = 7.8, become G = 76.54 +.03 =
76.57 and N = 40.27 +.02 = 40.29
And hence the corresponding radical values are nearly p g n 678 76.57 40.29
Which values, being substituted in the two general theorems, viz. ^, and ^,
they become ^, and ^ or ^ nearly: which are the new theorems hereafter to be
used.


Note, the mean value of i, for the point struck the four last days, is 88.82;
which, used in these last formula, give the corrected values of g and n, as
inserted in their proper columns in the table of this day's experiments. -- No
7 is doubtful, and therefore omitted.

The means of this day are as below: Powder Recoil Veloc. of with ht gun the ball
4 3.0 455 1124 6 4.3 615 1372 8 5.5 1445

81. Saturday, September 25, 1784.
This day Major Blomfield alone tried some cartridges, of 8 oz each, by firing
them behind, before, and in the middle; but he found no sensible difference in
the velocities.

He also discharged several low balls, weighing only 13 oz 3 dr, and having
about.15 of an inch windage; and the same balls, when covered with leather, so
as to fit closely in the bore: but the velocities were the same; probably owing
to the fired powder quickly blowing off the leather.

The weight of the pendulum was increased 10 or 11 lb, namely, by 8 balls and
58 inches of plugs.

82. Monday, October 4, 1784; from 11 till 2.
The weather dry, but cold and windy.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. diam with gun
pend p g n ball oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 D149 2 4 163 3 4
164 4 8 1.96 16 10 740 158 87.6 6 704.0 77.03 40.26 1440 5 8 14 742 166 88.2 6
705.0 77.05 40.26 1482 6 8 10 742 163 88.1 7 706.1 77.07 40.26 1482 7 8 14 729
158 87.6 6 707.1 77.09 40.25 1425 8 8 10 749 168 89.0 6 708.2 77.11 40.25 1517
9 8 14 751 166 88.8 6 709.2 77.13 40.25 1482 10 6 10 615 151 89.1 6 710.3 77.14
40.25 1367 11 6 14 604 150 90.2 7 711.3 77.16 40.25 1323 12 6 10 586 147 92.3 9
712.4 77.18 40.24 1289 13 6 14 610 152 91.9 8 713.4 77.20 40.24 1321 14 4 10
457 128 92.5 7 714.5 77.22 40.24 1124 15 4 14 453 120 92.4 8 715.5 77.24 40.24
1041 16 4 10 447 120 92.3 6 716.5 77.26 40.24 1059 17 2 14 270 85 91.5 5 717.6
77.27 40.23 747 18 2 10 271 85 91.2 4 718.6 77.29 40.23 762 19 2 14 279 87 91.4
4 719.7 77.31 40.23 768 20 4 14 459 128 92.3 5 720.7 77.33 40.23 1120

The GUN no 1, without the leads, weighed 384 lb.

The PENDULUM the same as left hanging since the last day.

This day was a continuation of the experiments with the light gun, again to
try if the velocity was altered. But without effect. The means as below:
Powder's Weight 2 oz 4 oz 6 oz 8 oz -- height 1.73 2.94 4.12 5.42 Recoil of gun
273 454 604 742 Velocity of ball 759 1086 1325 1472

The mean weight of the balls is 16 oz 12 dr.

The mean value of i, for the point struck, was 89.3.

83. Tuesday, October 5, 1784; from 11 till 2.
The weather fine and warm.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 48 2 8 1.96 16 10
206 152 89.0 5 721.9 77.35 40.23 1404 3 8 14 213 158 87.6 5 723.0 77.37 40.23
1463 4 8 14 208 163 91.8 7 724.1 77.39 40.23 1443 5 8 14 158 91.0 6 725.2 77.41
40.22 1414 6 8 14 152 90.7 6 726.4 77.43 40.22 1367 7 8 13 153 91.3 6 727.5
77.45 40.22 1374 mean 1411

The GUN was no 1, with 687 lb of lead fixed to it, namely, 433 lb about the
trunnions, and 253 lb lashed upon the upper side of the gun, close to, and
before and behind the stem: these, with 384 lb for the gun and iron together,
make in all 1071 lb.

The object was again to try if the velocity of the ball would be increased by
diminishing the recoil of the gun. And for the severer trial, a great quantity
of heavy timber was laid behind and against the cascable of the gun in the last
three rounds, so as to stop the recoil entirely, which it did, excepting for
about the or of an inch, which the gun pushed the timber back, as expressed in
the column of recoil. But the result is still the same.

The PENDULUM the same as left hanging since yesterday.

The mean value of i, or point struck the last 6 days, is 89.4.

84. Wednesday, October 6, 1784.
The weather clear, but windy.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 62 2 8 144 3 144
4 148 5 147 6 155 7 157 8 1.95 16 9 272 150 88.4 9 728.7 77.46 40.22 1416 9 268
146 88.8 7 729.8 77.48 40.22 1375 10 279 150 88.1 5 730.9 77.49 40.22 1426 11
279 147 88.7 7 732.0 77.51 40.21 1390 12 273 150 87.4 6 733.2 77.52 40.21 1442
13 282 174 D 87.4 8 693.4 76.83 40.27 1566 D mean 1436

The GUN no 1, with leads, weighed 817 lb.

The PENDULUM as left yesterday.

The mean value of i, or point struck, these last 7 days, 89.3.

The object this day was the effect of cork wads, and of different degrees of
ramming. The cork wads were near an inch long, and were made to fit very tight,
being rather more than 2 inches diameter; and weighed 5 drams each.

Nos 1, 2, 3, 8, 9 were without wads, 4, 5, 10, 11 with a wad gently pressed
home, 6, 7, 12, 13 with a wad, and hard rammed by 2 men.

At no 12 one of the iron bands of the pendulum broke, and fell across the
measuring arch. The band weighed 41 lb, and no 13 was fired after the band was
removed, and consequently 41 lb must be deducted.

The velocities are 1416 1396 the mean without wads 1375 1396 the mean without
wads 1426 1408 with wads not pressed. 1390 1408 with wads not pressed. 1442
1442 with wads very hard rammed. D 1442 with wads very hard rammed. 148 Mean
recoil without ball 275 Ditto with ball.

No 13 is very doubtful, the vibration of the pendulum being evidently too
large; perhaps 174 had been set down instead of 164.

In the above there seems to be some small advantage in favor of the wads. But
I suspect the difference is only accidental; and the number of experiments is
too small to afford any tolerably good mediums.

85. Monday, October 11, 1784; from 11 to 2.
The weather cold and cloudy.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 4 63 2 8 143 3 1.95
16 9 141 87.4 10 733.5 77.52 40.21 1357 4 9 285 160 85.9 9 734.9 77.54 1569 D 5
8 275 150 86.8 7 736.4 77.56 1465 6 8 267 149 86.1 8 737.8 77.58 1470 7 8 268
145 86.2 8 739.3 77.60 1433 8 8 264 146 87.0 9 740.7 77.62 1432 9 8 274 147
85.4 6 742.2 77.64 1472 10 8 272 148 86.5 7 743.6 77.66 1467 11 5 267 142 85.9
5 745.1 77.68 1436 12 5 261 137 86.5 9 746.5 77.70 1379 13 5 263 137 85.9 7
748.0 77.72 1392 14 5 269 143 85.7 6 749.4 77.74 1459 mean 1444

The GUN no 1, weighed 817 lb.

The PENDULUM had had its band repaired, which did not however alter its
weight. The whole weighed this morning 733 lb. Now the weight of the balls and
plugs in the last 5 days is 62 lb, which, being added to 683 lb, the weight of
the pendulum on September 21, it makes 745 lb, which is 11 lb more than it
weighed this morning. For this defect I know of no cause but evaporation: for
in this time there was no waste of leaden facing, as the other end of the block
was used, which was not covered with lead. The time in which this 11 lb was
lost is 20 days, which is nearly at the rate of a pound each day. This defect
is therefore divided equally among all the days.

The mean value of i, for the point struck these 8 days, is 88.8.

The object this day was again the effect of cork wads, and different degrees
of ramming.

Ht. of Powder Mean Veloc. Nos 2, 9 were without wads 5.85 1472 3, 5, 7 with
wads, not rammed 5.87 1418 6, 8 a wad, and very hard rammed 4.40 1451 10, 11,
12 a wad, and moderately rammed 5.20 1427 13, 14 2 wads over powder and 1 over
ball, and very hard rammed 4.45 1426 Mean of all 5.15 1444 With. of ball Mean
Veloc. Nos 3, 4 16 9 1463 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 16 8 1456 11, 12, 13, 14 16 5 1417
Mean of all 16 7 1444

In this course the wads have no perceptible effect.

86. Tuesday, October 12, 1784; from 11 till 1.
The weather fine and clear.
No Powder Ball's Vibration of Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball diam with
gun pend p g n oz inches oz dr inches inch lb inches feet 1 8 123 2 16 1.96 16
11 208 87.1 9 750.9 77.76 40.21 2047 3 16 425 219 86.0 9 752.3 77.78 40.21 2187
4 16 409 200 85.6 10 753.8 77.79 40.20 2011 5 16 152 87.1 7 755.2 77.81 40.20
1505 D 6 16 389 197 85.4 11 756.7 77.83 40.20 1994 7 16 412 204 85.7 8 758.1
77.85 40.20 2062 8 16 408 203 85.5 8 759.5 77.86 40.20 2061 mean 2060

The GUN no 4, weighed 928 lb.

The PENDULUM as left yesterday. But it was quite broken and useless at the end
of these experiments.

The mean value of i, or point struck these 9 days, 88.6.

The object this day was the effect of firing the charge in different parts,
either before, or behind, or in the middle: for which the means are as below:
Mean Veloc. Nos 2, 6 fired before 2020 3, 7 in the middle 2124 4, 8 behind 2036
Mean of all 2060 Mean recoil of gun 409 No 5 is omitted as doubtful.

The end of Experiments in 1784.

EXPERIMENTS IN 1785.
87. SEVERAL of the experiments of the two former years being not so regular as
might be wished, we have again undertaken to repeat some of them, and to add
still more to the stock already obtained, that the mediums upon the whole may
be tolerably exact, the great number of repetitions counteracting the
unavoidable small irregularities, and deviations from the truth, in experiments
instituted upon so large a scale. For this purpose we begin with the gun no 2,
and use charges of 8 ounces of powder; and have formed the resolution of firing
every shot into a fresh and sound part of the block of wood, and changing the
block very frequently, before it become too much battered, that the penetration
of the ball and the force of the blow may be obtained with the greater degree
of accuracy.

It is also proposed to procure some good ranges, to compare them with the
initial velocities made under the same circumstances; from the comparison of
which we may estimate the effects of the resistance of the air, and so lay a
foundation for a new theory of gunnery. It is rather difficult to obtain with
accuracy such long ranges as our initial velocities would produce, being from 1
mile to 2 miles, when the projection is made at an angle of 45 degrees; for in
such long ranges our small balls cannot be seen, when they fall to the ground.
We were obliged therefore to have recourse to the water, in which the fall of
the ball can be much better perceived; because the plunge of the ball in the
water, breaking the surface and throwing it up, makes the place visible at a
great distance. But then another difficulty occurs, how to obtain exactly the
distance of the fall, or length of the range, as the mark made in the surface
of the water is visible but for a moment. This difficulty however, our
situation at Woolwich, close by the river Thames, enabled us to overcome, as
well as afforded us a good length of range. For at our situation in the Warren,
the river makes a remarkable turn, and forms below us the part called the
Gallions Reach, a map of which is here given in plate IV. In this map, A
denotes the point where the guns were placed, being the Convicts' Wharf, which
is so called because it is there that the convicts, or felons condemned to work
on the river Thames, land their gravel, and upon which they usually labor.
From this point we have a convenient range of about a mile and a half toward
B, in the county of Essex, where there is a private or merchant's powder
magazine. The buildings near C consist of the academy and a noble range of
storehouses; and from this point we should have had a still longer and more
convenient range, had not our view from hence been interrupted by four large
hulks, which lie, for the use of the convicts, in the river opposite the part
between this point and the point A. Having found this convenient situation for
our operations, we made an exact survey and map of the two sides of the river,
both ways beyond the extent of the ranges; and fixed on convenient stations at
D and E on the south side, and F and G on the north side of the river, to place
two parties of observers, who might mark the place where each ball should fall
in the water, as well as note down the time employed by the ball in flying
through the air, from the visible discharge of the gun to the plunge of the
ball in the water. The method of determining the place of the fall was this:
Two parties of observers, consisting of three or four steady and intelligent
young gentlemen in each party, having taken their stands at D and F, or E and
G, according to the expected length of the range, carefully watched the
discharge of every ball from the gun at A; then tracing it, as it were, through
the air by the loud whizzing noise it made in its slight, their eye was
prepared and directed gradually toward the place of the fall, which they
seldom missed of observing. Then immediately on perceiving the plunge, some of
them noted the time of flight, by a good stop watch, while others observed some
remarkable land object on the opposite coast, and directly in a line with the
place in the water where the ball fell. This done, they directed the telescope
or sights of an instrument, such as a theodolite or plain table, to that
object, and noted the position of it. This being done by each party of
observers, and the line of position from each station drawn on the plan,
afterward at leisure, the intersection of those lines gave very exactly the
place of the fall, and consequently its distance from the gun. In this manner
then were determined all the ranges and times of flight registered in the
following experiments; those places being left blank where the observation was
either doubtful, or not made at all. The times of flight were also sometimes
observed at the gun itself, where the plunge of the ball could often be
perceived.

In this map of the river in plate IV, the dotted line on each side of the
river denotes low water mark; the first black line next without it denotes
high water mark; and the other, or outermost line, is the land bank which has
been raised in former ages, from Greenwich for many miles below, and with
immense labor, to prevent the waters of the river from overflowing the
adjacent fields, which it would do every tide, as they lie low and are
otherwise very marshy.

88. Wednesday, August 31, 1785.
EMPLOYED this day in making part of the survey by the side of the river, for
forming the map, and fixing the stations proper for the parties of observers to
occupy, in watching the fall of the balls in the river; and for other purposes.

We weighed and measured the pendulum, which had been prepared in a very
complete manner, and with stronger bands than before. It weighed just 795 lb.
And, by a mean of several times balancing and vibrating, we found 78 inches to
be the distance of the center of gravity below the axis, and 40.07 the number
of oscillations per minute.

After executing part of the survey by the side of the river, we fired a few
balls upon the water, from the Convicts' or Proof Wharf, to try whereabouts
they will fall, and thereby to judge of the proper places for the observers to
be stationed at. The gun was no 2, with 8 ounces of powder, and was tried at
different elevations. When the gun was elevated at 45 degrees, the balls ranged
much too far, going beyond the stretch of the river, and falling on the coast
of Essex below the point B. But at 15 degrees elevation, the balls ranged to a
very convenient distance, namely, a little more than a mile. And their fall in
the water could be very well seen from the side of the river nearly opposite
the place of the fall, and sometimes from the gun itself.

Upon this occasion I took out with me, and employed the first class of
Gentlemen Cadets belonging to the Royal Military Academy, namely, Messieurs
Bartlett, Rowley, De Butts, Bryce, Wm. Fenwick, Pilkington, Edridge, and
Watkins, who have gone through the science of fluxions, and have applied it to
several important considerations in natural philosophy. Those gentlemen I have
voluntarily offered and undertaken to introduce to the practice of these
interesting experiments, with the application of the theory of them, which they
have before studied under my care. For, although it be not my academy duty, I
am desirous of doing this for their benefit, and as much as possible to assist
the eager and diligent studies of so learned and amiable a class of young
gentlemen; who, as well as the whole body of students now in the upper academy,
form the best set of young men I ever knew in my life; nay, I did not think it
even possible, in our state of society in this country, for such a number of
gentlemen to exist together in the constant daily habits of so much regularity
and good manners; their behavior being indeed perfectly exemplary, and the
pure effect of true philosophical principles, arising from a rational
conviction of the propriety of a regular good conduct, which is such as would
do honor to the purest and most perfect state of society that ever existed in
the world: and I have no hesitation in predicting the great honor, and future
services, which will doubtless be rendered to the state by such eminent
instances of virtue and abilities.

89. Thursday, September 1, 1785.
WENT out again with the same class of eight young gentlemen, to complete the
survey of the river side. The weather changed to rain after we were out, which
continued the whole time, and to such a degree as to wet us entirely through
all our clothes. Yet every one went through the business, not only willingly,
but even cheerfully.

90. Friday, September 2, 1785; from 9 till 3.
The weather rather windy and cloudy.

Barometer 29.8; Thermometer within 66.

Went with Major Blomfield and the same class of cadets, and made the following
set of fourteen experiments, the first 8 balls being fired into the pendulum,
and the other 6 down the river, to get the corresponding ranges.

No Powder Ball's Vibr. pend Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball
Penetration with diam p g n oz oz dr inches inches inch lb inches feet inches 1 8
16 13 1.965 128 81.0 10 795.0 78.33 40.07 1438 18.0 2 139 85.7 9 796.6 35 07
1479 19.9 3 141 90.3 11 798.3 38 07 1428 4 146 92.7 12 800.0 40 07 1444 16.7 5
163 96.2 12 801.6 43 06 1557 20.3 6 171 94.0 10 803.2 45 06 1675 20.7 7 149
89.1 13 804.8 47 06 1543 16.4 8 144 91.5 11 806.4 50 06 1457 16.6 Time sec
Range feet means 1503 18.9 9 14 6110 10 6060 11 not 12 seen 13 5760 14 5735
mean 5916

The GUN was no 2. It was not hung on an axis, as in the two former years, but
mounted on a small carronade carriage, made for the purpose, both in the last 6
rounds, which were fired down the river, and in the first 8 rounds, which were
fired into the new pendulum, at the same distance as formerly, or about 35
feet, and each ball into a fresh part of the wood, both to obtain the force of
the blow the more accurately, and to take the penetration of the ball in the
solid wood, which we did every time by pushing in a wire to touch the hinder
part of the ball: these penetrations are various, according as the part struck
was more or less compact, and they are rather larger than was expected, the
medium of all being 18 4/10, although the block of elm, as the carpenters
assured us, was sound, dry, and well-seasoned wood. The penetrations are set
down in the last column, and are for the fore part of the balls, the diameter
having been always added to the length of the wire.

The POWDER was not of the same parcel as the two former years; but it was from
the same maker, and made as nearly similar to the former as might be. The
charges were gently set home, and all circumstances made alike. The mean length
of the charge of 8 oz was 4.84.

The PENDULUM had been kept close covered with a painted canvas cloth since the
first day that it was weighed and measured, to preserve it from the weather.
The plugs weighed 9 ounces to every 11 inches in length; the whole weight of
all the plugs, together with that of the 8 balls, make up 13 lb, wanting only
an ounce and a half; and when the pendulum was taken down and weighed this
afternoon, its weight was found to be 808 lb, which is just 13 lb more than its
weight at first. So that it has neither lost weight by evaporation, nor gained
by imbibing moisture: owing, probably, to the circumstance of being covered by
the painted canvas. -- All the apparatus was in good order, and the experiments
all very accurately made.

At the beginning of these experiments, the values of p, g, n, being p = 795, g
= 78, n = 40.07; if these values be substituted in the two theorems ^ ^ for the
correction of g and n, they become ^ ^ or ^ nearly. And by these theorems the
numbers in the columns g and n are made out, the mean value of i, or point
struck, being 90.1.

The last 6 rounds were fired down the river from the Convicts' or Proof Wharf
at A, and the place of the fall observed by two parties of the cadets,
stationed at D and E. The gun had 15 degrees elevation. The fall of the first
only could be seen at the gun, where the time of flight was observed by a stop
watch, and found to be 14 seconds. The two parties of observers at D and E had
no time-piece with them, so that the other times of flight could not be
observed. The medium range is 5916 feet or 1972 yards. The last two balls went
close over the heads, and fell just beyond, the lower party of observers, at E;
yet notwithstanding their imminent danger, they gallantly resolved to keep
their ground, if any more rounds should be fired, not knowing immediately that
we intended not firing any more at that time. These two rounds were probably
deslected thus a little from their course by the usual causes of deviation. And
perhaps the two former rounds had been still farther deflected, and thrown on
the land, as the observers saw nothing of them. But the gun was pointed in a
direction rather nearer this south side of the river.

91. Thursday, September 8, 1785; from 12 to 3.
The weather close and warm, rather hazy. Barometer 30.02; Thermometer 65
within, but warmer without.
No Powder Ball's Time Range Whereabouts the Balls fell with diam oz oz dr inches
sec feet 1 8 16 12 1.96 14 6460 Near the middle of the river 2 6080 Near the
north side 3 4 15 6040 Ditto 5 15 6540 Ditto 6 15 6460 Near the middle 7 14
5720 On the south bank, and within 40 means 14.7 6216 yards of the lower
station E

These 7 rounds were fired down the river from the same place as before; the
elevation of the gun being 15 degrees, and all other circumstances the same as
before. The gun was pointed nearly to the middle of the river; yet the balls
fell mostly wide of the direction, and that both ways, some falling near one
side of the river, and some near the other, though there was not the least
wind. The times of flight were taken with a stop watch, at the lower station of
observers at E, by noting the time between seeing the flash of the gun and the
plunge of the ball in the water. They run from 14 to 15 seconds, and accord
very well with the ranges, the larger to the larger: the medium is 14.7
seconds; and the medium range 6216 feet, or 2072 yards. No 3 was not seen. The
mean length of charge 4.8 inches.

The same parties of young gentlemen kept their station very gallantly, and
make no hesitation in offering to attend and observe there for the remainder of
the experiments, although some of the balls this day again fell near them, and
one indeed within 40 yards of them.

92. Friday, September 9, 1785; from 9 till 1.
The weather very fine and warm. Barometer 29.93; Thermometer, within, 66.
No Powder Ball's Vibrat. pend Point struck Plugs Values of Veloc. ball Penetr.
with diam p g n oz oz dr inches inches lb inches feet inches 1 4 16 12 1.96 99
79.0 9 805.3 78.48 40.06 1162 16.7 2 107 82.3 10 806.7 49 06 1208 16.4 3 114
87.1 10 808.1 50 07 1218 16.7 4 115 87.3 9 809.6 51 07 1228 mediums 1204 16.6

We fired these 4 rounds into the same pendulum as we left hanging on September
2, which had been kept under cover since that time. After these 4 rounds, it
weighed 811 lb, which is 2 lb less than it ought to be when the weight of the 4
balls and plugs are added to its former weight, and which 2 lb it must be
supposed to have lost by evaporation in the course of the 7 days, which was
mostly dry, warm weather.

The plugs weighed 9 oz to 14 inches.

Mean length of the charge 3.0.

We could not venture to fire down the river this day, on account of the great
number of ships that were upon it.

93. Saturday, September 10, 1785; from 12 till 2.
Fine dry weather. Barometer 29.8; Thermometer 66.
No Powder Ball's Penetr. Recoil with diam oz oz dr inches inches inches 1 2 16
10 1.96 6.1 2.5 2 4 12.2 7.0 3 8 20.8 15.8 4 2 6.7 3.0 5 4 14.4 9.0 6 8 23.0
17.5 7 2 16 12 7.8 2.5 8 4 14.0 7.5 9 8 20.7

These 9 balls were fired into the root end of a block of elm, laid upon the
ground, to obtain the penetration with different charges, each ball being fired
into a fresh and sound part of the wood, and in the direction of the fibers.
The wood was moist within, as we discovered by boring out the balls; but it was
hard and firm of its kind, being in the root, or the root end after the body of
the tree was sawed off from it. The penetrations are for the fore part of the
ball, as usual.

The gun was no 2, and mounted, as in all the experiments of this year, on a
small sea gun carriage, without trucks, but fixed on a base like a mortar bed,
and slid along the ground or platform in recoiling.

The muzzle was placed at 79 inches from the face of the block. The mean
penetrations and recoils are as follows: Powder Penetr. Recoil 2 oz 6.9 2.7 4
13.5 7.8 8 21.2 16.7

So that the penetrations are nearly 7, 14, 21, or nearly as 1, 2, 3, or as the
logarithms of the weights of powder.

94. Wednesday, September 14, 1785; from 10 till 12.
A fine warm day. Barometer 30.5; Thermometer, within, 67.
No Powder Ball's Time Range with diam oz oz dr inches seconds feet 1 4 16 12
1.96 2 3 10 4730 4 7 4030 5 8 4450 6 4380 7 8 mediums 8.4 4398

These 8 rounds were fired down the river as before. The gun no 2, and
elevation 15 degrees, as usual. One party of the young gentlemen was stationed
at D as before, but the other on the north side of the river at Deval's house
at F. This last party saw only one ball plunge, and the first party saw four;
which however proved sufficient for determining their ranges, because they all
fell near the middle of the river, a circumstance which we also at the gun
could sometimes perceive.

The mean time of flight is about 8 seconds, and the mean range 4398 feet, or
1466 yards.

95. Saturday, September 17, 1785.
No Powder Ball's Penetr. with diam oz oz dr inches inches 1 12 16 12 1.96 22.0 2
14 23.6 3 16 24.0 4 10 16 14 1.97 22.3 5 8 18.1

These 5 balls were fired into the same block of elm root as on the 10th
instant, to get a greater variety of penetrations.

96. Tuesday, September 27, 1785.
No Powder Ball's Penetr. Part of the Charge fired at with diam oz oz dr 1 8 17 0
20.5 Back part 2 20.6 Back part 3 21.6 Middle 4 20.5 Middle 5 11.0 Fore part 6
17.3 Fore part

These 6 also were fired, from the same gun, into the same block, to try the
difference by firing the cartridge either behind, or before, or in the middle.
-- There must be some mistake in the numbers in the last two rounds, which
cannot possibly differ so much from the other numbers.

97. Wednesday, September 28, 1785.
A fine clear day. Barometer 30.35; Thermometer 60.
No Powder Ball's Elevation Time Range with diam oz oz dr inches degrees seconds
feet 1 4 16 10 1.97 15 5180 2 4 8 4370 3 4 4 4 16 7 7 4020 5 2 45 5120 6 2 21
5300 7 2 21 5200 8 2 4120 9 4 16 11 1.95 15 10 4 13 5770 11 2 16 7 1.97 45 23
5600 12 2 16 10

These 12 rounds were fired down the river; the gun, stations, parties of
cadets, etc. as before. The fall of those balls was not seen whose range is not
set down. With 2 oz of powder the gun was elevated 45 degrees, but with 4 oz
only 15 degrees, as before. The mediums are as below.

Powder Elev. Time Range 2 oz 45 22 5068 4 15 8 4523 Rejecting no 10, as very
doubtful; a mistake most likely having been made in the weight of the powder.

98. Thursday, September 29, 1785.
A fine clear day. Barometer 30.35; Thermometer 60.
No Powder Ball's Elevation Time Range with diam oz oz dr inches degrees seconds
feet 1 2 16 12 1.95 45 20 5120 2 19 4730 3 20 5370 4 20 5120 5 22 5510 6 20
5050 7 12 15 17 7120 8 10 D 4860 D 9 9 D 4880 D 10 14 6660 11 5500 12 7520

These 12 rounds were fired on the river, and observed as before. No^ 8 and 9
are very doubtful: the means of the rest are as below.

Powder Elevation Time Range 2 oz 45 20 5150 12 15 15 6700

99. The same day the following 6 rounds were fired into the block of elm root,
to try the penetrations with and without wads; the first 4 being with a wad
over the powder, and hard rammed; the other two without.

No Powder Ball's Penetration with diam oz oz dr inches inches 1 8 15 12 1.95
16.1 With wads 2 21.4 With wads 3 20.6 With wads 4 19.8 With wads 5 19.8
Without wads 6 21.0 Without wads

100. Tuesday, October 4, 1785.
Fine morning, but turned to rain about noon. Barometer 29.93.
No Powder Ball's Time Range with diam oz oz dr inches seconds feet 1 8 15 3 1.96
6330 2 5770 3 4 8 4800 5 4880 medium 5600

These 5 rounds were fired on the river, and observed as before.

The GUN was no 3, and its elevation 15 degrees.

The balls were not good ones, and the ranges very irregular; and the medium
5600 feet, or 1867 yards, too low; perhaps owing to the lightness of the balls.

101. Tuesday, October 11, 1785.
The weather fine. Barometer 29.88; Thermometer 60.
No Powder Ball's Time Range with diam oz oz dr inches seconds feet 1 8 15 12
1.96 5580 2 3 10 5270 4 5990 5 9 4910 6 11 5750 7 9 6140 8 11 5700 means 10 1/7
5620

These 8 were fired in the river, and observed as before.

The GUN was no 3, and was elevated 15 degrees.

The ranges are again low, probably from the lightness of the balls.

The usual causes of deflection carried three of the balls, namely, the 1st,
7th, and 8th, very near the south station at E; and then fell almost close to
the party there. In general it was observed that the balls deviate from their
line of direction, or middle line of the river, to each side, by half the
breadth of the river, or from 300 to 400 yards!

The end of Experiments in 1785.

EXPERIMENT IN 1786.
102. Monday, June 12, 1786; from 10 till 1.
Fine weather. Barometer 29.89; Thermometer 63 at 9 A. M.
No Powder Ball's Elevat gun Time flt Range diam with oz inches oz dr degrees 1 2
1.96 16 6 15 2 1.96 6 14 D 5000 D 3 1.96 6 5040 D 4 1.96 6 8 3920 5 1.97 7 7
3560 6 1.96 5 8 3910 7 1.96 5 10 4450 8 1.96 5 9 4280 9 1.95 5 8 3910 10 1.96 4
15 D 5600 D 11 1.96 4 8 3910 12 1.96 4 11 4750 13 1.96 4 9 4270 14 1.96 4 10
4230 15 1.96 4 9 4000 16 1.95 3 4960 D 17 1.95 9 9 4420 18 4 1.95 3 4840 19 4
1.96 3 11 4690 20 4 1.96 2 10 5650 mediums 2 1.959 16 5 15 9 4130 mediums 4
1.957 16 2 15 11 5060

The GUN was no 2.

The ranges were taken from observations, as before, at Duval's house, and the
first gibbet. The first 17 rounds were fired this year, with 2 ounces of
powder, to complete the series of ranges at 15 degrees elevation of the gun;
and the last three rounds, with 4 ounces, to try if the powder was of the same
strength as before: and which, by comparing these three ranges with those of
last year, appears to be now somewhat stronger. So that these ranges and times,
it may be presumed, are too great in respect of those of last year. They are
also evidently very irregular; owing perhaps to the inequalities of the balls,
which were only the remaining outcasts from the whole stock we first began
with, having been rejected either from their lightness, or from the
irregularities of their surfaces. And sometimes indeed the ranges and times,
here set down, were not very accurately obtained. The mediums of all, except
those marked doubtful, are placed at the bottom.

A SUMMARY OF THE EXPERIMENTS: WITH PHILOSOPHICAL REMARKS AND DEDUCTIONS.
103. WE have now got through this long three-years course of experiments; and
have detailed them in so minute and circumstantial a manner, as to enable every
person fully to comprehend and make his own use of them; without subjecting him
to the dissatisfaction of having mediums and results forced upon him,
unaccompanied with the fair and regular means of assuring himself both of their
justice and propriety. We are now therefore to make some use of these
experiments, by pointing out the philosophical laws and deductions that flow
from them, and making such other remarks as may be suggested by the various
circumstances of them, or that may be useful for improving or farther extending
experiments attended with such important consequences in natural philosophy.
And for these beneficial purposes, it will first be necessary to bring the
mediums and results together into an abstract, or one comprehensive point of
view; to form as it were the sure and regular foundation for the future
structure we hope to be able to raise upon them.

OF THE LENGTH OF THE CHARGE.
104. AND first we shall deduce the lengths or heights of the charge of powder,
for every two ounces in weight; or the part of the bore of the gun which every
charge occupies: a thing very necessary both to show the part of the bore,
occupied by the charge, corresponding to the greatest or any other velocity of
the ball, as also to compute a priori, from theory, the velocity due to every
charge of powder. Now the length of the charge was taken at every experiment,
by means of the divisions of inches and tenths marked on the rammer, and the
mediums of most of them are specified for each day in the preceding account of
the experiments; and those mediums of each day are here in the following table
collected and ranged in columns, each under its respective weight at top,
extending from 2 to 20 ounces: 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 1.7 3.2 4.6 5.9 6.93
8.4 9.8 10.6 12.3 13.2 1.7 3.2 4.4 5.9 6.97 8.2 9.27 11.0 12.15 13.3 2.1 3.3
4.5 6.1 6.9 8.3 9.55 11.2 13.2 1.8 3.23 4.43 6.2 6.97 8.23 9.4 11.4 1.8 3.33
4.2 5.67 7.0 8.3 9.53 10.9 1.7 3.24 4.5 6.0 8.37 11.0 1.7 3.2 4.44 5.7 8.07
10.8 1.87 3.2 4.4 5.72 11.13 1.9 3.1 4.37 5.6 11.38 1.85 3.17 4.27 5.63 11.26
1.9 2.9 4.28 5.65 11.1 1.8 3.4 4.12 5.6 10.6 1.9 3.13 5.6 10.97 1.9 3.1 5.83
10.87 1.83 3.08 5.7 10.85 1.73 3.4 5.77 10.79 3.1 5.88 3.0 5.45 2.95 5.4 3.0
5.74 3.1 5.85 3.1 5.4 3.03 4.84 4.8 1.82 3.15 4.38 5.66 6.95 8.27 9.51 10.99
12.22 13.23 and in the lowest line are set down the means among all the former
means, or numbers in each column, the numbers in which last line of means are
found by adding into one sum the numbers in each column, and dividing that sum
by the number of those parts. And thus we have obtained the mediums of the
mediums for each day, which must be very near the truth. But to find how near
they are to the truth, and to correct them, let these be collected and ranged
as in the second column of the following table of the heights of charges, or
column of irregular With Irregular Regular oz means diffs diffs means 2 1.82 1.33
1.27 1.85 4 3.15 1.23 1.27 3.12 6 4.38 1.28 1.27 4.39 8 5.66 1.29 1.27 5.66 10
6.95 1.32 1.27 6.93 12 8.27 1.24 1.27 8.20 14 9.51 1.48 1.27 9.47 16 10.99 1.23
1.27 10.74 18 12.22 1.01 1.27 12.01 20 13.23 13.28 means. Then take the
differences between each of these, and place them in the 3d column, or
irregular differences; which would have been all equal if the mediums had been
regular. Find then a medium among these unequal differences, by dividing their
sum by the number of them, and it will be found to be 1.27, which set in the
4th column of regular or equal differences. Then, as the numbers in the 3d
column, the nearest to this mean 1.27, are the differences between 6, 8, and 10
ounces, by supposing 5.66 to be the true length of the 8 ounce charge, I form
all the others from it, by adding and subtracting continually the mean or
common difference 1.27, and place them in the last column; which will therefore
consist of the true regular length of each charge, including both the powder
and the neck of the flannel bag which contained it.

How much of each space was really occupied by the neck of the bag, may be thus
sound: the first number 1.85 is the length of the charge of 2 ounces, including
the neck; and the common difference 1.27 is the real length of 2 ounces of
powder in the bore; therefore, subtracting this number from the former, the
remainder 0.58 is the mean length of the bore which was occupied by the neck of
the bag in every charge. And, therefore, taking this number from each of those
in the last column, the remainders will show the real length of bore occupied
by the powder alone in each of the charges.

OF THE RECOIL WITHOUT BALLS.
105. NEXT let us consider the quantity of recoil, or extent of the vibration
of each gun, for every charge of powder; and first without balls. Now as these
recoils were measured sometimes to one radius, and sometimes to another, it
will be proper to reduce them all to a common radius, as well as to a common
weight of gun when it happens to vary in weight. In the first year's
experiments, the radius was various, and the chords of recoil were always taken
in inches; but in those of the second and third years, the radius was
constantly 10 feet, or 120 inches, which was divided into 1000 equal parts, and
the chords of vibration measured in thousandth parts of the radius, each part
being 12/100 of an inch. It will therefore be convenient to reduce the recoils
of the first year, to the same radius and parts as those of the other two
years: which may be done as follows: Let r = any radius of the first year in
inches, and c = a corresponding chord of recoil taken in inches and parts.

Then r 120 c 120 c/ r the chord corresponding to the radius 120, and measured
in inches; and 120 1000 120 c/ r 1000 c/ r the same chord as expressed in
thousandth parts of 120 inches.

Hence then, to reduce any chord of recoil, in the first year, multiply it by
1000, and divide the product by its own radius in inches; so shall the quotient
be the corresponding chord answering to the radius 120 inches, and expressed in
thousandth parts of that radius.

106. By the foregoing rule then having reduced all the chords of recoil to the
radius 10 feet, and denoted them in thousandth parts of that radius; the
mediums of every day's experiments, collected and arranged, will be as below.

Table of Recoils without Balls.
Charge of Powder, oz 2 4 6 8 12 16 22 53 85 113 176 221 21 53 119 165 215 21
55 116 220 GUN no 1 23 54 110 23 55 108 22 128 22 127 mediums 22 54 85 117 171
219 23 52 123 236 23 56 118 240 GUN no 2 24 124 23 124 24 mediums 23 54 122 238
22 57 93 123 247 23 59 125 250 23 58 125 259 23 56 252 GUN no 3 23 23 24 25
mediums 23 57 93 125 252 25 58 127 280 GUN no 4 24 58 131 255 GUN no 4 26 56
261 24 59 mediums 25 58 129 265

Some of these mediums have not the greatest degree of exactness that they are
capable of, for want of a sufficient number of repetitions, or numbers to take
the mediums of. However, by a very small and obvious correction, the more
accurate mediums, for the most usual charges of 2, 4, 8, and 16 ounces of
powder, may be fairly stated as follows: Gun Center of gravity Vibrat. Length
of bore Powder 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz no inches inches Recoils without Balls 1
80.47 40.1 28.2 22 53 117 220 2 80.47 40.0 38.1 23 55 121 237 3 80.50 39.9 57.4
24 57 125 252 4 80.44 39.8 79.9 25 59 129 265

The recoils being estimated in parts of which the radius is 1000: and the
common weight of the gun, with its frame and leaden weights, being 917 lb; also
the distance of the center of gravity below the axis, and the number of
vibrations per minute, as set down in the 2d and 3d columns of the tablet above.

107. From the view and consideration of these numbers, various observations
easily arise. As first, that, by observing the four columns, or vertical rows,
it appears that the recoil of the gun, and consequently the force of the powder
upon it, always increases as the length of the gun increases, and that in a
manner tolerably regular as far as the charge of 8 ounces; but after that, the
increase is faster: thus, between the shortest bore of 28 inches long, and the
longest of 80 inches, the increase in the velocity of recoil with 2 ounces of
powder is from 22 to 25, or about the part; with 4 ounces of powder, it is from
53 to 59, or the 1/9 part; and with 8 ounces of powder, it is from 117 to 129,
or the 1/10 part; but with 16 ounces of powder, the increase is from 220 to
265, or the part. And this increase of recoil is chiefly, if not entirely, to
be ascribed to the longer time the fluid of the inflamed powder acts upon the
gun, in passing through the greater length of bore; at least as far as to the
charge of 8 ounces: but the extraordinary increase in the case of 16 ounces,
seems to be partly owing to that, and partly to some of the powder, in this
high charge, being blown out unfired from the short gun. And from this
circumstance I would infer, that the whole of the charge of 8 ounces, without
ball, is fired before it issues from the mouth of the short gun, that is before
the fluid expands through a space of 22 inches of bore. And hence, if the
velocity of the fluid were known, we could assign the time within which all the
powder is fired. If, for instance, the mean velocity of the fluid were only
5000 feet in a second, though it is probably much more, the time would be only
about the 250th part of a second in which the 8 ounces would be all inflamed.

The foregoing are the rates of increase in the chord of recoil, or in the
velocity of the gun, which is proportional to it. It must be remarked however
that the increase in the force of the powder will be about double of that of
the recoil, because the force is as the square of the velocity: so that, from
the shortest gun to the longest, the increase in the force of the powder with
2, 4, or 8 ounces, is about, or from 4 to 5; and with 16 ounces of powder, the
force is almost as 2 to 3, or the increase almost one half of the less force.

108. Again, if we contemplate the numbers on each horizontal line, that is,
the recoils of each gun separately, with the several charges of 2, 4, 8, and 16
ounces of powder, we shall find that, in each of them, the recoil increases
from the beginning, to a certain part, in a greater ratio than the constant
ratio, 2 to 1, of the powder increases; and afterward in a less ratio than
that of the powder. That the ratio of the recoils, in every gun, is greatest at
first, or with the least charges of powder: that the ratio continually
decreases as the charge increases: that the ratio, at first, is greatest with
the shortest gun, and so gradually less and less all the way to the longest:
but that, however, the ratio in the shorter guns decrease faster than in the
longer; and so as to come sooner to the ratio of 2 to 1 in the shorter guns
than in the longer; and after that, the ratios in the short guns, with the same
charge, are less than in the long ones. All these properties will perhaps
appear still plainer by arranging together the several ratios for each no of
gun, as here below: Ratios for the Gun Powder no 1 no 2 no 3 no 4 2 2.41 2.39
2.37 2.36 4 2.21 2.20 2.19 2.18 8 1.88 1.96 2.02 2.06 16 means 2.17 2.18 2.19
2.20 where each column of ratios is found by dividing the recoils successively
by each other, from the beginning, namely, the recoil of 4 oz by that of 2, the
recoil of 8 oz by that of 4, and the recoil of 16oz by that of 8. Also the
first and second lines rather decrease, but the 3d rather increases, and the
last, or that of means, also rather increases.

And if we divide the first ratios, in the last table but one, successively by
each other, the 2d by the 1st, and the 3d by the 2d; and then again these last
ratios or quotients by each other; and so on; we shall obtain the several
orders of ratios for each gun, as follows, observing uniform laws: No 1 No 2 No
3 No 4 22 23 24 25 2.41 2.39 2.37 2.36 53.917 55.920 57.922 59.924 2.21.93
2.20.97 2.19.100 2.18 1.02 117.850 121.891 125.922 129.945 1.88 1.96 2.02 2.06
220 237 252 265 where the first column, of each no or gun, contains the recoils
with 2, 4, 8, 16 ounces of powder; the 2d the first ratios, or the ratios of
the recoils; the 3d contains the 2d ratios, or the ratios of the first ratios;
and the last column contains the 3d ratios, or the ratios of the 2d ratios.

Or, perhaps, for some purposes it will serve better to set the same table in
the following form, where the vertical columns are changed into horizontal
lines: No 1 No 2 No 3 No 4 22 53 117 220 23 55 121 237 24 57 125 252 25 59 129
265 2.41 2.21 1.89 2.39 2.20 1.96 2.37 2.19 2.02 2.36 2.18
2.06.917.850.920.891.922.922.924.945.93.97 1.00 1.02

OF THE RECOIL WITH BALLS.
109. BY collecting now the mean recoil of each gun for every day, after
reducing them all to the same weight of gun, 917lb, and weight of ball, 16oz
13dr, and to the same radius 1000, in the manner specified in Art. 105, they
will stand as in this following table.

Powder, oz 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 90 148 197 241 260 290 294 329 91 145 196 226
253 273 295 331 199 234 260 281 313 331 GUN no 1 232 287 234 240 244 239
mediums 90 146 197 236 258 283 301 330 92 152 207 249 274 296 305 360 95 157
244 276 304 343 364 GUN no 2 244 348 246 mediums 94 154 207 246 275 300 324 358
99 166 216 259 399 GUN no 3 100 163 218 257 380 164 260 mediums 99 164 217 259
390 101 163 266 397 GUN no 4 417 mediums 101 163 266 407

Some of these mediums are not very accurate, for want of a good number of
repetitions, and especially those of the last gun no 4, which has only one
duplicate. In this gun the recoils appear to be all rather low in respect of
the others, but more especially that with the charge of 4 oz of powder, which
is evidently much more defective than the rest, and requires an increase of
about 6 to make it uniform with the others, and which increase it would
probably have received from future experiments, had there been any repetitions
of it. Augmenting therefore only that number by 6, all the orders of means will
be tolerably regular, and stand as below, for the most usual charges of powder,
namely, 2, 4, 8, and 16 ounces. Gun Powder no 2 4 8 16 Recoils with Balls 1 90
146 236 330 2 94 154 246 358 3 99 164 259 390 4 101 169 266 407 The common
weight of ball being 16oz 13 dr, and the weight of the gun 917lb; the other
circumstances being as in Art. 106.

110. From the several vertical columns of this tablet of means, we discover,
that the recoils increase always as the length of the gun increases; but that
in the 4th or longest gun, the increase is less, in proportion, than in the
others. And from the horizontal lines we perceive, that the recoil always
increases as the charge of powder increases, and that in a manner tolerably
regular; and also in continued geometrical proportion when the charges of
powder are so; but the common ratio in the former progression being only about
of that in the latter. For, if the mediums, for each gun, be divided by each
other, namely, the 2d by the 1st, the 3d by the 2d, and the 4th by the 3d, the
quotients or ratios will come out as in the following tablet: Powder Ratios for
the Gun no 1 no 2 no 3 no 4 2 1.62 1.64 1.66 1.67 4 1.61 1.60 1.58 1.57 8 1.40
1.45 1.50 1.53 16 means 1.54 1.56 1.58 1.59 where the numbers in the vertical
columns, or the ratios for each gun separately, continually decrease; and the
numbers in the horizontal lines, or for the different guns with the same
weights of powder, rather increase in the first and third line, but decrease in
the second, and again rather increase in the last, which are the mediums of the
three ratios in each column, and which mean ratios are rather more than of 2,
the common ratio of the weights of powder, which are 2, 4, 8, 16 ounces.

And if we divide the numbers or ratios, in each column, continually by each
other; and their quotients by each other again; the whole continued series or
columns of ratios, for each gun, will be as here below: No 1 No 2 No 3 No 4 90
94 99 101 1.62 1.64 1.66 1.67 146.994 154.976 164.952 169.940 1.61.88 1.60.93
1.58 1.00 1.57 1.04 236.870 246.906 259.950 266.974 1.40 1.45 1.50 1.53 330 358
390 407 where the first column, in each no or gun, contains the recoils with 2,
4, 8, 16 ounces of powder; the 2d column contains the ratios of those recoils;
the 3d contains the 2d ratios, and the last the 3d ratios.

Or the same table may, for some purposes, be more conveniently placed as
below, where the vertical columns are ranged in horizontal lines: No 1 No 2 No
3 No 4 90 146 236 330 94 154 246 358 99 164 259 390 101 169 266 407 1.62 1.61
1.40 1.64 1.60 1.45 1.66 1.58 1.50 1.67 1.57
1.53.994.870.976.906.952.950.940.974.88.93 1.00 1.04

OF THE MEAN VELOCITY OF THE BALL FROM THE RECOIL OF THE GUN.
III. HAVING determined the mean recoil of the guns, both with and without
balls, for the charges of 2, 4, 8, 16 ounces; we can now assign the mean
velocity of the ball, for each gun and charge, from the recoils; if, as Robins
has asserted, the force of the powder upon the gun be the same, whether it is
fired with a ball or without one. For, if that property be generally true, then
the velocity of the ball must be proportional to the difference of the chords
of recoil with and without a ball; and that difference being multiplied by a
certain constant number, will give the velocity of the ball itself; as we have
before shown.

Now if c denote the difference of those chords, b the weight of the ball, G
the weight of the gun, g the distance to its center of gravity, i the distance
to the axis of the bore, and n the number of oscillations the gun would make in
a minute; then we have found, in Art. 68, that 59/96 x G gc/ bin will express
the velocity of the ball. And that when G = 917, g = 80.47, i = 89.15, and n =
40, which are the medium values of those letters, then the same theorem becomes
51/4 x c / b for the velocity of the ball. And, farther, when the mean value of
b is 1.051 or 16 oz 13 dr, the same theorem for the velocity becomes barely 12
1/7 c. Subtracting however the 700th part in the gun no 1, and adding in the
other three guns, as follows, namely, the 1000th part in no 2, 400th part in no
3, 300th part in no 4.


Therefore if each of the recoils without balls, in the last table of Art. 106,
be taken from the corresponding recoils in Art. 109, and the remainders be
multiplied by 12 1/7, making the additions and subtractions abovementioned, we
shall have the corresponding velocities of the ball by this method. And a
synopsis of the whole, for each gun and charge, will be as in the following
table: Charges, 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz Gun no Recoil Diff Veloc of ball Recoil
Diff Veloc of ball Recoil Diff Veloc of ball Recoil Diff Veloc of ball with
ball without ball with ball without ball with ball without ball with ball
without ball 1 90 22 68 825 146 53 93 1127 236 117 119 1443 330 220 110 1334 2
94 23 71 863 154 55 99 1203 246 121 125 1520 358 237 121 1471 3 99 24 75 913
164 57 107 1302 259 125 134 1631 390 252 138 1680 4 101 25 76 926 169 59 110
1340 266 129 137 1669 407 265 142 1730 And we shall hereafter see how far these
agree with the velocities computed from the vibration of the pendulum.

OF THE VELOCITY OF THE BALL, AS COMPUTED FROM THE PENDULUM AND GUN.
112. THE four following tables contain the mediums of the velocities of the
balls, as computed for each day, for all the principal charges of powder, and
for each gun separately; one table being allotted for each. In these tables all
the mediums are arranged in a continued series, in the chronological order as
they occurred, and accompanied with all the circumstances necessary to be
known; thus forming a fund or collection of elements, from which other
arrangements and principles are to be deduced.

Each table consists of ten columns. The first column contains the dates; the
next three the state of the weather and air; namely, the 2d column the
hygrometer, or state of the air as to dryness and moisture; the 3d the
barometer; and the 4th the thermometer; both which last instruments, it must be
observed, were always placed in the shade, and within the house, while the
experiments were made in the open air, where it was commonly much hotter than
the degree shown by the thermometer. The 5th column contains the weight of the
charge of powder; the 6th and 7th the weight and diameter of the ball; the 8th
and 9th the velocity of the ball, the former as computed from the vibration of
the pendulum, and the latter from the recoil of the gun; and finally the 10th
column contains the difference between these two velocities, which is marked
with the negative sign (-) when the velocity by the gun is the less of the two.

Daily Mediums of Experiments with the Gun no 1.
Date Hygrometer Barometer Thermom Powder Ball's Velocity by the Diff with diam
pend gun 1783 inches degrees oz oz dr inches feet feet feet June 30 dry 30.34
74 16 16 13 1.95 1456 1315 - 141 July 17 dry 30.23 72 8 1.96 1471 1501 30 19
dry 30.12 70 2 797 832 35 19 4 1109 1145 36 31 dry 30.13 69 12 1412 1374 - 38
31 16 1367 1334 - 33 Aug 12 wet 30.00 64 16 12 1419 1399 - 20 Sept 10 2 785 838
53 Sept 10 dry 29.7 60 4 1087 1122 35 Sept 10 8 1353 1396 43 18 8 13 1383 18 10
1417 18 12 1375 18 14 1333 18 dry 30.08 64 16 1243 D 18 20 1144 18 24 1194 18
32 880 18 36 838 30 6 14 1331 30 8 1386 30 dry 30.25 64 10 1402 30 12 1453 30
14 1402 1784 Aug 4 wet 6 1295 1339 44 11 6 1368 11 8 15 1.97 1475 11 hazy 30.25
65 10 15 1493 11 12 14 1520 11 14 14 1528 Sept 10 2 12 1.96 755 Sept 10 fair 4
1131 1170 39 Sept 10 6 1370 1358 - 12 Sept 10 8 1475 21 4 12 1.97 1124 21 fair
6 12 1.97 1372 21 8 11 1.96 1445 Oct. 4 2 13 1.96 759 Oct. 4 dry 4 12 1.96 1086
Oct. 4 6 12 1.96 1325 Oct. 4. 8 12 1.96 1472 5 dry 8 13 1.96 1411 6 dry 8 9
1.95 1436 11 hazy 8 7 1.95 1444 Daily Mediums of Experiments with the Gun no 2.
Date Hygrometer Barometer Thermom Powder Ball's Velocity by the Diff with diam
pend gun 1783 inches degrees oz oz dr inches feet feet feet July 23 2 16 13
1.96 793 840 47 July 23 dry 29.88 70 4 13 1135 D 1207 72 July 23 8 13 1566 1592
26 July 23 16 13 1660 1499 -161 Aug 12 wet 30.00 64 16 12 1676 1497 -179 Sept
11 2 856 846 -10 Sept 11 dry 29.93 60 4 1239 1220 -19 Sept 11 8 1571 1452 -119
Sept 11 8 12 1569 25 10 1608 25 dry 29.93 59 12 1615 25 14 1517 D 25 16 1664 D
29 6 11 1448 29 8 1561 29 10 1618 29 dry 30.28 64 12 1669 29 14 1662 29 16 1637
29 18 11 1598 29 20 1639 D 1785 Sept 2 cloudy 8 13 1.96 1503 9 dry 4 12 1.96
1204 Daily Mediums of Experiments with the Gun no 3.
Date Hygrometer Barometer Thermom Powder Ball's Velocity by the Diff with diam
pend gun 1783 inches degrees oz oz dr inches feet feet feet July 12 dry 16 16
13 1.96 2030 1706 - 324 18 dry 30.28 68 4 1.96 1353 1321 - 32 18 8 1766 1620
-146 19 dry 30.12 70 2 898 921 23 Aug 13 cloudy 30.17 64 8 12 1803 1594 -209
Aug 13 16 1966 1542 - 424 Sept 8 moist 30.03 61 2 13 926 928 2 Sept 8 4 1334
1266 - 68 1784 Aug 5 dry 29.98 68 6 14 1.97 1616 Sept 11 4 15 2 1.87 1225 Sept
11 4 16 2 1.92 1244 Sept 11 dry 4 16 14 1.97 1346 Sept 11 8 15 2 1.87 1662 Sept
11 8 16 3 1.92 1728 Sept 11 8 16 14 1.97 1815 16 4 16 9 1.96 1388 D Daily
Mediums of Experiments with the Gun no 4.
Date Hygrometer Barometer Thermom Powder Ball's Velocity by the Diff with diam
pend gun 1783 inches degrees oz oz dr inches feet feet feet July 29 dry 29.90
72 8 16 13 1.96 1936 1643 -293 July 29 16 2161 1656 - 505 30 dry 30.06 69 2 968
929 - 39 30 4 12 1375 1295 - 80 1784 Oct 12 dry 16 11 2060

113. The foregoing tables contain the several mediums of velocities, for each
day, and for all varieties in the circumstances of powder, and weight and
diameter of ball. It will now then be proper to collect together all the
repetitions of the same charge or weight of powder, and to take the mediums of
all those mediums, to serve as fixed radical numbers, or established degrees of
velocity, adapted to all the various charges of powder, and length of gun. And
for this purpose, I shall reduce the numbers of these tables all to one common
weight and diameter of ball, namely, to the weight 16 oz 13 dr, and the
diameter 1.96 inches, which are the numbers that most commonly occur. And this
reduction will be very well deduced from the experiments of September 11, 1784,
when several trials were made with diverse weights and diameters of ball, and
with both 4 oz and 8 oz of powder, the results of which accord very well
together. In the experiments of that day, it was found that, with the 4 oz
charges, 1/7 of the whole velocity is lost by the difference of 1/10 of an inch
in the diameter of the ball; and, with the 8 oz charge, 2/15 of the velocity is
lost by the same difference of windage. But the quantity of inflamed fluid
which escapes, will be nearly as the difference between the area of the circle
of the bore and the great circle of the ball, or the force will be as the
square of the ball's diameter; and the velocity, we know, is as the square root
of the force: and therefore the velocity is as the diameter of the ball; and
the difference in the velocity, as the difference of the diameter, or as the
windage. Hence, if w denote any difference of windage in parts of an inch, or
difference between 1.96 and the diameter of any ball, and 1/ m the part of the
experimented velocity lost by 1/10 of an inch difference of windage; then shall
1/10 w 1/ m 10 w/ m, which last term will show what part of the experimented
velocity is lost by the increase of windage denoted by 10. By this rule then, I
reduce all the velocities to what they would have been, had the diameter of the
ball been always 1.96. It is to be noted however, that the value of m will vary
with the charge of powder: with 4 ounces of powder, it was found that 1/ m was
1/7 of the whole velocity, or of the experimented velocity; but with 8 oz of
powder, 1/ m was found to be 2/15 of the whole, or 2/13 of the experimented
velocity. We shall not be far from the truth therefore, if we take the
following values of 1/ m, to the several corresponding charges of powder; that
is, as far as 16 oz in the guns no 3 and 4, and then returning backwards again
as the powder is increased above 16 oz, by 2 oz at a time; but in the gun no 2,
to continue only to 14 oz, and then return backwards again for all above 14 oz;
and for the gun no 1, to continue only to 12 oz, and then return backwards for
all above that charge.

Powder Value of 1/ m 2 2/11 =.182 4 =.167 6 4/25 =.160 8 2/13 =.154 10 4/27
=.148 12 1/7 =.143 14 4/29 =.138 16 2/15 =.133

Such then is the reduction of the velocity on account of the windage. And as
to that for the different weights of the ball, we know that the velocity varies
in the reciprocal subduplicate ratio of the weight; and according to this rule
the numbers were corrected on account of the different weights of ball. After
these reductions then are made, the numbers in the foregoing tables, arranged
under their respective charges of powder, will be as here below, for a ball of
1.96 diameter, and weighing 16 oz 13 dr.

Mean Velocities of Balls, for all the Guns, with several Charges of Powder,
reduced to a Ball of 1.96 Diameter, and weighing 16 oz 13 dr.
Powder, oz 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 797 1109 1334 1471 1417 1412 1333 1478 784 1086
1298 1352 1405 1375 1405 1367 754 1129 1371 1383 1476 1453 1511 1418 759 1103
1368 1389 1503 1243 D 1084 1347 1458 GUN no 1 1322 1472 1439 1469 1411 1447
1449 mediums 774 1102 1340 1431 1433 1436 1416 1377 794 D 1136 D 1444 1566 1605
1612 1657 1660 855 1238 1569 1613 1664 1674 GUN no 2 1204 1566 1661 1557 1632
1503 mediums 825 1191 1444 1552 1609 1638 1657 1656 898 1353 1593 1766 2030 926
1334 1801 1966 GUN no 3 1327 1793 1378 D mediums 912 1348 D 1593 1787 1998 968
1373 1936 2161 GUN no 4 2052 mediums 968 1373 1936 2106

114. These last medium velocities, for each gun, will be tolerably near the
truth; and the more so, commonly, as the number of the other mediums is the
greater. For want, however, of a sufficient number of each sort, there are some
small irregularities among the final mediums, which may be corrected, for the
most part, by adding or subtracting 3 or 4 feet, as they are sometimes too
little, and sometimes too great. And these small deviations will be very easily
discovered by dividing the mediums by each other, namely, each of the
velocities for 4, 6, 8, etc. ounces of powder, by that for 2 ounces. For we
know, from the principles of forces, and other experiments, that the velocities
will be nearly as the square roots of the quantities of powder; that is, while
the length of the charge does not much shorten the length of the bore before
the ball; but gradually deviating from that proportion more and more, as the
charge of powder is increased in length; because the force has gradually a less
distance and time to act upon the ball in. Now by dividing the quantities of
powder 4, 6, 8, etc. by 2, the quotients 2, 3, 4, etc. show the ratios of the
charges; and the roots of these numbers, namely, 1.414 1.732 2.000 etc.
show the ratios which the velocities would have to each other nearly, if the
empty part of the bore was always of the same length. But as the vacant part
always decreases as the charge increases, the ratios of the velocities may be
expected to fall short of those above, and the sooner and the more so, as the
gun is shorter. Accordingly, on trial, we find the ratios hold pretty well,
even in the shortest gun, as far as to the 6oz charge; but in the 8oz charge it
falls about 1/13 or 1/14 part below the true ratio, being 1.85 instead of 2. In
the longer guns, the proportions hold out gradually longer, and the deviations
are always less and less: thus, in the 2d gun, the ratio for the 8oz charge is
about 1.895, in the 3d it is 1.945, and in the 4th gun it is 1.999 or 2 very
nearly. And so for other charges. Correcting then some of the mediums by means
of this property, the more accurate radical medium velocities, for each gun,
with the several charges of 2, 4, 6, and 8 ounces of powder, will be as here
below: Powder Gun no 1 No 2 No 3 No 4 Ratio. Veloc. Dif 1. 11. Ratio. Veloc.
Dif 1. 11. Ratio. Veloc. Dif 1. 11. Ratio. Veloc. Dif 1. 11. 2 780 835 920 970
320 345 380 400 4 1.140 1100 80 1.414 1180 80 1.413 1300 90 1.412 1370 90 240
265 290 310 6 1.731 1340 150 1.730 1445 130 1.729 1590 90 1.732 1680 50 90 135
200 260 8 1.850 1430 1.893 1580 1.945 1790 2.000 1940 where the velocity is set
in large characters in the middle column; on the left hand in a small
character, is the ratio, which is found by dividing each velocity by the first,
the law of which ratios has been mentioned above; and on the right hand are the
columns of first and second differences; the first being the difference between
each two succeeding numbers, and the second the differences of those
differences.

Or, for some purposes, it may be more convenient to rangethe velocities, etc.
as here below: Gun no 2 oz 4 oz 6 oz 8 oz 1 780 1.410 1100 1.731 1340 1.850
1430 55 80 105 150 2 835 1.414 1180 1.730 1445 1.893 1580 85 120 145 210 3 920
1.413 1300 1.729 1590 1.945 1790 50 70 90 150 4 970 1.412 1370 1.732 1680 2.000
1940 where the numbers are here placed in horizontal lines, which before were
vertical; and vertical here, those which before were horizontal. And where the
law, both of the ratios and differences, is evident. We also hence perceive
how, for each charge, the velocity of the ball is continually increased as the
gun is longer.

And these velocities may be considered as standard radical numbers, here
deposited, and ready to be applied to any purpose, in which the consideration
of the velocity can be useful. And those for the other charges of powder will
be as in the general table in Art. 113.

115. These velocities however, it must be remarked, are those with which the
ball strikes the pendulum, after passing through the air between it and the
muzzle of the gun; and consequently they are less than the velocities with
which it immediately issues from the gun, by as much velocity as the ball loses
by the resistance of the air, in its flight through that space. Now we have
found, in Art. 33, that the first velocities lose at least their 84th part by
that resistance, when the air behind the ball is supposed instantly to fill up
the place always quitted by the ball in its flight. But as this is not exactly
the case, the air rushing into a vacuum with a certain finite velocity,
therefore the part lost will be gradually more and more as the ball moves
swifter, till its velocity become equal to that of the air itself; after which
the part lost will remain constant. And Mr. Robins asserts that the velocity
lost by very swift motions, is about 3 times as great as that lost by slow
ones; and therefore that will be about the 28th part. So that the loss will
always lie between the 84th part and the 28th part. I shall therefore leave it
in this uncertain state, till other experiments enable us to ascertain what may
be the exact proportion of loss peculiar to every degree of velocity.

116. From the general table of medium velocities in Art. 113, it is evident
that, for each gun, the velocity increases with the charge to a certain extent,
where it is greatest; and that afterward it gradually decreases as the charge
is increased. It farther appears that the point, or charge, at which the
velocity is the greatest, is different in the guns of different lengths; the
charge which gives the maximum of velocity, being always greater, as the gun is
longer. And by tracing this increase of charge, from the beginning, to the
point of greatest velocity, it appears that, with the 1st, 2d, and 3d guns, the
charges which give the greatest velocities, are nearly as follows, viz. Gun no
1 at the charge of 12oz, Gun no 2 at the charge of 14oz, Gun no 3 at the charge
of 16oz.


Here it will not be so proper to specify what portion of the weight of the
ball these weights of powder are; being no ways regulated by that circumstance;
but what portion of the bore of the gun is filled with these quantities of
powder. Now, by the table of the lengths of charges in Art. 104, it appears
that the lengths of the charges of 12, 14, and 16oz, are these, viz. 12oz 8.20
inches; gun 1, its length 28.2 14oz 9.5 inches; gun 2 its length 38.1 16oz 10.7
inches; gun 3 its length 57.4
Then dividing each length of charge by its corresponding length of gun, we
obtain nearly these three following fractions, viz. 3/10 in gun 1 of 15
calibers long in gun 2 of 20 calibers long 3/10 in gun 3 of 30 calibers long
which express what part of the bore is filled with powder, when the greatest
velocity is given to the ball, with each of these lengths of gun. And which
therefore is not one and the same constant part for all lengths of gun, but
varying nearly in the reciprocal subduplicate ratio of the length of the bore.

117. Having so far settled the degree of velocity of the ball, as determined
by the vibration of the pendulum, we may in like manner now proceed to assign
the mean velocities, as deduced from the recoil of the gun. The repetitions in
this latter way are not so numerous as in the former; but, such as they are, we
shall here abstract them from the general tables in Art. 112, reducing them,
however, all to the same common weight and diameter of ball, as was done in
Art. 113.

Mean Velocities from the Recoil of the Gun.
Powder, oz 2 4 6 8 12 16 832 1145 1344 1501 1374 1337 GUN no 1 837 1120 1352
1393 1334 1165 1396 mediums 835 1143 1348 1447 1374 1356 841 1209 1592 1499 GUN
no 2 845 1218 1450 1494 mediums 843 1213 1521 1496 921 1321 1620 1706 GUN no 3
928 1266 1591 1540 mediums 925 1294 1605 1623 GUN no 4 929 1293 1643 1656

These mediums however are not so exact as those in Art. 111, because those
were deduced from a greater number of particulars. We shall therefore chiefly
adopt those that were stated in that article, for the radical standard
velocities of the ball, as determined from the recoil of the gun, excepting in
some instances when the other is used, and sometimes the mediums of both. So
that the final mediums will be as follows: Velocities of the Ball from the
Recoil of the Gun.
Gun no 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz 1 830 1135 1445 1345 2 863 1203 1521 1485 3 919
1294 1631 1680 4 929 1317 1669 1730

118. Let us now compare these velocities, deduced from the recoil of the gun,
with those that are stated in Art. 113 and 114, which were determined from the
pendulum; that we may see how near they will agree together. And, in this
comparison, it will be sufficient to employ the velocities for 2, 4, 8, and 16
ounces of powder; this will be the most certain also, as these mediums are
better determined than most of the others.

Comparison of the Velocities by the Gun and Pendulum.
Gun no 2 oz 4 oz 8 oz 16 oz Velocity by Dif Velocity by Dif Velocity by Dif
Velocity by Dif gun pend gun pend gun pend gun pend 1 830 780 50 1135 1100 35
1445 1430 15 1345 1377 - 32 2 863 835 28 1203 1180 23 1521 1580 - 59 1485 1656
-171 3 919 920 -1 1294 1300 - 6 1631 1790 -159 1680 1998 - 318 4 929 970 - 41
1317 1370 - 53 1669 1940 -271 1730 2106 - 376

In this table, the first column shows the number of the gun; and its velocity
of ball, both by the vibration of the gun and pendulum, with their differences,
is on the same line with it, for the several charges of powder. After the first
column, the rest of the page is divided into four spaces, for the four charges,
2, 4, 8, 16 ounces; and each of these is divided into three columns: in the
first of the three, is the velocity of the ball as determined from the
vibration of the gun; in the second is the ball as determined from the
vibration of the pendulum; and in the third is the difference between the two,
which is marked with the negative sign, or -, when the former velocity is less
than the latter, otherwise it is positive.

119. From the comparison contained in the last article, it appears, in
general, that the velocities, determined by the two different ways, do not
agree together; and that therefore the method of determining the velocity of
the ball from the recoil of the gun, is not generally true, although Mr. Robins
and Mr. Thompson had suspected it to be so; and consequently that the effect of
the inflamed powder on the recoil of the gun, is not exactly the same when it
is fired without a ball, as when it is fired with one. It also appears that
this difference is no ways regular, neither in the different guns with the same
charge, nor in the same gun with different charges of powder. That with very
small charges, the velocity by the gun is greater than that by the pendulum;
but that the latter always gains upon the former, and soon becomes equal to it;
and then exceeds it more and more as the charge of powder is increased. That
the particular charge, at which the two velocities become equal, is different
in the different guns; and that this charge is less, or the equality sooner
takes place, as the gun is longer. And all this, whether we use the actual
velocity with which the ball strikes the pendulum, or the same increased by the
velocity lost by the resistance of the air, in its flight from the gun to the
pendulum.

OF THE RANGES AND TIMES OF FLIGHT.
120. HAVING dispatched what relates to the velocity of the ball, we may now
proceed in like manner to the experiments made to determine the actual ranges,
and the times of flight of the balls.

The mediums of these, hitherto obtained, are not so numerous as could be
wished; however, such as they are, we shall here collect them in the same
manner as we did the circumstances relating to the initial velocities in Art.
112.

Mediums of Ranges and Times of Flight.
Date Hygrometer Barometer Thermom Powder Ball's Elevat gun Time fit Range with
diam 1785 inches degrees oz oz dr inches degrees sec feet Sept 2 cloudy 29.80
66 8 16 13 1.965 15 14.0 5916 8 hazy 30.02 65 8 16 12 1.96 15 14.7 6216 14
clear 30.50 67 4 16 12 1.96 15 8.4 4398 28 clear 30.35 60 4 16 10 1.963 15 8.3
4523 28 2 16 8 1.97 45 22.0 5068 29 clear 30.35 60 2 16 12 1.95 45 20.3 5150 29
12 16 12 1.95 15 15.5 6700 1786 June 12 clear 29.89 63 4 16 3 1.957 15 11.0
5060 June 12 2 16 5 1.959 15 9.2 4130 1785 Oct 4 rain 29.93 8 15 3 1.96 15 5600
11 clear 29.88 60 8 15 12 1.96 15 10.1 5620 Of these, the first 6 days
experiments were with the gun no 2; and the last two days, with the gun no 3.

121. Now, by taking again the mediums of these, both in the balls, and their
ranges and times of flight, they will finally come out as follows: Final
Mediums of Ranges and Times.
GUN Powder Ball's Elevat gun Time fit Range Veloc. ball with diam oz oz dr
inches degrees sec feet feet 2 16 10 1.96 45 21.2 5109 863 2 16 5 1.959 15 9.2
4130 868 No 2 4 16 8 1.96 15 9.2 4660 1234 8 16 12 1.962 15 14.4 6066 1644 12
16 12 1.95 15 15.5 6700 1676 No 3 8 15 7 1.96 15 10.1 5610 1938 And in the last
column are added the corresponding initial velocities, which the ball would
have at the muzzle of the gun; which have been extracted from the medium
velocities, as determined by the pendulum, and here reduced to the peculiar
weight and diameter of ball in each particular case of this table, by the
reductions specified in Art. 113, and by augmenting the velocity for the 2
ounce charge by its 36th part, and the others by their 28th part, for the loss
of velocity in passing from the gun to the pendulum.

So that in this little table, we have the following concomitant data,
determined with a tolerable degree of precision; namely, the weight of powder,
the weight and diameter of the ball, the initial or projectile velocity, the
elevation of the gun, the time of the ball's flight, and its range, or the
distance of the horizontal plane. From which it is hoped that the resistance of
the medium, and its effect on other elevations, etc. may be determined, and so
afford the means of deriving easy rules for the several cases of practical
gunnery: a subject intended to be prosecuted in a future volume of these Tracts.

OF THE BALL's PENETRATION INTO THE WOOD.
I SHALL here select only the depths of the penetrations into the block of
wood, that have been made in the course of the last year's experiments, as they
are the most numerous and uniform, and were all made with the same gun, namely,
no 2. I shall also select only those for 2, 4, and 8 ounces of powder, as they
are the most useful and certain numbers for affording safe and general
conclusions; and besides, the trials with other charges are too few in number,
being commonly no more than one of each.

Mean Penetrations of Balls into Elm Wood.
Powder 2 4 8 7 16.6 18.9 13.5 21.2 18.1 20.8 20.5 means 7 15 20

That is, the balls penetrated about 7 inches deep with 2 oz of powder 15
inches deep with 4 oz of powder 20 inches deep with 8 oz of powder
And these penetrations are nearly as the numbers 2, 4, 6, or 1, 2, 3; but the
quantities of powder are as 2, 4, 8, or 1, 2, 4; so that the penetrations are
as the charges as far as 4 ounces, but in a less ratio at 8 ounces, namely,
less in the ratio of 3 to 4. And are indeed, so far, proportional to the
logarithms of the charges.

Now, by the theory of penetrations, the depths ought to be as the charges, or,
which is the same thing, as the squares of the velocities. But from our
experiments it appears that the penetrations fall short of that proportion in
the higher charges. And therefore it would seem, that the resisting force of
the wood is not uniformly the same; but that it increases a little with the
increased velocity of the ball. And this probably may be occasioned by the
greater quantity of fibers driven before the ball; which may thus increase the
spring or resistance of the wood, and so prevent the ball from penetrating so
deep as it otherwise would do. But it will require sarther experiments in
suture to determine this point more accurately.

124. Before we conclude this tract, it may not be unuseful to make a short
recapitulation of the more remarkable deductions that have been drawn from the
experiments, in the course of these calculations. For by bringing them together
into one collected point of view, we may, at any time, easily see what useful
points of knowledge are hereby obtained, and thence be able to judge what
remains yet to be done by future experiments. Having therefore experimented and
examined all the objects that were pointed out in art. 5, p. 104, and seq. we
shall just slightly mention the answers to these enquiries; which are either
additions to, or confirmations of, those laid down p. 102, as drawn from our
former experiments in the year 1775.

And 1st, then, it may be remarked that the former law, between the charge and
velocity of ball, is again confirmed, namely, that the velocity is directly as
the square root of the weight of powder, as far as to about the charge of 8
ounces: and so it would continue for all charges, were the guns of an
indefinite length. But as the length of the charge is increased, and bears a
more considerable proportion to the length of the bore, the velocity falls the
more short of that proportion.

2nd. That the velocity of the ball increases with the charge, to a certain
point, which is peculiar to each gun, where it is greatest; and that by further
increasing the charge, the velocity gradually diminishes till the bore is quite
full of powder. That this charge for the greatest velocity is greater as the
gun is longer, but not greater however in so high a proportion as the length of
the gun is; so that the part of the bore filled with powder bears a less
proportion to the whole in the long guns, than it does in the shorter ones; the
part of the whole which is filled being indeed nearly in the reciprocal
subduplicate ratio of the length of the empty part. And the other circumstances
are as in this Table of Charges producing the Greatest Velocity.
Gun no Length of the bore Length filled Part of the whole Weight of the powder
inches inches oz 1 28.2 8.2 3/20 12 2 38.1 9.5 3/12 14 3 57.4 10.7 3/16 16 4
79.9 12.1 3/20 18

3dly. It appears that the velocity continually increases as the gun is longer,
though the increase in velocity is but very small in respect to the increase in
length, the velocities being in a ratio somewhat less than that of the square
roots of the length of the bore, but somewhat greater than that of the cube
roots of the length, and is indeed nearly in the middle ratio between the two.
But the particular degrees of velocity for each gun, and charge, may be seen at
p. 255 and 257.

4thly. It appears, from the table of ranges in art. 121, p. 263, that the
range increases in a much less ratio than the velocity, and indeed is nearly as
the square root of the velocity, the gun and elevation being the same. And when
this is compared with the property of the velocity and length of gun in the
foregoing paragraph, we perceive that we gain extremely little in the range by
a great increase in the length of the gun, the charge being the same. And
indeed the range is nearly as the 5th root of the length of the bore; which is
so small an increase, as to amount only to about 1/7th part more range for a
double length of gun.

5thly. From the same table in art. 121, it also appears that the time of
slight is nearly as the range; the gun and elevation being the same.

6thly. It appears that there is no difference caused in the velocity or range,
by varying the weight of the gun, nor by the use of wads, nor by different
degrees of ramming, nor by firing the charge of powder in different parts of it.

7thly. But a very great difference in the velocity arises from a small degree
of windage. Indeed with the usual established windage only, namely, about
1/20th of the caliber, no less than between and of the powder escapes and is
lost. And as the balls are often smaller than that size, it frequently happens
that the powder is lost by unnecessary windage.

8thly. It appears that the resisting force of wood, to balls fired into it, is
not constant. And that the depths penetrated by different velocities or
charges, are nearly as the logarithms of the charges, instead of being as the
charges themselves, or, which is the same thing, as the square of the velocity.

9thly. These, and most other experiments, show that balls are greatly
deflected from the direction they are projected in; and that so much as 300 or
400 yards in a range of a mile, or almost th of the range, which is nearly a
deflection of an angle of 15 degrees.

10thly. Finally, these experiments furnish us with the following concomitant
data, to a tolerable degree of accuracy; namely, the dimensions and elevation
of the gun, the weight and dimensions of the powder and shot, with the range
and time of slight, and first velocity of the ball; from which it is to be
hoped that the measure of the resistance of the air to projectiles may be
determined, and thereby lay the foundation for a true and practical system of
gunnery, which may be as well useful in service as in theory; especially after
a sew more accurate ranges are determined with better balls than some of the
last employed on the foregoing ranges.

PLATE I.


PLATE II.


PLATE III.


PLATE IV.


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
Pa. 6, l. 17, for -, read 1/-2.

Pa. 12, l. 18, for operation, read operations.

Pa. 59, l. 7, for 3 r, read ^.

Pa. 259, l. 19, at the end of Art. 116, add as follows; or still nearer in the
reciprocal subduplicate ratio of the empty part of the bore before the charge.
And by this rule finding the part for the longest gun, or no 4, it will be
found to be 3/20, or 12.1 inches in length, answering to 18 ounces of powder.
So that the whole set of numbers, for the greatest velocity, will be as
follows: Gun no Length of the bore The Charge With Length oz Inches Part of whole
1 28.2 12 8.2 3/10 2 38.1 14 9.5 3/12 3 57.4 16 10.7 3/10 4 79.9 18 12.1 3/20

FINIS.
Lately published, by the same Author, MATHEMATICAL TABLES:
CONTAINING the Common, Hyperbolic, and Logistic Logarithms. Also Sines,
Tangents, Secants, and versed Sines, both natural and logarithmic. Together
with several other Tables useful in Mathematical Calculations. To which is
prefixed, a large and original History of the Discoveries and Writings relating
to those Subjects. With the complete Description and Use of the Tables. Price
14s. in Boards.


