ORMOND; OR THE SECRET WITNESS.

LANE, MINERVA-PRESS, LEADENHALL-STREET.

ORMOND; OR THE SECRET WITNESS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF WIELAND, ARTHUR MERVYN, etc. etc.

"Saepe intereunt aliis meditantes necem." PHAEDRUS. Those who plot the
destruction of others, very often fall themselves the victims. LONDON: PRINTED
AT THE Minerva-Press, FOR WILLIAM LANE, LEADENHALL-STREET. 1800.

TO I. E. ROSENBERG.
YOU are anxious to obtain some knowledge of the history of Constantia Dudley.
I am well acquainted with your motives, and allow that they justify your
curiosity. I am willing, to the utmost of my power, to comply with your
request, and will now dedicate what leisure I have to the composition of her
story.

My narrative will have little of that merit which flows from unity of design.
You are desirous of hearing an authentic, and not a fictitious tale. It will,
therefore, be my duty to relate events in no artificial or elaborate order, and
without that harmonious congruity and luminous amplification, which might
justly be displayed in a tale flowing merely from invention. It will be little
more than a biographical sketch, in which the facts are distributed and
amplified, not as a poetical taste would prescribe, but as the materials
afforded me, sometimes abundant and sometimes scanty, would permit.

Constance, like all the beings made known to us, not by fancy, but experience,
has numerous defects. You will readily perceive, that her tale is told by her
friend, but I hope you will not discover many or glaring proofs of a
disposition to extenuate her errors or falsify her character.

Ormond will, perhaps, appear to you a contradictory or unintelligible being. I
pretend not to the infallibility of inspiration. He is not a creature of fancy.
It was not prudent to unfold all the means by which I gained a knowledge of his
actions; but these means, though singularly fortunate and accurate, could not
be unerring and complete. I have shown him to you as he appeared, on different
occasions and at successive periods, to me. This is all that you will demand
from a faithful biographer.

If you were not deeply interested in the fate of my friend, yet my undertaking
will not be useless, inasmuch as it will introduce you to scenes to which you
have been hitherto a stranger. The modes of life, the influence of public
events upon the character and happiness of individuals in America, are new to
you. The distinctions of birth, the artificial degrees of esteem or contempt
which connect themselves with different professions and ranks in your native
country, Germany.
are but little known among us. Society and manners constitute your favorite
study, and I am willing to believe, that my relation will supply you with
knowledge, on these heads, not to be otherwise obtained. If these details be,
in that respect, unsatisfactory, all that I can add, is, my counsel to go and
examine for yourself.

S. C.

ORMOND; OR THE SECRET WITNESS.
CHAPTER I.
STEPHEN DUDLEY was a native of New York. He was educated to the profession of
a painter. His father's trade was that of an apothecary. But this son,
manifesting an attachment to the pencil, he was resolved that it should be
gratified. For this end Stephen was sent at an early age to Europe, and not
only enjoyed the instructions of Fuzeli and Bartolozzi, but spent a
considerable period in Italy, in studying the Augustan and Medicean monuments.
It was intended that he should practice his art in his native city, but the
young man, though reconciled to this scheme by deference to paternal authority,
and by a sense of its propriety, was willing, as long as possible to postpone
it. The liberality of his father relieved him from all pecuniary cares. His
whole time was devoted to the improvement of his skill in his favorite art, and
the enriching of his mind with every valuable accomplishment. He was endowed
with a comprehensive genius and indefatigable industry. His progress was
proportionably rapid, and he passed his time without much regard to futurity,
being too well satisfied with the present to anticipate a change. A change
however was unavoidable, and he was obliged at length to pay a reluctant
obedience to his father's repeated summons. The death of his wife had rendered
his society still more necessary to the old gentleman.

He married before his return. The woman whom he had selected was an
unportioned orphan, and was recommended merely by her moral qualities. These,
however, were eminent, and secured to her, till the end of her life, the
affection of her husband. Though painting was capable of fully gratifying his
taste as matter of amusement, he quickly found that, in his new situation it
would not answer the ends of a profession. His father supported himself by the
profits of his shop, but with all his industry he could do no more than procure
a subsistence for himself and his son.

Till his father's death young Dudley attached himself to painting. His gains
were slender but he loved the art, and his father's profession rendered his own
exertions in a great degree superfluous. The death of the elder Dudley
introduced an important change in his situation. It thenceforth became
necessary to strike into some new path, to deny himself the indulgence of his
inclinations, and regulate his future exertions by a view to nothing but gain.
There was little room for choice. His habits had disqualified him for
mechanical employments. He could not stoop to the imaginary indignity which
attended them, nor spare the time necessary to obtain the requisite degree of
skill. His father died in possession of some stock, and a sufficient portion of
credit to supply its annual decays. He lived at what they call a good stand,
and enjoyed a certain quantity of permanent custom. The knowledge that was
required was as easily obtained as the elements of any other profession, and
was not wholly unallied to the pursuits in which he had sometimes engaged.
Hence he could not hesitate long in forming his resolution, but assumed the
management of his father's concerns with a cheerful and determined spirit.

The knowledge of his business was acquired in no long time. He was stimulated
to the acquisition by a sense of duty, he was inured to habits of industry, and
there were few things capable to resist a strenuous exertion of his faculties.
Knowledge of whatever kind afforded a compensation to labor, but the task
being finished, that which remained, which, in ordinary apprehensions would
have been esteemed an easy and smooth path, was to him insupportably
disgustful. The drudgery of a shop, where all the faculties were at a stand,
and one day was an unvaried repetition of the foregoing, was too incongenial to
his disposition not to be a source of discontent. This was an evil which it was
the tendency of time to increase rather than diminish. The longer he endured it
the less tolerable it became. He could not forbear comparing his present
situation with his former, and deriving from the contrast perpetual food for
melancholy.

The indulgence of his father had contributed to instill into him prejudices,
in consequence of which a certain species of disgrace was annexed to every
employment of which the only purpose was gain. His present situation not only
precluded all those pursuits which exalt and harmonize the feelings, but was
detested by him as something humiliating and ignominious. His wife was of a
pliant temper, and her condition less influenced by this change than that of
her husband. She was qualified to be his comforter, but instead of dispelling
his gloom by judicious arguments, or a seasonable example of vivacity, she
eaught the infection that preyed upon his mind and augmented his anxieties by
partaking in them.

By enlarging in some degree, the foundation on which his father had built, he
had provided the means of a future secession, and might console himself with
the prospect of enjoying his darling ease at some period of his life. This
period was necessarily too remote for his wishes, and had not certain
occurrences taken place, by which he was flattered with the immediate
possession of ease, it is far from being certain that he would not have fallen
a victim to his growing disquietudes.

He was one morning engaged behind his counter as usual, when a youth came into
his shop, and, in terms that bespoke the union of fearlessness and frankness,
enquired whether he could be engaged as an apprentice. A proposal of this kind
could not be suddenly rejected or adopted. He stood in need of assistance, the
youth was manly and blooming, and exhibited a modest and ingenuous aspect. It
was possible that he was, in every respect, qualified for the post for which he
applied, but it was previously necessary to ascertain these qualifications. For
this end he requested the youth to call at his house in the evening, when he
should be at leisure to converse with him and furnished him with suitable
directions.

The youth came according to appointment. On being questioned as to his
birthplace and origin, he stated that he was a native of Wakefield, in
Yorkshire; that his family were honest, and his education not mean; that he was
the eldest of many children, and having attained an age at which he conceived
it his duty to provide for himself, he had, with the concurrence of his
friends, come to America, in search of the means of independent subsistence;
that he had just arrived in a ship which he named, and, his scanty stock of
money being likely to be speedily consumed, this had been the first effort he
had made to procure employment.

His tale was circumstantial and consistent, and his veracity appeared liable
to no doubt. He was master of his book and his pen, and had acquired more than
the rudiments of Latin. Mr. Dudley did not require much time to deliberate. In
a few days the youth was established as a member of his family, and as a
coadjutor in his shop, nothing but food, clothing, and lodging being stipulated
as the reward of his services.

The young man improved daily in the good opinion of his master. His
apprehension was quick, his sobriety invariable, and his application incessant.
Though by no means presumptuous or arrogant, he was not wanting in a suitable
degree of self-confidence. All his propensities appeared to concentre in his
occupation and the promotion of his master's interest, from which he was drawn
aside by no allurements of sensual or intellectual pleasure. In a short time he
was able to relieve his master of most of the toils of his profession, and Mr.
Dudley a thousand times congratulated himself on possessing a servant equally
qualified by his talents and his probity. He gradually remitted his attention
to his own concerns, and placed more absolute reliance on the fidelity of his
dependant.

Young Craig, that was the name of the youth, maintained a punctual
correspondence with his family, and confided to his patron, not only copies of
all the letters which he himself wrote, but those which, from time to time, he
received. He had several correspondents, but the chief of those were his mother
and his eldest sister. The sentiments contained in their letters breathed the
most appropriate simplicity and tenderness, and flowed with the nicest
propriety, from the different relationships of mother and sister. The style and
even the penmanship were distinct and characteristical.

One of the first of these epistles, was written by the mother to Mr. Dudley,
on being informed by her son of his present engagement. It was dictated by that
concern for the welfare of her child befitting the maternal character.
Gratitude, for the ready acceptance of the youth's services, and for the
benignity of his deportment toward him, a just representation of which had
been received by her from the boy himself, was expressed with no inconsiderable
elegance; as well as her earnest wishes that Mr. Dudley should extend to him
not only the indulgence, but the moral superintendance of a parent.

To this Mr. Dudley conceived it incumbent upon him to return a consenting
answer, and letters were in this manner occasionally interchanged between them.

Things remained in this situation for three years, during which period every
day enhanced the reputation of Craig, for stability and integrity. A sort of
provisional engagement had been made between the parents, unattended however by
any legal or formal act, that things should remain on their present footing for
three years. When this period terminated, it seemed as if a new engagement had
become necessary. Craig expressed the utmost willingness to renew the former
contract, but his master began to think that the services of his pupil merited
a higher recompense. He ascribed the prosperity that had hitherto attended him,
to the disinterested exertions of his apprentice. His social and literary
gratifications had been increased by the increase of his leisure. These were
capable of being still more enlarged. He had not yet acquired what he deemed a
sufficiency, and could not therefore wholly relieve himself from the turmoils
and humiliation of a professional life. He concluded that he should at once
consult his own interest and perform no more than an act of justice to a
faithful servant, by making Craig his partner, and allowing him a share of the
profits, on condition of his discharging all the duties of the trade.

When this scheme was proposed to Craig, he professed unbounded gratitude,
considered all that he had done as amply rewarded by the pleasure of
performance, and as being nothing more than was prescribed by his duty. He
promised that this change in his situation should have no other effect, than to
furnish new incitements to diligence and fidelity, in the promotion of an
interest, which would then become in a still higher degree than formerly, a
common one. Mr. Dudley communicated his intention to Craig's mother, who, in
addition to many grateful acknowledgements, stated that a kinsman of her son,
had enabled him, in case of entering into partnership, to add a small sum to
the common stock, and that for this sum, Craig was authorized to draw upon a
London banker.

The proposed arrangement was speedily effected. Craig was charged with the
management of all affairs, and Mr. Dudley retired to the enjoyment of still
greater leisure. Two years elapsed and nothing occurred to interrupt the
harmony that subsisted between the partners. Mr. Dudley's condition might be
esteemed prosperous. His wealth was constantly accumulating. He had nearly
attained all that he wished, and his wishes still aimed at nothing less than
splendid opulence. He had annually increased the permanent sources of his
revenue. His daughter was the only survivor of many children, who perished in
their infancy, before habit and maturity had rendered the parental tie
difficult to break. This daughter had already exhibited proofs of a mind
susceptible of high improvement, and the loveliness of her person promised to
keep pace with her mental acquisitions. He charged himself with the care of her
education, and found no weariness or satiety in this task that might not be
amply relieved by the recreations of science and literature. He flattered
himself that his career, which had hitherto been exempt from any considerable
impediment, would terminate in tranquillity. Few men might, with more propriety,
have discarded all apprehensions respecting futurity.

Craig had several sisters and one brother younger than himself. Mr. Dudley
desirous of promoting the happiness of this family, proposed to send for this
brother, and have him educated to his own profession, insinuating to his
partner that at the time when the boy should have gained sufficient stability
and knowledge, he himself might be disposed to relinquish the profession
altogether, on terms particularly advantageous to the two brothers who might
thenceforth conduct their business jointly. Craig had been eloquent in praise
of this lad, and his testimony had, from time to time, been confirmed by that
of his mother and sister. He had often expressed his wishes for the prosperity
of the lad, and when his mother had expressed her doubts as to the best method
of disposing of him, modestly requested Mr. Dudley's advice on this head. The
proposal therefore, might be supposed to be particularly acceptable, and yet
Craig expressed reluctance to concur with it. This reluctance was accompanied
with certain tokens which sufficiently showed whence it arose. Craig appeared
unwilling to increase those obligations under which he already labored. His
sense of gratitude was too acute to allow him to heighten it by the reception
of new benefits.

It might be imagined that this objection would be easily removed; but the
obstinacy of Craig's opposition was invincible. Mr. Dudley could not relinquish
a scheme to which no stronger objection could be made. And, since his partner
could not be prevailed upon to make this proposal to the friends of the lad, he
was determined to do it himself. He maintained an intercourse by letters with
several of those friends which he formed in his youth. One of them usually
resided in London. From him he received about this time, a letter, in which,
among other information, the writer mentioned his intention of setting out on a
tour through Yorkshire and the Scottish highlands. Mr. Dudley thought this a
suitable opportunity for executing his design in favor of young Craig. He
entertained no doubts about the worth and condition of this family, but was
still desirous of obtaining some information on this head from one who would
pass through this town where they resided, who would examine with his own eyes,
and on whose discernment and integrity he could place an implicit reliance. He
concealed this intention from his partner, and entrusted his letter to a friend
who was just embarking for Europe. In due season he received an answer,
confirming, in all respects, Craig's representations, but informing him that
the lad had been lately disposed of in a way not equally advantageous with that
which Mr. Dudley had proposed, but such as would not admit of change.

If doubts could possibly be entertained respecting the character and views of
Craig, this evidence would have dispelled them: But plans however skilfully
contrived, if founded on imposture, cannot fail of being sometimes detected.
Craig had occasion to be absent from the city for some weeks. Meanwhile a
letter had been left at his lodgings by one who merely enquired if that were
the dwelling of Mr. Dudley, and being answered by the servant in the
affirmative, left the letter without further parley. It was superscribed with a
name unknown to any of the family, and in a hand which its badness rendered
almost illegible. The servant placed it in a situation to be seen by his master.

Mr. Dudley allowed it to remain unopened for a considerable time. At length,
deeming it excusable to discover, by any means, the person to whom it was
addressed, he ventured to unseal it. It was dated at Portsmouth in
New Hampshire. The signature was Mary Mansfield. It was addressed to her son,
and was a curious specimen of illiterateness. Mary herself was unable to write,
as she reminds her son, and had therefore procured the assistance of Mrs.
Dewitt, for whose family she washed. The amanuensis was but little superior in
the arts of penmanship to her principal. The contents of the epistle were made
out with some difficulty. This was the substance of it

Mary reproaches her son for deserting her, and letting five years pass away
without allowing her to hear from him. She informed him of her distresses as
they flowed from sickness and poverty, and were aggravated by the loss of her
son who was so handsome and promising a lad. She related her marriage with
Zekel Hackney, who first brought her tidings of her boy. He was master, it
seems, of a fishing smack, and voyaged sometimes to New York. In one of his
visits to this city, he met a mighty spry young man, on whom he thought he
recognized his wife's son. He had traced him to the house of Mr. Dudley, and on
enquiry, discovered that the lad resided here. On his return he communicated
the tidings to his spouse, who had now written to reproach him for his neglect
of his poor old mother, and to entreat his assistance to relieve her from the
necessity of drudging for her livelihood.

This letter was capable of an obvious construction. It was, no doubt, sounded
in mistake, though, it was to be acknowledged, that the mistake was singular.
Such was the conclusion immediately formed by Mr. Dudley. He quietly replaced
the letter on the mantlepiece, where it had before stood, and dismissed the
affair from his thoughts.

Next day Craig returned from his journey. Mr. Dudley was employed in examining
some papers in a desk that stood behind the door, in the apartment in which the
letter was placed. There was no other person in the room when Craig entered it.
He did not perceive Mr. Dudley, who was screened from observation, by his
silence and by an open door. As soon as he entered, Mr. Dudley looked at him,
and made no haste to speak. The letter whose superscription was turned toward
him, immediately attracted Craig's attention. He seized it with some degree of
eagerness, and observing the broken seal, thrust it hastily into his pocket,
muttering, at the same time, in a tone, betokening a mixture of consternation
and anger, "Damn it." -- He immediately left the room, still uninformed of the
presence of Mr. Dudley, who began to muse, with some earnestness, on what he
had seen. Soon after he left this room and went into another, in which the
family usually sat. In about twenty minutes, Craig made his appearance with his
usual freedom and plausibility. Complimentary and customary topics were
discussed. Mrs. Dudley and her daughter were likewise present. The uneasiness
which the incident just mentioned had occasioned in the mind of Mr. Dudley, was
at first dispelled by the disembarrassed behavior of his partner, but new
matter of suspicion was speedily afforded him. He observed that his partner
spoke of his present entrance as of the first since his arrival, and that when
the lady mentioned that he had been the subject of a curious mistake, a letter
being directed to him by a strange name, and left there during his absence, he
pretended total ignorance of the circumstance. The young lady was immediately
directed by her mother to bring the letter which lay, she said, on the
mantle-tree in the next room.

During this scene Mr. Dudley was silent. He anticipated the disappointment of
the messenger, believing the letter to have been removed. What then was his
surprise when the messenger returned bearing the letter in her hand! Craig
examined and read it and commented, with great mirth, on the contents, acting,
all the while, as if he had never seen it before. These appearances were not
qualified to quiet suspicion. The more Dudley brooded over them, the more
dissatisfied he became. He, however, concealed his thoughts as well from Craig
himself as his family, impatiently waiting for some new occurrence to arise by
which he might square his future proceedings.

During Craig's absence, Mrs. Dudley had thought this a proper occasion for
cleaning his apartment. The furniture, and among the rest, a large chest
strongly fastened, was removed into an adjoining room which was otherwise
unoccupied, and which was usually kept locked. When the cleansing was finished,
the furniture was replaced, except this trunk, which its bulk, the indolence of
the servant, and her opinion of its uselessness, occasioned her to leave in the
closet.

About a week after this, on a Saturday evening, Craig invited to sup with him
a friend who was to embark, on the ensuing Monday, for Jamaica. During supper,
at which the family were present, the discourse turned on the voyage on which
the guest was about to enter. In the course of talk, the stranger expressed how
much he stood in need of a strong and commodious chest, in which he might
safely deposit his clothes and papers. Not being apprized of the early
departure of the vessel, he had deferred till it was too late, applying to an
artizan.

Craig desired him to set himself at rest on that head, for that he had, in his
possession, just such a trunk as he described. It was of no use to him, being
long filled with nothing better than refuse and lumber, and that, if he would,
he might send for it the next morning. He turned to Mrs. Dudley and observed,
that the trunk to which he alluded was in her possession, and he would thank
her to direct its removal into his own apartment, that he might empty it of its
present contents, and prepare it for the service of his friend. To this she
readily assented.

There was nothing mysterious in this affair, but the mind of Mr. Dudley was
pained with doubts. He was now as prone to suspect, as he was formerly disposed
to confidence. This evening he put the key of the closet in his own pocket.
When enquired for the next day, it was, of course, missing. It could not be
found on the most diligent search. The occasion was not of such moment as to
justify breaking the door. Mr. Dudley imagined that he saw, in Craig, more
uneasiness at this disappointment, than he was willing to express. There was no
remedy. The chest remained where it was, and, next morning, the ship departed
on her voyage.

Craig accompanied his friend on board, was prevailed upon to go to sea with
him, designing to return with the pilot-boat, but when the pilot was preparing
to leave the vessel, such was this man's complaisance to the wishes of his
friend, that he concluded to perform the remainder of the voyage in his
company. The consequences are easily seen. Craig had gone with a resolution of
never returning. The unhappy Dudley was left to deplore the total ruin of his
fortune which had fallen a prey to the arts of a subtle imposter.

The chest was opened, and the part which Craig had been playing for some
years, with so much success, was perfectly explained. It appeared that the sum
which Craig had contributed to the common stock, when first admitted into
partnership, had been previously purloined from the daily receipts of his shop,
of which an exact register was kept. Craig had been so indiscrete as to
preserve this accusing record, and it was discovered in this depository: He was
the son of Mary Mansfield and a native of Portsmouth. The history of the
Wakefield family, specious and complicated as it was, was entirely fictitious.
The letters had been forged, and the correspondence supported by his own
dexterity. Here was found the letter which Mr. Dudley had written to his friend
requesting him to make certain enquiries at Wakefield, and which he imagined
that he had delivered with his own hands to a trusty bearer. Here was the
original draught of the answer he received. The manner in which this stratagem
had been accomplished came gradually to light. The letter which was written to
the Yorkshire traveller had been purloined, and another, with a similar
superscription, in which the hand of Dudley was exactly imitated, and
containing only brief and general remarks, had been placed in its stead. Craig
must have suspected its contents, and by this suspicion have been incited to
the theft. The answer which the Englishman had really written, and which
sufficiently corresponded with the forged letter, had been intercepted by
Craig, and furnished him a model from which he might construct an answer
adapted to his own purposes.

This imposture had not been sustained for a trivial purpose. He had embezzled
a large share of the stock, and had employed the credit of the house to procure
extensive remittances to be made to an agent at a distance, by whom the
property was effectually secured. Craig had gone to participate these spoils,
while the whole estate of Mr. Dudley was insufficient to pay the demands that
were consequently made upon him.

It was his lot to fall into the grasp of men, who squared their actions by no
other standard than law, and who esteemed every claim to be incontestably just,
that could plead that sanction. They did not indeed throw him into prison. When
they had despoiled him of every remnant of his property, they deemed themselves
entitled to his gratitude for leaving his person unmolested.

CHAPTER II.
THUS in a moment was this man thrown from the summit of affluence to the
lowest indigence. He had been habituated to independance and ease. This
reverse, therefore, was the harder to bear. His present situation was much
worse than at his father's death. Then he was sanguine with youth and glowing
with health. He possessed a fund on which he could commence his operations.
Materials were at hand, and nothing was wanted but skill to use them. Now he
had advanced in life. His frame was not exempt from infirmity. He had so long
reposed on the bosom of opulence and enjoyed the respect attendant on wealth,
that he felt himself totally incapacitated for a new station. His misfortune
had not been foreseen. It was imbittered by the consciousness of his own
imprudence, and by recollecting that the serpent which had stung him, was
nurtured in his own bosom.

It was not merely frugal fare and an humble dwelling to which he was
condemned. The evils to be dreaded were beggary and contempt. Luxury and
leisure were not merely denied him. He must bend all his efforts to procure
clothing and food, to preserve his family from nakedness and famine. His
spirit would not brook dependence. To live upon charity, or to take advantage
of the compassion of his friends, was a destiny far worse than any other. To
this therefore he would not consent. However irksome and painful it might
prove, he determined to procure his bread by the labor of his hands.

But to what scene or kind of employment should he betake himself? He could not
endure to exhibit this reverse of fortune on the same theater which had
witnessed his prosperity. One of his first measures was to remove from New York
to Philadelphia. How should he employ himself in his new abode? Painting, the
art in which he was expert, would not afford him the means of subsistence. Though
no despicable musician, he did not esteem himself qualified to be a teacher of
this art. This profession, besides, was treated by his new neighbors, with
general, though unmerited contempt. There were few things on which he prided
himself more than on the facilities and elegances of his penmanship. He was
besides well acquainted with arithmetic and accompting. He concluded therefore,
to offer his services as a writer in a public office. This employment demanded
little bodily exertion. He had spent much of his time at the book and the desk:
his new occupation, therefore, was further recommended by its resemblance to
his ancient modes of life.

The first situation of this kind, for which he applied, he obtained. The
duties were constant, but not otherwise toilsome or arduous. The emoluments
were slender, but by contracting, within limits as narrow as possible, his
expenses, they could be made subservient to the mere purposes of subsistence.
He hired a small house in the suburbs of the city. It consisted of a room above
and below, and a kitchen. His wife, daughter and one girl, composed its
inhabitants.

As long as his mind was occupied in projecting and executing these
arrangements, it was diverted from uneasy contemplations. When his life became
uniform, and day followed day in monotonous succession, and the novelty of his
employment had disappeared, his cheerfulness began likewise to fade, and was
succeeded by unconquerable melancholy. His present condition was in every
respect the contrast of his former. His servitude was intolerable. He was
associated with sordid hirelings, gross and uneducated, who treated his age
with rude familiarity, and insulted his ears with ribaldry and scurril jests.
He was subject to command, and had his portion of daily drudgery allotted to
him, to be performed for a pittance no more than would buy the bread which he
daily consumed. The task assigned him was technical and formal. He was
perpetually encumbered with the rubbish of law, and waded with laborious steps
through its endless tautologies, its impertinent circuities, its lying
assertions, and hateful artifices. Nothing occurred to relieve or diversify the
scene. It was one tedious round of scrawling and jargon; a tissue made up of
the shreds and remnants of barbarous antiquity, polluted with the rust of ages,
and patched by the stupidity of modern workmen, into new deformity.

When the day's task was finished, jaded spirits, and a body enfeebled by
reluctant application, were but little adapted to domestic enjoyments. These
indeed were incompatible with a temper like his, to whom the privation of the
comforts that attended his former condition, was equivalent to the loss of
life. These privations were still more painful to his wife, and her death added
one more calamity to those under which he already groaned. He had always loved
her with the tenderest affection, and he justly regarded this evil as
surpassing all his former woes.

But his destiny seemed never weary of persecuting him. It was not enough that
he should fall a victim to the most atrocious arts, that he should wear out his
days in solitude and drudgery, that he should feel not only the personal
restraints and hardships attendant upon indigence, but the keener pangs that
result from negligence and contumely. He was imperfectly recovered from the
shock occasioned by the death of his wife, when his sight was invaded by a
cataract. Its progress was rapid, and terminated in total blindness.

He was now disabled from pursuing his usual occupation. He was shut out from
the light of heaven, and debarred of every human comfort. Condemned to eternal
dark, and worse than the helplessness of infancy, he was dependant for the
meanest offices on the kindness of others, and he who had formerly abounded in
the gifts of fortune, thought only of ending his days in a gaol or an
almshouse.

His situation however was alleviated by one circumstance. He had a daughter
whom I have formerly mentioned, as the only survivor of many children. She was
sixteen years of age when the storm of adversity fell upon her father's house.
It may be thought that one educated as she had been, in the gratification of
all her wishes, and at an age of timidity and inexperience, would have been
less fitted than her father for encountering misfortune, and yet when the task
of comforter fell upon her, her strength was not found wanting. Her fortitude
was immediately put to the test. This reverse did not only affect her obliquely
and through the medium of her family, but directly and in one way usually very
distressful to female feelings.

Her fortune and character had attracted many admirers. One of them had some
reason to flatter himself with success. Miss Dudley's notions had little in
common with those around her. She had learned to square her conduct, in a
considerable degree, not by the hasty impulses of inclination, but by the
dictates of truth. She yielded nothing to caprice or passion. Not that she was
perfectly exempt from intervals of weakness, or from the necessity of painful
struggles, but these intervals were transient, and these struggles always
successful. She was no stranger to the pleadings of love from the lips of
others, and in her own bosom, but its tumults were brief, and speedily gave
place to quiet thoughts and steadfast purposes.

She had listened to the solicitations of one, not unworthy in himself, and
amply recommended by the circumstances of family and fortune. He was young and
therefore impetuous. Of the good that he sought, he was not willing to delay
the acquisition for a moment. She had been taught a very different lesson.
Marriage included vows of irrevocable affection and obedience. It was a
contract to endure for life. To form this connection in extreme youth, before
time had unfolded and modelled the characters of the parties, was, in her
opinion, a proof of pernicious and opprobrious temerity. Not to perceive the
propriety of delay in this case, or to be regardless of the motives that would
enjoin upon us a deliberate procedure, furnished an unanswerable objection to
any man's pretensions. She was sensible, however, that this, like other
mistakes, was curable. If her arguments failed to remove it, time, it was
likely, would effect this purpose. If she rejected a matrimonial proposal for
the present, it was for reasons that might not preclude her future acceptance
of it.

Her scruples, in the present case, did not relate to the temper or person, or
understanding of her lover, but to his age, to the imperfectness of their
acquaintance, and to the want of that permanence of character, which can flow
only from the progress of time and knowledge. These objections, which so rarely
exist, were conclusive with her. There was no danger of her relinquishing them
in compliance with the remonstrances of parents and the solicitations of her
lover, though the one and the other were urged with all the force of authority
and insinuation. The prescriptions of duty were too clear to allow her to
hesitate and waver, but the consciousness of rectitude could not secure her
from temporary vexations.

Her parents were blemished with some of the frailties of that character. They
held themselves entitled to prescribe in this article, but they forbore to
exert their power. They condescended to persuade, but it was manifest, that
they regarded their own conduct as a relaxation of right, and had not the
lover's importunities suddenly ceased, it is not possible to tell how far the
happiness of Miss Dudley might have been endangered. The misfortunes of her
father were no sooner publicly known, than the youth forbore his visits, and
embarked on a voyage which he had long projected, but which had been hitherto
delayed by a superior regard to the interests of his passion.

It must be allowed that the lady had not foreseen this event. She had
exercised her judgment upon his character, and had not been deceived. Before
this desertion, had it been clearly stated to her apprehension, she would have
readily admitted it to be probable. She knew the fascination of wealth, and the
delusiveness of self-confidence. She was superior to the folly of supposing him
exempt from sinister influences, and deaf to the whispers of ambition, and yet
the manner in which she was affected by this event, convinced her that her
heart had a larger share than her reason in dictating her expectations.

Yet it must not be supposed that she suffered any very acute distress on this
account. She was grieved less for her own sake than his. She had no design of
entering into marriage, in less than seven years from this period. Not a single
hope, relative to her own condition, had been frustrated. She had only been
mistaken in her favorable conceptions of another. He had exhibited less
constancy and virtue than her heart had taught her to expect.

With those opinions, she could devote herself, with a single heart, to the
alleviation of her parent's sorrows. This change in her condition she treated
lightly, and retained her cheerfulness unimpaired. This happened because, in a
rational estimate, and so far as it affected herself, the misfortune was
slight, and because her dejection would only tend to augment the
disconsolateness of her parents, while, on the other hand, her serenity was
calculated to infuse the same confidence into them. She indulged herself in no
fits of exclamation or moodiness. She listened in silence to their invectives
and laments, and seized every opportunity that offered to inspire them with
courage, to set before them the good as well as ill, to which they were
reserved, to suggest expedients for improving their condition, and to soften
the asperities of his new mode of life, to her father, by every species of
blandishment and tenderness.

She refused no personal exertion to the common benefit. She incited her father
to diligence, as well by her example, as by her exortations; suggested plans,
and superintended or assisted in the execution of them. The infirmities of sex
and age vanished before the motives to courage and activity flowing from her
new situation. When settled in his new abode, and profession, she began to
deliberate what conduct was incumbent on herself, how she might participate
with her father, the burden of the common maintenance, and blunt the edge of
this calamity by the resources of a powerful and cultivated mind.

In the first place, she disposed of every superfluous garb and trinket. She
reduced her wardrobe to the plainest and cheapest establishment. By this means
alone, she supplied her father's necessities with a considerable sum. Her music
and even her books were not spared, not from the slight esteem in which these
were held by her, but because she was thenceforth to become an economist of
time as well as of money, because musical instruments are not necessary to the
practice of this art in its highest perfection, and because, books, when she
should procure leisure to read, or money to purchase them, might be obtained in
a cheaper and more commodious form, than those costly and splendid volumes,
with which her father's munificence had formerly supplied her.

To make her expenses as limited as possible was her next care. For this end
she assumed the province of cook, the washing of house and clothes, and the
cleansing of furniture. Their house was small, the family consisted of no more
than four persons, and all formality and expensiveness were studiously
discarded, but her strength was unequal to unavoidable tasks. A vigorous
constitution could not supply the place of laborious habits, and this part of
her plan must have been changed for one less frugal. The aid of a servant must
have been hired, if it had not been furnished by gratitude.

Some years before this misfortune, her mother had taken under her protection a
girl, the daughter of a poor woman, who subsisted by labor, and who dying,
left this child without friend or protector. This girl possessed no very
improveable capacity, and therefore, could not benefit by the benevolent
exertions of her young mistress as much as the latter desired, but her temper
was artless and affectionate, and she attached herself to Constance with the
most entire devotion. In this change of fortune she would not consent to be
separated, and Miss Dudley, influenced by her affection to her Lucy, and
reflecting that on the whole it was most to her advantage to share with her, at
once, her kindness and her poverty, retained her as her companion. With this
girl she shared the domestic duties, scrupling not to divide with her the
meanest and most rugged, as well as the lightest offices.

This was not all. She, in the next place, considered whether her ablity
extended no farther than to save. Could she not by the employment of her hands
increase the income as well as diminish the expense? Why should she be
precluded from all lucrative occupation? She soon came to a resolution. She was
mistress of her needle, and this skill she conceived herself bound to employ
for her own subsistence.

Clothing is one of the necessaries of human existence. The art of the tailor
is scarcely of less use than that of the tiller of the ground. There are few
the gains of which are better merited, and less injurious to the principles of
human society. She resolved therefore to become a workwoman, and to employ in
this way, the leisure she possessed from household avocations. To this scheme
she was obliged to reconcile not only herself but her parents. The conquest of
their prejudices was no easy task, but her patience and skill finally
succeeded, and she procured needle work in sufficient quantity to enable her to
enhance in no trivial degree, the common fund.

It is one thing barely to comply with the urgencies of the case, and to do
that which, in necessitous circumstances is best. But to conform with grace and
cheerfulness, to yield no place to fruitless recriminations and repinings, to
contract the evils into as small a compass as possible, and extract from our
condition all possible good, is a task of a different kind.

Mr. Dudley's situation required from him frugality and diligence. He was
regular and unintermitted in his application to his pen. He was frugal. His
slender income was administered agreeably to the maxims of his daughter: but he
was unhappy. He experienced in its full extent the bitterness of disappointment.

He gave himself up for the most part to a list-less melancholy. Sometimes his
impatience would produce effects less excusable; and conjure up an accusing and
irascible spirit. His wife and even his daughter he would make the objects of
peevish and absurd reproaches. These were moments when her heart drooped
indeed, and her tears could not be restrained from flowing. These fits were
transitory and rare, and when they had passed, the father seldom failed to
mingle tokens of contrition and repentance with the ^ears of his daughter. Her
arguments and soothings were seldom disappointed of success. Her mother's
disposition was soft and pliant, but she could not accommodate herself to the
necessity of her husband's affairs. She was obliged to endure the want of some
indulgences, but she reserved to herself the liberty of complaining, and to
subdue this spirit in her was found utterly impracticable. She died a victim to
discontent.

This event deepened the gloom that shrouded the soul of her father, and
rendered the task of consolation still more difficult. She did not despair. Her
sweetness and patience was invincible by any thing that had already happened,
but her fortitude did not exceed the standard of human nature. Evils now began
to menace her, to which it is likely she would have yielded, had not their
approach been intercepted by an evil of a different kind.

The pressure of grief is sometimes such as to prompt us to seek a refuge in
voluntary death. We must lay aside the burden which we cannot sustain. If
thought degenerate into a vehicle of pain, what remains but to destroy that
vehicle? For this end, death is the obvious, but not the only, or morally
speaking, the worst means. There is one method of obtaining the bliss of
forgetfulness, in comparison with which suicide is innocent.

The strongest mind is swayed by circumstances. There is no firmness of
integrity, perhaps, able to repel every species of temptation, which is
produced by the present constitution of human affairs, and yet temptation is
successful, chiefly by virtue of its gradual and invisible approaches. We rush
into danger, because we are not aware of its existence, and have not therefore
provided the means of safety, and the demon that seizes us is hourly
reinforced by habit. Our opposition grows fainter in proportion as our
adversary acquires new strength, and the man becomes enslaved by the most
sordid vices, whose fall would, at a former period, have been deemed
impossible, or who would have been imagined liable to any species of depravity,
more than to this.

Mr. Dudley's education had entailed upon him many errors, yet who would have
supposed it possible for him to be enslaved by a depraved appetite; to be
enamoured of low debauchery, and to grasp at the happiness that intoxication
had to bestow? This was a mournful period in Constantia's history. My feelings
will not suffer me to dwell upon it. I cannot describe the manner in which she
was affected by the first symptoms of this depravity, the struggles which she
made to counteract this dreadful infatuation, and the grief which she
experienced from the repeated miscarriage of her efforts. I will not detail her
various expedients for this end, the appeals which she made to his
understanding, to his sense of honor and dread of infamy, to the gratitude to
which she was entitled, and to the injunctions of parental duty. I will not
detail his fits of remorse, his fruitless penitence, and continual relapses,
nor depict the heartbreaking scenes of uproar and violence, and foul disgrace
that accompanied his paroxysms of drunkenness.

The only intellectual amusement which this lady allowed herself was writing.
She enjoyed one distant friend, with whom she maintained an uninterrupted
correspondence, and to whom she confided a circumstantial and copious relation
of all these particulars. That friend is the writer of these memoirs. It is not
impossible but that these letters may be communicated to the world, at some
future period. The picture which they exhibit is hourly exemplified and
realized, though, in the many-coloured scenes of human life, none surpasses it
in disastrousness and horror. My eyes almost wept themselves dry over this part
of her tale.

In this state of things Mr. Dudley's blindness might justly be accounted, even
in its immediate effects, a fortunate event. It dissolved the spell, by which
he was bound, and which, it is probable, would never have been otherwise
broken. It restored him to himself and showed him, with a distinctness which
made him shudder, the gulf to which he was hastening But nothing can compensate
to the sufferer the evils of blindness. It was the business of Constantia's
life to alleviate those sufferings, to cherish and console her father, and to
rescue him, by the labor of her hands from dependence on public charity. For
this end, her industry and solicitude were never at rest. She was able, by that
industry, to provide him and herself with necessaries. Their portion was
scanty, and, if it sometimes exceeded the standard of their wants, not less
frequently fell short of it. For all her toils and disquietudes she esteemed
herself fully compensated by the smiles of her father. He indeed could seldom
be prompted to smile, or to suppress the dictates of that despair which flowed
from his sense of this new calamity, and the aggravations of hardship which his
recent insobrieties had occasioned to his daughter.

She purchased what books her scanty stock would allow, and borrowed others.
These she read to him when her engagements would permit. At other times she was
accustomed to solace herself with her own music. The lute which her father had
purchased in Italy, and which had been disposed of among the rest of his
effects, at public sale, had been gratuitously restored to him by the
purchaser, on condition of his retaining it in his possession. His blindness
and inoccupation now broke the long silence to which this instrument had been
condemned, and afforded an accompaniment to the young lady's voice.

Her chief employment was conversation. She resorted to this as the best means
of breaking the monotony of the scene; but this purpose was not only
accomplished, but other benefits of the highest value accrued from it. The
habits of a painter eminently tended to vivify and make exact her father's
conceptions and delineations of visible objects. The sphere of his youthful
observation comprised more ingredients of the picturesque, than any other
sphere. The most precious materials of the moral history of mankind, are
derived from the revolutions of Italy. Italian features and landscape,
constitute the chosen field of the artist. No one had more carefully explored
this field than Mr. Dudley. His time, when abroad, had been divided between
residence at Rome, and excursions to Calabria and Tuscany. Few impressions were
effaced from his capacious register, and these were now rendered by his
eloquence, nearly as conspicuous to his companion as to himself.

She was imbued with an ardent thirst of knowledge, and by the acuteness of her
remarks, and the judiciousness of her enquiries, reflected back upon his
understanding as much improvement as she received. These efforts to render his
calamity tolerable, and enure him to the profiting by his own resources, were
aided by time, and, when reconciled by habit to unrespited gloom, he was,
sometimes, visited by gleams of cheerfulness, and drew advantageous comparisons
between his present and former situation. A stillness not unakin to happiness,
frequently diffused itself over their winter evenings. Constance enjoyed, in
their full extent, the felicities of health and self-approbation. The genius
and eloquence of her father, nourished by perpetual exercise, and undiverted
from its purpose by the intrusion of visible objects, frequently afforded her a
delight in comparison with which all other pleasures were mean.

CHAPTER III.
THIS period of tranquillity was short. Poverty hovered at their threshold, and
in a state precarious as their's, could not be long excluded. The lady was more
accustomed to anticipate good than evil, but she was not unconscious that the
winter, which was hastening, would bring it with numerous inconveniences. Wants
during that season are multiplied, while the means of supplying them either
fail or are diminished. Fuel is alone, a cause of expense equal to all other
articles of subsistence. Her dwelling was old, crazy, and full of avenues to
air. It was evident that neither fire nor clothing would, in an habitation
like that, attemper the chilling blasts. Her scanty gains were equal to their
needs, during summer, but would probably fall short during the prevalence of
cold.

These reflections could not fail sometimes to intrude. She indulged them as
long as they served merely to suggest expedients and provisions for the future,
but labored to call away her attention when they merely produced anxiety. This
she more easily effected, as some months of summer were still to come, and her
knowledge of the vicissitudes to which human life is subject, taught her to
rely upon the occurrence of some fortunate, though unforeseen event.

Accident suggested an expedient of this kind. Passing through an alley, in the
upper part of the town, her eye was caught by a label on the door of a small
house, signifying that it was to be let. It was smaller than that she at
present occupied, but it had an aspect of much greater comfort and neatness.
Its situation, near the center of the city, in a quiet, cleanly, and well paved
alley, was far preferable to that of her present habitation, in the suburbs,
scarcely accessible in winter for pools and gullies, and in a neighborhood
abounding with indigence and profligacy. She likewise considered that the rent
of this might be less, and that the proprietor of this might have more
forbearance and benignity than she had hitherto met with.

Unconversant as she was with the world, imbued with the timidity of her sex
and her youth, many enterprises were arduous to her, which would, to age and
experience, have been easy. Her reluctances, however, when required by
necessity, were overcome, and all the measures which her situation prescribed,
executed with address and dispatch. One, marking her deportment, would have
perceived nothing but dignity and courage. He would have regarded these as the
fruits of habitual independence and exertion, whereas they were merely the
results of clear perceptions and inflexible resolves.

The proprietor of this mansion was immediately sought out, and a bargain,
favorable as she could reasonably desire, concluded. Possession was to be taken
in a week. For this end carters and draymen were to be engaged, household
implements to be prepared for removal, and negligence and knavery prevented by
scrupulous attention. The duties of superintendence and execution devolved upon
her. Her father's blindness rendered him powerless. His personal ease required
no small portion of care. Household and professional functions were not to be
omitted. She stood alone in the world. There was none whose services or counsel
she could claim. Tortured by multiplicity of cares, shrinking from exposure to
rude eyes, and from contention with refractory and insolent spirits, and
overpowered with fatigue and disgust, she was yet compelled to retain a
cheerful tone in her father's presence, and to struggle with his regrets and
his peevishness.

O my friend! Methinks I now see thee, encountering the sneers and obstinacy of
the meanest of mankind, subjecting that frame of thine, so exquisitely
delicate, and therefore so feeble, to the vilest drudgery. I see thee, leading
thy unhappy father to his new dwelling, and stifling the sighs produced by his
fruitless repinings and unseasonable scruples -- Why was I not partaker of thy
cares and labors? Why was I severed from thee by the ocean, and kept in
ignorance of thy state? I was not without motives to anxiety, for I was
friendless as thou, but how unlike to thine was my condition! I reposed upon
down and tissue, never moved but with obsequious attendance and pompous
equipage, painting and music were consolations ever at hand, and my cabinet was
stored with poetry and science. These, indeed, were insufficient to exclude
care, and with regard to the past, I have no wish but that I had shared with my
friend her toilsome and humiliating lot. However an erroneous world might
judge, thy life was full of dignity, and thy moments of happiness not few,
since happiness is only attendant on the performance of our duty.

A toilsome and sultry week was terminated by a sabbath of repose. Her new
dwelling possessed indisputable advantages over her old. Not the least of these
benefits consisted in the vicinity of people, peaceable and honest, though
poor. She was no longer shocked by the clamours of debauchery, and exposed, by
her situation, to the danger of being mistaken by the profligate of either sex,
for one of their own class. It was reasonable to consider this change of abode,
as fortunate, and yet, circumstances quickly occurred which suggested a very
different conclusion.

She had no intercourse, which necessity did not prescribe, with the rest of
the world. She screened herself as much as possible from intercourse with
prying and loquacious neighbors. Her father's inclinations in this respect
coincided with her own, though their love of seclusion was prompted by
different motives. Visitants were hated by the father, because his dignity was
hurt by communication with the vulgar. The daughter set too much value upon
time willingly to waste it upon trifles and triflers. She had no pride to
subdue, and therefore never escaped from well meant importunity at the expense
of politeness and good humor. In her moments of leisure, she betook herself to
the poet and the moralist for relief.

She could not at all times, suppress the consciousness of the evils which
surrounded and threatened her. She could not but rightly estimate the absorbing
and brutifying nature of that toil to which she was condemned. Literature had
hitherto been regarded as her solace. She knew that meditation and converse as
well as books and the pen, are instruments of knowledge, but her musing
thoughts were too often fixed upon her own condition. Her father's soaring
moods and luminous intervals grew less frequent. Conversation was too rarely
abstracted from personal considerations, and strayed less often than before
into the wilds of fancy or the mazes of analysis.

These circumstances led her to reflect whether subsistence might not be
obtained by occupations purely intellectual. Instruction was needed by the
young of both sexes. Females frequently performed the office of teachers. Was
there no branch of her present knowledge which she might claim wages for
imparting to others? Was there no art within her reach to acquire, convertible
into means of gain? Women are generally limited to what is sensual and
ornamental: Music and painting, and the Italian and French languages, are
bounds which they seldom pass. In these pursuits it is not possible, nor is it
expected, that they should arrive at the skill of adepts. The education of
Constance had been regulated by the peculiar views of her father, who sought to
make her, not alluring and voluptuous, but eloquent and wise. He therefore
limited her studies to Latin and English. Instead of familiarizing her with the
amorous effusions of Petrarcha and Racine, he made her thoroughly conversant
with Tacitus and Milton. Instead of making her a practical musician or
pencilist, he conducted her to the school of Newton and Hartley, unveiled to
her the mathematical properties of light and sound, taught her as a
metaphysician and anatomist, the structure and power of the senses, and
discussed with her the principles and progress of human society.

These accomplishments tended to render her superior to the rest of women, but
in no degree qualified her for the post of a female instructor. She saw and
lamented her deficiencies, and gradually formed the resolution of supplying
them. Her knowledge of the Latin tongue and of grammatical principles, rendered
easy the acquisition of Italian and French, these being merely Scions from the
Roman stock.

Having had occasion, previous to her change of dwelling, to purchase paper at
a bookseller's, the man had offered her at a very low price, a second-hand copy
of Veneroni's grammar. The offer had been declined, her views at that time
being otherwise directed. Now, however, this incident was remembered, and a
resolution instantly formed to purchase the book. As soon as the light
declined, and her daily task at the needle had drawn to a close, she set out to
execute this purpose. Arriving at the house of the bookseller, she perceived
that the doors and windows were closed. Night having not yet arrived, the
conjecture easily occurred, that some one had died in the house. She had always
dealt with this man for books and paper, and had always been treated with
civility. Her heart readily admitted some sympathy with his distress, and to
remove her doubts, she turned to a person who stood at the entrance of the next
house, and who held a cloth steeped in vinegar to his nostrils. In reply to her
question, the stranger said in a tone of the deepest consternation -- Mr.
Watson do you mean? He is dead: He died last night of the yellow fever.

The name of this disease was not absolutely new to her ears. She had been
apprized of its rapid and destructive progress in one quarter of the city, but,
hitherto, it had existed, with regard to her, chiefly in the form of rumor.
She had not realized the nature or probable extent of the evil. She lived at no
great distance from the seat of the malady, but her neighborhood had been
hitherto exempt. So wholly unused was she to contemplate pestilence except at a
distance, that its actual existence in the bosom of this city was incredible.

Contagious diseases, she well knew, periodically visited and laid waste the
Greek and Egyptian cities. It constituted no small part of that mass of evil,
political and physical, by which that portion of the world has been so long
afflicted. That a pest equally malignant had assailed the metropolis of her own
country, a town famous for the salubrity of its airs and the perfection of its
police, had something in it so wild and uncouth that she could not reconcile
herself to the possibility of such an event.

The death of Watson, however, filled her mind with awful reflections. The
purpose of her walk was forgotten amidst more momentous considerations. She
bent her steps pensively homeward. She had now leisure to remark the symptoms
of terror with which all ranks appeared to have been seized. The streets were
as much frequented as ever, but there were few passengers whose countenances
did not betray alarm, and who did not employ the imaginary antidote to
infection, vinegar.

Having reached home, she quickly discovered in her father, an unusual
solemnity and thoughtfulness. He had no power to conceal his emotions from his
daughter, when her efforts to discover them were earnestly exerted. She learned
that, during her absence he had been visited by his next neighbor, a thrifty,
sober and well meaning, but ignorant and meddling person, by name Whiston. This
person, being equally inquisitive into other men's affairs, and communicative
of his own, was always an unwelcome visitant. On this occasion, he had come to
disburthen on Mr. Dudley his fears of disease and death. His tale of the origin
and progress of the epidemic, of the number and suddenness of recent deaths was
delivered with endless prolixity. With this account he mingled prognostics of
the future, counseled Mr. Dudley to fly from the scene of danger, and stated
his own schemes and resolutions. After having thoroughly affrighted and wearied
his companion he took his leave.

Constance endeavored to remove the impression which had been thus needlessly
made. She urged her doubts as to the truth of Whiston's representations, and
endeavored, in various ways, to extenuate the danger.

Nay, my child, said her father, thou need not reason on the subject. I am
not afraid. At least, on my own account I fear nothing. What is life to me
that I should dread to lose it? If on any account I should tremble it is on
thine, my angelic girl. Thou do not deserve thus early to perish: And yet if
my love for thee were rational, perhaps, I ought to wish it. An evil destiny
will pursue thee to the close of thy life, be it never so long.

I know that ignorance and folly breed the phantoms by which themselves are
peplexed and terrified, and that Whiston is a fool, but here the truth is too
plain to be disguised. This malady is pestilential. Havoc and despair will
accompany its progress and its progress will be rapid. The tragedies of
Marseilles and Messina will be reacted on this stage.

For a time, we in this quarter will be exempt, but it will surely reach us at
last, and then, whither shall we fly? For the rich, the whole world is a safe
asylum, but for us, indigent and wretched, what fate is reserved but to stay
and perish? If the disease spare us, we must perish by neglect and famine.
Alarm will be far and wide diffused. Fear will hinder those who supply the
market, from entering the city. The price of food will become exorbitant. Our
present source of subsistence, ignominious and scanty as it is, will be cut
off. Traffic and labor of every kind will be at an end. We shall die, but not
until we have witnessed and endured horrors that surpass thy powers of
conception.

I know full well the enormity of this evil. I have been at Messina, and talked
with many who witnessed the state of that city in 1743. I will not freeze thy
blood with the recital. Anticipation has a tendency to lessen or prevent some
evils, but pestilence is not of that number. Strange untowardness of destiny!
That thou and I should be cast upon a scene like this!

Mr. Dudley joined with uncommon powers of discernment, a species of
perverseness not easily accounted for. He acted as if the inevitable evils of
her lot was not sufficient for the trial of his daughter's patience. Instead of
comforter and counselor, he fostered impatience in himself, and endeavored,
with the utmost diligence, to undermine her fortitude and disconcert her
schemes. The task was assigned to her, not only of subduing her own fears, but
of maintaining the contest with his disastrous eloquence. In most cases she had
not failed of success. Hitherto their causes of anxiety, her own observation
had, in some degree, enabled her to estimate at their just value. The r^eful
pictures which his imagination was wont to pourtray, affected her for a moment;
but deliberate scrutiny commonly enabled her to detect and demonstrate their
falacy. Now, however, the theme was new. Panick and foreboding found their way
to her heart in defiance of her struggles. She had no experience by which to
counteract this impulse. All that remained was to beguile her own and her
father's cares by counterfeiting cheerfulness and introducing new topics.

This panic, stifled for a time, renewed its sway when she retired to her
chamber. Never did futurity wear, to her fancy, so dark an hue. Never did her
condition appear to her in a light so dreary and forlorn. To fly from the
danger was impossible. How should accommodation at a distance, be procured? The
means of subsistence were indissolubly connected with her present residence,
but the progress of this disease would cut off these means, and leave her to be
beset not only with pestilence but famine. What provision could she make
against an evil like this?

CHAPTER IV.
THE terms on which she had been admitted into this house, included the advance
of one quarter's rent and the monthly payment of subsequent dues. The requisite
sum had been with difficulty collected, the landlord had twice called to remind
her of her stipulation, and this day had been fixed for the discharge of this
debt. He had omitted, contrary to her expectations and her wishes, to come. It
was probable, however, that they should meet on the ensuing day. If he should
fail in this respect, it appeared to be her duty to carry the money to his
house, and this it had been her resolution to perform.

Now, however, new views were suggested to her thoughts. By the payment of this
debt she should leave herself nearly destitute. The flight and terror of the
citizens would deprive her of employment. Want of food was an immediate and
inevitable evil which the payment of this sum would produce. Was it just to
incur this evil? To retain the means of luxurious gratification would be wrong,
but to bereave herself and her father of bare subsistence was surely no dictate
of duty.

It is true the penalty of nonpayment was always in the landlord's hands. He
was empowered by the law to sell their movables and expel them from his house.
It was now no time for a penalty like this to be incurred. But from this
treatment it was reasonable to hope that his lenity would save them. Was it not
right to wait till the alternative of expulsion or payment was imposed?
Meanwhile, however, she was subjected to the torments of suspense and to the
guilt of a broken promise. These consequences were to be eluded only in one
way: By visiting her landlord and stating her true condition, it was possible
that his compassion would remit claims which were, in themselves, unreasonable
and uncommon. The tender of the money accompanied by representations
sufficiently earnest and pathetic, might possibly be declined.

These reflections were, next morning, submitted to her father. Her decision in
this case was of less importance in his eyes, than in those of his daughter.
Should the money be retained, it was, in his opinion, a pittance too small to
afford them effectual support. Supposing provisions to be had at any price,
which was, itself improbable, that price would be exorbitant. The general
confusion would probably last for months, and thirty dollars would be devoured
in a few weeks even in a time of safety. To give or to keep was indifferent for
another reason. It was absurd for those to consult about means of subsistence
for the next month, when it was fixed that they should die tomorrow -- The
true proceeding was obvious. The landlord's character was well known to him by
means of the plaints and invectives of their neighbors, most of whom were
tenants of the same man. If the money were offered his avarice would receive
it, in spite of all the pleas that she should urge. If it were detained without
lieve, an officer of justice would quickly be dispatched to claim it.

This statement was sufficient to take away from Constance the hope that she
had fostered. What then, said she, after a pause, is my father's advice? Shall
I go forthwith and deliver the money?

No, said he, stay till he sends for it. Have you forgotten that Mathews
resides in the very midst of this disease. There is no need to thrust yourself
within its fangs. They will reach us time enough. It is likely his messenger
will be an agent of the law. No matter. The debt will be merely increased by a
few charges. In a state like ours, the miserable remnant is not worth caring
for.

This reasoning, did not impart conviction to the lady. The danger, flowing
from a tainted atmosphere was not small, but to incur that danger was wiser
than to exasperate their landlord, to augment the debt and to encounter the
disgrace, accruing from a constable's visits. The conversation was dropped and,
presently after, she set out on a visit to Mathews.

She fully estimated the importance to her happiness of the sum which she was
going to pay. The general panic had already, in some degree, produced the
effect she chiefly dreaded; the failure of employment for her needle. Her
father had, with his usual diligence at self-torment, supplied her with
sufficient proofs of the covetous and obdurate temper of her creditor.
Insupportable, however, as the evil of payment was, it was better to incur it
spontaneously, than by means of legal process. The desperateness of this
proceeding therefore, did not prevent her from adopting it, but it filled her
heart with the bitterest sensations. Absorbed as she past along, by these, she
was nearly insensible to the vacancy which now prevailed in a quarter which
formerly resounded with the din of voices and carriages.

As she approached the house to which she was going, her reluctance to proceed
increased. Frequently she paused to recollect the motives that had prescribed
this task, and to reinforce her purposes. At length she arrived at the house.
Now, for the first time, her attention was excited by the silence and
desolation that surrounded her. This evidence of fear and of danger struck upon
her heart. All appeared to have fled from the presence of this unseen and
terrible foe. The temerity of adventuring thus into the jaws of the pest, now
appeared to her in glaring colors.

Appearances suggested a reflection which had not previously occurred and which
tended to console her. Was it not probable that Mathews had likewise flown? His
habits were calculated to endear to him his life: He would scarcely be among
the last to shun perils like these: The omission of his promised visit on the
preceding day, might be owing to his absence from the city, and thus, without
subjection to any painful alternative, she might be suffered to retain the
money.

To give certainty to this hope, she cast her eye toward the house opposite to
which she now stood. Her heart drooped on perceiving proofs that the dwelling
was still inhabited. The door was open and the windows in the second and third
story were raised. Near the entrance, in the street, stood a cart. The horse
attached to it, in his form and furniture and attitude, was an emblem of torpor
and decay. His gaunt sides, motionless limbs, his gummy and dead eyes, and his
head hanging to the ground, were in unison with the craziness of the vehicle to
which he belonged, and the paltry and bedusted harness which covered him. No
attendant nor any human face was visible. The stillness, though at an hour
customarily busy, was uninterrupted except by the sound of wheels moving at an
almost indistinguishable distance.

She paused for a moment to contemplate this unwonted spectacle. Her
trepidations were mingled with emotions not unakin to sublimity, but the
consciousness of danger speedily prevailed, and she hastened to acquit herself
of her engagement. She approached the door for this purpose, but before she
could draw the bell her motions were arrested by sounds from within. The
staircase was opposite the door. Two persons were now discovered descending the
stair. They lifted between them an heavy mass, which was presently discerned to
be a coffin. Shocked by this discovery and trembling she withdrew from the
entrance.

At this moment a door on the opposite side of the street opened and a female
came out. Constance approached her involuntarily and her appearance not being
unattractive, adventured, more by gestures than by words, to enquire whose
obsequies were thus unceremoniously conducted. The woman informed her that the
dead was Mathews, who, two days before, was walking about, indifferent to, and
braving danger. She cut short the narrative which her companion seemed willing
to prolong, and to embellish with all its circumstances, and hastened home with
her utmost expedition.

The mind of Constance was a stranger to pusillanimity. Death, as the common
lot of all, was regarded by her without perturbation. The value of life, though
not annihilated, was certainly diminished by adversity. With whatever solemnity
contemplated, it excited on her own account, no aversion or inquietude. For her
father's sake only, death was an evil to be ardently deprecated. The nature of
the prevalent disease, the limits and modes of its influence, the risque that
is incurred by approaching the sick or the dead, or by breathing the
surrounding element, were subjects foreign to her education. She judged like
the mass of mankind from the most obvious appearances, and was subject like
them to impulses which disdained the control of her reason. With all her
complacency for death and speculative resignation to the fate that governs the
world, disquiet and alarm pervaded her bosom on this occasion.

The deplorable state to which her father would be reduced by her death, was
seen and lamented, but her tremulous sensations flowed not from this source.
They were, in some sort, inexplicable and mechanical. In spite of recollection
and reflection, they bewildered and harassed her, and subsided only of their
own accord.

The death of Mathews was productive of one desirable consequence. Till the
present tumult were passed, and his representatives had leisure to inspect his
affairs, his debtors would probably remain unmolested. He, likewise, who should
succeed to the inheritance, might possess very different qualities, and be as
much distinguished for equity as Mathews had been for extortion. These
reflections lightened her footsteps as she hied homeward. The knowledge she had
gained, she hoped would counterpoise, in her father's apprehension, the perils,
which accompanied the acquisition of it.

She had scarcely passed her own threshhold, when she was followed by Whiston.
This man pursued the occupation of a Cooper. He performed journey-work in a
shop, which, unfortunately for him, was situated near the water, and at a small
distance from the scene of original infection. This day his employer had
dismissed his workman, and Whiston was at liberty to retire from the city; a
scheme, which had been the theme of deliberation and discussion during the
preceding fortnight.

Hitherto his apprehensions seemed to have molested others more than himself.
The rumors and conjectures industriously collected during the day, were, in
the evening, copiously detailed to his neighbors, and his own mind appeared to
be disburthened of its cares, in proportion as he filled others with terror and
inquietude. The predictions of physicians, the measures of precaution
prescribed by the government, the progress of the malady, and the history of
the victims who were hourly destroyed by it, were communicated with tormenting
prolixity and terrifying minuteness.

On these accounts as well as on others, no one's visits were more unwelcome
than his. As his deportment was sober and honest, and his intentions harmless,
he was always treated, by Constantia, with politeness, though his entrance
always produced a momentary depression of her spirits. On this evening she was
less fitted than ever to repel those anxieties which his conversation was
qualified to produce. His entrance, therefore, was observed with sincere regret.

Contrary, however, to her expectation, Whiston brought with him new manners
and a new expression of countenance. He was silent, abstracted, his eye was
full of inquietude, and wandered with perpetual restlessness. On these tokens
being remarked, he expressed, in faultering accents his belief, that he had
contracted this disease, and that now it was too late for him to leave the city.

Mr. Dudley's education was somewhat medical. He was so far interested in his
guest as to enquire into his sensations. They were such as were commonly the
preludes to fever. Mr. Dudley, while he endeavored by cheerful tones, to
banish his dejection, exhorted him to go home, and to take some hot and
wholesome draught, in consequence of which, he might rise tomorrow with his
usual health. This advice was gratefully received, and Whiston put a period to
his visit much sooner than was customary.

Mr. Dudley entertained no doubts that Whiston was seized with the reigning
disease, and extinguished the faint hope which his daughter had cherished, that
their district would escape. Whiston's habitation was nearly opposite their
own, but as they made no use of their front room, they had seldom an
opportunity of observing the transactions of their neighbors. This distance
and seclusion were congenial with her feelings, and she derived pleasure from
her father's confession, that they contributed to personal security.

Constance was accustomed to rise with the dawn, and traverse, for an hour, the
State-house Mall. As she took her walk the next morning, she pondered with
astonishment on the present situation of the city. The air was bright and pure,
and apparently salubrious. Security and silence seemed to hover over the scene.
She was only reminded of the true state of things by the occasional appearance
of carriages loaded with household utensils tending toward the country, and by
the odor of vinegar by which every passenger was accompanied. The public walk
was cool and fragrant as formerly, skirted by verdure as bright, and shaded by
foliage as luxuriant, but it was no longer frequented by lively steps and
cheerful countenances. Its solitude was uninterrupted by any but herself.

This day passed without furnishing any occasion to leave the house. She was
less sedulously employed than usual, as the clothes, on which she was engaged,
belonged to a family who had precipitately left the city. She had leisure
therefore to ruminate. She could not but feel some concern in the fate of
Whiston. He was a young man who subsisted on the fruits of his labor, and
divided his gains with an only sister who lived with him, and who performed
every household office.

This girl was humble and innocent, and of a temper affectionate and mild.
Casual intercourse only had taken place between her and Constance. They were
too dissimilar for any pleasure to arise from communication, but the latter was
sufficiently disposed to extend to her harmless neighbor, the sympathy and
succor which she needed. Whiston had come from a distant part of the country,
and his sister was the only person in the city with whom he was connected by
ties of kindred. In case of his sickness, therefore, their consdition would be
helpless and deplorable.

Evening arrived, and Whiston failed to pay his customary visit. She mentioned
this omission to her father, and expressed her apprehension as to the cause of
it. He did not discountenance the inference which she drew from this
circumstance, and assented to the justice of the picture which she drew of the
calamitous state to which Whiston and his sister would be reduced by the
indisposition of either. She then ventured to suggest the propriety of visiting
the house, and of thus ascertaining the truth.

To this proposal Mr. Dudley urged the most vehement objectioes. What purpose
could be served by entering their dwelling? What benefit would flow but the
gratification of a dangerous curiosity? Constance was disabled from furnishing
pecuniary aid. She could not act the part of physician or nurse. Her father
stood in need of a thousand personal services, and the drudgery of cleansing
and cooking, already exceeded the bounds of her strength. The hazard of
contracting the disease by conversing with the sick, was imminent. What
services was she able to render equivalent to the consequences of her own
sickness and death?

These representations had temporary influence. They recalled her for a moment,
from her purpose, but this purpose was speedily re-embraced. She reflected that
the evil to herself, formidable as it was, was barely problematical. That
converse with the sick would impart this disease, was by no means certain.
Whiston might at least be visited. Perhaps she should find him well. If sick,
his disease might be unepidemical, or curable by seasonable assistance. He
might stand in need of a physician, and she was more able than his sister, to
summon this aid.

Her father listened calmly to her reasonings. After a pause, he gave his
consent. In doing this he was influenced not by the conviction that his
daughter's safety would be exposed to no hazard, but from a belief that though
she might shun infection for the present, it would inevitably seize her during
some period of the progress of this pest.

CHAPTER V.
IT was now dusk and she hastened to perform this duty. Whiston's dwelling was
wooden and of small dimensions. She lifted the latch softly and entered. The
lower room was unoccupied. She advanced to the foot of a narrow staircase, and
knocked and listened, but no answer was returned to the summons. Hence there
was reason to infer that no one was within, but this, from other
considerations, was extremely improbable. The truth could be ascertained only
by ascending the stair. Some feminine scruples were to be subdued before this
proceeding could be adopted.

After some hesitation, she determined to ascend. The staircase was terminated
by a door at which she again knocked, for admission, but in vain. She listened
and presently heard the motion as of some one in bed. This was succeeded by
tokens of vehement exertions to vomit. These signs convincing her that the
house was not without a tenant, she could not hesitate to enter the room.

Lying in a tattered bed, she now discovered Mary Whiston. Her face was flushed
and swelled, her eyes closed and some power appeared to have laid a leaden hand
upon her faculties. The floor was moistened and stained by the effusion from
her stomach. Constance touched her hand, and endeavored to rouse her. It was
with difficulty that her attention was excited. Her languid eyes were scarcely
opened before they again closed and she sunk into forgetfulness.

Repeated efforts, however, at length recalled her to herself, and extorted
from her some account of her condition. On the day before, at noon, her stomach
became diseased, her head dizzy, and her limbs unable to support her. Her
brother was absent, and her drowsiness, interrupted only by paroxysms of
vomiting, continued till his return late in the evening. He had then shown
himself, for a few minutes, at her bedside, had made some enquiries and
precipitately retired, since when he had not reappeared.

It was natural to imagine that Whiston had gone to procure medical assistance.
That he had not returned, during a day and a half was matter of surprise. His
own indisposition was recollected and his absence could only be accounted for
by supposing that sickness had disabled him from regaining his own house. What
was his real destiny, it was impossible to conjecture. It was not till some
months after this period that satisfactory intelligence was gained upon this
head.

It appeared that Whiston had allowed his terrors to overpower the sense of
what was due to his sister and to humanity. On discovering the condition of the
unhappy girl, he left the house, and, instead of seeking a physician, he turned
his steps toward the country. After traveling some hours, being exhausted by
want of food, by fatigue, and by mental as well as bodily anguish, he laid
himself down under the shelter of an hayrick, in a vacant field. Here he was
discovered in the morning by the inhabitants of a neighboring farm house.
These people had too much regard for their own safety to accommodate him under
their roof, or even to approach within fifty paces of his person.

A passenger whose attention and compassion had been excited by this incident,
was endowed with more courage. He lifted the stranger in his arms, and carried
him from this unwholesome spot to a barn. This was the only service which the
passenger was able to perform. Whiston, deserted by every human creature,
burning with fever, tormented into madness by thirst, spent three miserable
days in agony. When dead, no one would cover his body with earth, but he was
suffered to decay by piecemeal.

The dwelling, being at no great distance from the barn, could not be wholly
screened from the malignant vapor which a corpse, thus neglected, could not
fail to produce. The inhabitants were preparing on this account, to change
their abode, but, on the eve of their departure, the master of the family
became sick. He was, in a short time, followed to the grave by his mother, his
wife and four children.

They probably imbibed their disease from the tainted atmosphere around them.
The life of Whiston and their own lives, might have been saved by affording the
wanderer an asylum and suitable treatment, or at least, their own deaths might
have been avoided by interring his remains.

Meanwhile Constantia was occupied with reflecting on the scene before her. Not
only a physician but a nurse was wanting. The last province it was more easy
for her to supply than the former. She was acquainted with the abode but of one
physician. He lived at no small distance from this spot. To him she immediately
hastened, but he was absent, and his numerous engagements left it wholly
uncertain when he would return and whether he would consent to increase the
number of his patients. Direction was obtained to the residence of another, who
was happily disengaged, and who promised to attend immediately. Satisfied with
this assurance, she neglected to request directions, by which she might
regulate herself on his failing to come.

During her return her thoughts were painfully employed in considering the mode
proper for her to pursue, in her present perplexing situation. She was for the
most part unacquainted with the character of those who composed her
neighborhood. That any would be willing to undertake the tendance of this girl
was by no means prebable. As wives and mothers, it would perhaps be unjust to
require or permit it. As to herself there were labors and duties of her own
sufficient to engross her faculties, yet, by whatever foreign cares or tasks
she was oppressed, she felt that, to desert this being, was impossible.

In the absence of her friend, Mary's state exhibited no change. Constance, on
regaining the house, lighted the remnant of a candle, and resumed her place by
the bed side of the sick girl. She impatiently waited for the arrival of the
physician, but hour succeeded hour and he came not. All hope of his coming
being extinguished, she bethought herself that her father might be able to
inform her of the best manner of proceeding. It was likewise her duty to
relieve him from the suspense in which her absence would unavoidably plunge him.

On entering her own apartment she found a stranger in company with Mr. Dudley.
The latter perceiving that she had returned, speedily acquainted her with the
views of their guest. His name was M'Crea; he was the nephew of their landlord
and was now become, by reversion, the proprietor of the house which they
occupied. Mathews had been buried the preceding day, and M'Crea, being well
acquainted with the engagements which subsisted between the deceased and Mr.
Dudley, had come, thus unseasonably, to demand the rent. He was not unconscious
of the inhumanity and sordidness of this proceeding, and therefore, endeavored
to disguise it by the usual pretenses. All his funds were exhausted. He came
not only in his own name, but in that of Mrs. Mathews his aunt, who was
destitute of money to procure daily and indispensible provision, and who was
striving to collect a sufficient sum to enable her and the remains of her
family, to fly from a spot where their lives were in perpetual danger.

These excuses were abundantly fallacious, but Mr. Dudley was too proud to
solicit the forbearance of a man like this. He recollected that the engagement
on his part was voluntary and explicit, and he disdained to urge his present
exigences as reasons for retracting it. He expressed the utmost readiness to
comply with the demand, and merely desired him to wait till Miss Dudley
returned. From the inquietudes with which the unusual duration of her absence
had filled him, he was now relieved by her entrance.

With an indignant and desponding heart, she complied with her father's
directions, and the money being reluctantly delivered, M'Crea took an hasty
leave. She was too deeply interested in the fate of Mary Whiston, to allow her
thoughts to be diverted for the present into a new channel. She described the
desolate condition of the girl to her father, and besought him to think of
something suitable to her relief.

Mr. Dudley's humanity would not suffer him to disapprove of his daughter's
proceeding. He imagined that the symptoms of the patient portended a fatal
issue. There were certain complicated remedies which might possibly be
beneficial, but these were too costly, and the application would demand more
strength than his daughter could bestow. He was unwilling, however, to leave
any thing within his power, untried. Pharmacy had been his trade, and he had
reserved, for domestic use, some of the most powerful evacuants. Constantia was
supplied with some of these, and he consented that she should spend the night
with her patient, and watch their operation.

The unhappy Mary received whatever was offered, but her stomach refused to
retain it. The night was passed by Constantia without closing her eyes. As soon
as the day dawned, she prepared once more to summon the physician, who had
failed to comply with his promise. She had scarcely left the house, however,
before she met him. He pleaded his numerous engagements in excuse for his last
night's negligence, and desired her to make haste to conduct him to the patient.

Having scrutinized her symptoms, he expressed his hopelessness of her
recovery. Being informed of the mode in which she had been treated, he declared
his approbation of it, but intimated, that these being unsuccessful, all that
remained was to furnish her with any liquid she might choose to demand, and wait
patiently for the event. During this interview, the physician surveyed the
person and dress of Constance with an inquisitive eye. His countenance betrayed
marks of curiosity and compassion, and had he made any approaches to confidence
and friendliness, Constance would not have repelled them. His air was
benevolent and candid, and she estimated highly the usefulness of a counselor
and friend in her present circumstances. Some motive, however, hindered him
from tendering his service, and, in a few moments, he withdrew.

Mary's condition hourly grew worse. A corroded and gangrenous stomach was
quickly testified by the dark hue and poisonous malignity of the matter which
was frequently ejected from it. Her stupor gave place to some degree of
peevishness and restlessness. She drank the water that was held to her lips
with unspeakable avidity, and derived from this source a momentary alleviation
of her pangs. Fortunately for her attendant, her agonies were not of long
duration. Constantia was absent from her bedside as rarely, and for periods as
short as possible. On the succeeding night, the sufferings of the patient
terminated in death.

This event took place at two o'clock in the morning. An hour whose customary
stillness was, if possible, increased tenfold by the desolation of the city.
The poverty of Mary and of ^er nurse, had deprived the former of the benefits
resulting from the change of bed and clothes. Every thing about her was in a
condition noisome and detestable. Her yellowish and haggard vi^age, conspicuous
by a feeble light, an atmosphere freighted with malignant vapors, and
reminding Constance at every instant, of the perils which encompassed her, the
consciousness of solitude and sensations of deadly sickness in her own frame,
were sufficient to intimidate a soul of firmer texture than here is.

She was sinking fast into helplessness, when a new train of reflections showed
her the necessity of perseverance. All that remained was to consign the corpse
to the grave. She knew that vehicles for this end were provided at the public
expense, that notice being given of the occasion there was for their
attendance, a receptacle and carriage for the dead would be instantly provided.
Application, at this hoar, she imagined would be unseasonable. It must be
deferred till the morning which was yet at some distance.

Meanwhile to remain at her present post, was equally useless and dangerous.
She endeavored to stifle the conviction, that some mortal sickness had seized
upon her own frame. Her anxieties of head and stomach, she was willing to
impute to extraordinary fatigue and watchfulness; and hoped that they would be
dissipated by an hour's unmolested repose. She formed the resolution of seeking
her own chamber.

At this moment, however, the universal silence underwent a slight
interruption. The sound was familiar to her ears. It was a signal frequently
repeated at the midnight hour during this season of calamity. It was the slow
movement of an hearse, apparently passing along the street, in which the alley,
where Mr. Dudley resided, terminated. At first, this sound had no other effect
than to aggravate the dreariness of all around her. Presently it occured to her
that this vehicle might be disengaged. She conceived herself bound to see the
last offices performed for the deceased Mary. The sooner so irksome a duty was
discharged the better. Every hour might augment her incapacity for exertion.
Should she be unable when the morning arrived, to go as far as the city-hall,
and give the necessary information, the most shocking consequences would ensue.
Whiston's house and her own were opposite each other, and not connected with
any on the same side. A narrow space divided them, and her own chamber was
within the sphere of the contagion which would flow, in consequence of such
neglect, from that of her neighbor.

Influenced by these considerations she passed into the street, and gained the
corner of the alley, just as the carriage, whose movements she had heard,
arrived at the same spot. It was accompanied by two men, negroes, who listened
to her tale with respect. Having already a burden of this kind, they could not
immediately comply with this request. They promised that, having disposed of
their present charge, they would return forthwith and be ready to execute her
orders.

Happily one of these persons was known to her. At other seasons his occupation
was that of woodcarter, and as such he had performed come services for Mr.
Dudley. His temper was gentle and obliging. The characser of Constance had been
viewed by him with reverence, and his kindness had relieved her from many
painful offices. His old occupation being laid aside for a time, he had betaken
himself, like many others of his color and rank, to the conveyance and burial
of the dead.

At Constantia's request, he accompanied her to Whiston's house, and promised
to bring with him such assistance, as would render her further exertions and
attendance unnecessary. Glad to be absolved from any new task, she now retired
to her own chamber. In spite of her distempered frame, she presently sunk into
sweet sleep. She awoke not till the day had made considerable progress, and
found herself invigorated and refreshed. On re-entering Whiston's house, she
discovered that her humble friend had faithfully performed his promise, the
dead body having disappeared. She deemed it unsafe, as well as unnecessary, to
examine the clothes and other property remaining, but leaving every thing in
the condition in which it had been found, she fastened the windows and doors,
and thenceforth kept as distant from the house as possible.

CHAPTER VI.
CONSTANTIA had now leisure to ruminate upon her own condition. Every day added
to the devastation and confusion of the city. The most populous streets were
deserted and silent. The greater number of inhabitants had fled, and those who
remained were occupied with no cares but those which related to their own
safety. The labors of the artizan and the speculations of the merchant were
suspended. All shops, but those of the apothecaries were shut. No carriage but
the hearse was seen, and this was employed, night and day, in the removal of the
dead. The customary sources of subsistence were cut off. Those, whose fortunes
enabled them to leave the city, but who had deferred till now their retreat,
were denied an asylum by the terror which pervaded the adjacent country, and by
the cruel prohibitions which the neighboring towns and cities thought it
necessary to adopt. Those who lived by the fruits of their daily labor were
subjected, in this total inactivity, to the alternative of starving, or of
subsisting upon public charity.

The meditations of Constance, suggested no alternative but this. The exactions
of M'Crea had reduced her whole fortune to five dollars. This would rapidly
decay, and her utmost ingenuity could discover no means of procuring a new
supply. All the habits of their life had combined to fill both her father and
herself with aversion to ^he acceptance of charity. Yet this avenue,
op^robrious and disgustful as it was, afforded the only means of escaping from
the worst extremes of famine.

In this state of mind it was obvious to consider ^n what way the sum remaining
might be most ^sefully expended. Every species of provision was not equally
nutritious or equally cheap. Her mind, active in the pursuit of knowledge and
fer^le of resources, had lately been engaged, in ^iscussing with her father,
the best means of re^aining health, in a time of pestilence. On occa^^ons, when
the malignity of contagious diseases ^as been most signal, some individuals
have es^aped. For their safety, they were doubtless indebted to some
peculiarities in their constitution ^r habits. Their diet, their dress, their
kind and degree of exercise, must somewhat hare contributed to their exemption
from the common ^estiny. These, perhaps, could be ascertained, and when known
it was surely proper to conform ^o them.

In discussing these ideas, Mr. Dudley intro^uced the mention of a Benedictine
of Messina, who, during the prevalence of the plague in that city, was
incessantly engaged in administering assistance to those who needed.
Notwithstanding his perpetual hazards, he retained perfec^ health, and was
living thirty years after this event. During this period, he fostered a
tranquil, fearless, and benevolent spirit, and restricted his diet to water and
pollenta. Spices, and meats, and liquors, and all complexities of cookery were
utterly discarded.

These facts now occurred to Constantia's reflections with new vividness, and
led to interesting consequences. Pollenta and hasty-pudding or samp, are
preparations of the same substance; a substance which she needed not the
experience of others to convince her was no less grateful than nutritive.
Indian meal was procurable at ninety cents per bushel. By recollecting former
experiments, she knew that this quantity, with no accompaniment but salt, would
supply wholesome and plentiful food for four months to one person. See this
useful fact explained and demonstrated in Count Rumford's Essays.
The inference was palpable. Three persons were now to be supplied with food,
and this supply could be furnished, during four months, at the trivial expense
of three dollars. This expedient was at once so uncommon and so desirable, as
to be regarded with temporary disbelief. She was inclined to suspect some
latent error in her calculation. That a sum thus applied, should suffice for
the subsistence of a year, which, in ordinary cases, is expended in a few days,
was scarcely credible. The more closely, however, the subject was examined, the
more incontestably did this inference flow. The mode of preparation was simple
and easy, and productive of the fewest toils and inconveniences. The attention
of her Lucy was sufficient to this end, and the drudgery of marketing was
wholly precluded.

She easily obtained the concurrence of her father and the scheme was found as
practicable and beneficial as her fondest expectations had predicted.
Infallible security was thus provided against hunger. This was the only care
that was urgent and immediate. While they had food and were exempt from
disease, they could live, and were not without their portion of comfort. Her
hands were unemployed, but her mind was kept in continual activity. To seclude
herself as much as possible from others, was the best means of avoiding
infection. Spectacles of misery which she was unable to relieve, would merely
tend to harrass her with useless disquietudes and make her frame more
accessible to disease. Her father's instructions were sufficient to give her a
competent acquaintance with the Italian and French languages. His dreary hours
were beguiled by this employment, and her mind was furnished with a species of
knowledge, which she hoped, in future, to make subservient to a more
respectable and plentiful subsistence than she had hitherto enjoyed.

Meanwhile the season advanced, and the havoc which this fatal malady produced,
increased with portentous rapidity. In alleys and narrow streets, in which the
houses were smaller, the inhabitants more numerous and indigent, and the air
pent up within unwholesome limits, it raged with greatest violence. Few of
Constantia's neighbors possessed the means of removing from the danger. The
inhabitants of this alley consisted of three hundred persons. Of these eight or
ten experienced no interruption of their health. Of the rest two hundred were
destroyed in the course of three weeks. Among so many victims, it may be
supposed that this disease assumed every terrific and agonizing shape.

It was impossible for Constantia to shut out every token of a calamity thus
enormous and thus near. Night was the season usually selected for the removal
of the dead. The sound of wheels thus employed was incessant. This, and the
images with which it was sure to be accompanied, bereaved her of repose. The
shrieks and laments of survivors, who could not be prevented from attending the
remains of an husband or child to the place of interment, frequently struck her
senses. Sometimes urged by a furious delirium, the sick would break from their
attendants, rush into the streets, and expire on the pavement, amidst frantic
outcries and gestures. By these she was often roused from imperfect sleep, and
called to reflect upon the fate which impended over her father and herself.

To preserve health in an atmosphere thus infected, and to ward off terror and
dismay in a scene of horrors thus hourly accumulating, was impossible.
Constance found it vain to contend against the inroads of sadness. Amidst so
dreadful a mortality, it was irrational to cherish the hope that she or her
father would escape. Her sensations, in no long time, seemed to justify her
apprehensons. Her appetite forsook her, her strength failed, the thirst and
lassitude of fever invaded her, and the grave seemed to open for her reception.

Lucy was assailed by the same symptoms at the same time. Household offices
were unavoidably neglected. Mr. Dudley retained his health, but he was able
only to prepare his scanty food, and supply the cravings of his child, with
water from the well. His imagination marked him out for the next victim. He
could not be blind to the consequences of his own indisposition, at a period so
critical. Disabled from contributing to each others assistance, destitute of
medicine and food, and even of water to quench their tormenting thirst,
unvisited, unknown, and perishing in frightful solitude! -- These images had a
tendency to prostrate the mind, and generate or ripen the seeds of this fatal
malady, which, no doubt, at this period of its progress, every one had imbibed.

Contrary to all his fears, he awoke each morning free from pain, though not
without an increase of debility. Abstinence from food, and the liberal use of
cold water seemed to have a medicinal operation on the sick. Their pulse
gradually resumed its healthful tenor, their strength and their appetite slowly
returned, and in ten days they were able to congratulate each other on their
restoration.

I will not recount that series of disastrous thoughts which occupied the mind
of Constance during this period. Her lingering and sleepless hours were
regarded by her as preludes to death. Though at so immature an age, she had
gained large experience of the evils which are allotted to man. Death, which,
in her prosperous state, was peculiarly abhorrent to her feelings, was now
disrobed of terror. As an entrance into scenes of lightsome and imperishable
being, it was the goal of all her wishes. As a passage to oblivion it was still
desirable, since forgetfulness was better than the life which she had hitherto
led, and which, should her existence be prolonged, it was likely that she could
continue to lead.

These gloomy meditations were derived from the langours of her frame. When
these disappeared, her cheerfulness and fortitude revived. She regarded with
astonishment and delight, the continuance of her father's health and her own
restoration. That trial seemed to have been safely undergone, to which the life
of every one was subject. The air which till now had been arid and sultry, was
changed into cool and moist. The pestilence had reached its utmost height, and
now symptoms of remission and decline began to appear. Its declension was more
rapid than its progress, and every day added vigor to hope.

When her strength was somewhat retrieved, Constantia called to mind a good
woman who lived in her former neighborhood, and from whom she had received
many proofs of artless affection. This woman's name was Sarah Baxter. She lived
within a small distance of Constantia's former dwelling. The trade of her
husband was that of porter, and she pursued, in addition to the care of a
numerous family, the business of a Laundress. The superior knowledge and
address of Constance, had enabled her to be serviceable to this woman in
certain painful and perplexing circumstances.

This service was repaid with the utmost gratitude. Sarah regarded her
benefactress with a species of devotion. She could not endure to behold one,
whom every accent and gesture proved to have once enjoyed affluence and
dignity, performing any servile office. In spite of her own multiplied
engagements, she compelled Constance to acsept her assistance on many
occasions, and could scarcely be prevailed upon to receive any compensation for
her labor. Washing clothes was her trade, and from this task she insisted on
relieving her lovely patronness.

Constantia's change of dwelling produced much regret in the kind Sarah. She
did not allow it to make any change in their previous arrangements, but
punctually visited the Dudleys once a week, and carried home with her whatever
stood in need of ablution. When the prevalence of disease disabled Constance
from paying her the usual wages, she would, by no means, consent to be absolved
from this task. Her earnestness on this head was not to be eluded, and
Constance, in consenting that her work should, for the present, be performed
gratuitously, solaced herself with the prospect of being able, by some future
change of fortune, amply to reward her.

Sarah's abode was distant from danger, and her fears were turbulent. She was,
never^s, punctual in her visits to the Dudleys, and anxious for their safety.
In case of their sickness, she had declared her resolution to be their
attendant and nurse. Suddenly, however, her visits ceased. The day on which her
usual visit was paid, was the same with that on which Constantia sickened, but
her coming was expected in vain. Her absence was, on some accounts, regarded
with pleasure, as it probably secured her from the danger connected with the
office of a nurse, but it added to Constantia's cares, inasmuch as her own
sickness, or that of some of her family, was the only cause of her detention.

To remove her doubts, the first use which Constantia made of her recovered
strength, was to visit her laundress: Sarah's house was a theater of suffering.
Her husband was the first of his family assailed by the reigning disease. Two
daughters, nearly grown to womanhood, well-disposed and modest girls, the pride
and support of their mother, and who lived at service, returned home, sick, at
the same time, and died in a few days. Her husband had struggled for eleven
days with his disease, and was seized, just before Constantia's arrival, with
the pangs of death.

Baxter was endowed with great robustness and activity. This disease did not
vanquish him but with tedious and painful struggles. His muscular force now
exhausted itself in ghastly contortions, and the house resounded with his
ravings. Sarah's courage had yielded to so rapid a succession of evils.
Constantia found her shut up in a chamber, distant from that of her dying
husband, in a paroxysm of grief, and surrounded by her younger children.

Constantia's entrance was like that of an angelic comforter. Sarah was
unqualified for any office but that of complaint. With great difficulty she was
made to communicate the knowledge of her situation. Her visitant then passed
into Baxter's apartment. She forced herself to endure this tremendous scene
long enough to discover that it was hastening to a close. She left the house,
and hastening to the proper office, engaged the immediate attendance of an
hearse. Before the lapse of an hour, Baxter's lifeless remains were thrust into
a coffin and conveyed away.

Constance now exerted herself to comfort and encourage the survivors. Her
remonstrances incited Sarah to perform with alacrity the measures which
prudence dictates on these occasions. The house was purified by the admission
of air and the sprinkling of vinegar. Constantia applied her own hand to these
tasks, and set her humble friend an example of forethought and activity. Sarah
would not consent to part with her till a late hour in the evening.

These exertions had like to have been fatally injurious to Constance. Her
health was not sufficiently confirmed to sustain offices so arduous. In the
course of the night her fatigue terminated in fever. In the present more
salubrious state of the atmosphere, it assumed no malignant symptoms, and
shortly disappeared. During her indisposition, she was attended by Sarah, in
whose honest bosom no sentiment was more lively than gratitude. Constantia
having promised to renew her visit the next day, had been impatiently expected,
and Sarah had come to her dwelling in the evening, full of foreboding and
anxiety, to ascertain the cause of her delay. Having gained the bedside of her
patronness, no consideration could induce her to retire from it.

Constantia's curiosity was naturally excited as to the causes of Baxter's
disease. The simple-hearted Sarah was prolix and minute in the history of her
own affairs. No theme was more congenial to her temper than that which was now
proposed. In spite of redundance and obscurity in the style of the narrative,
Constantia found in it powerful excitements of her sympathy. The tale, on its
own account, as well as from the connection of some of its incidents with a
subsequent part of these memoirs, is worthy to be here inserted. However
foreign the destiny of Monrose may at present appear to the story of the
Dudleys, there will hereafter be discovered an intimate connection between them.

CHAPTER VII.
ADJACENT to the house occupied by Baxter was an antique brick tenement. It was
one of the first erections made by the followers of William Penn. It had the
honor to be used as the temporary residence of that venerable person. Its
moss-grown penthouse, crumbling walls, and ruinous porch, made it an
interesting and picturesque object. Notwithstanding its age, it was still
tenable.

This house was occupied, during the preceding months, by a Frenchman. His
dress and demeanor were respectable. His mode of life was frugal almost to
penuriousness, and his only companion was a daughter. The lady seemed not much
less than thirty years of age, but was of small and delicate frame. It was she
that performed every household office. She brought water from the pump and
provisions from the market. Their house had no visitants, and was almost always
closed. Duly, as the morning returned, a venerable figure was seen issuing from
his door, dressed in the same style of tarnished splendor and old-fashioned
preciseness. At the dinner hour he as regularly returned. For the rest of the
day he was invisible.

The habitations in this quarter are few and scattered. The pestilence soon
showed itself here, and the flight of most of the inhabitants, augmented its
desolateness and dreariness. For some time, Monrose, that was his name, made
his usual appearance in the morning. At length the neighbors remarked that he
no longer came forth as usual. Baxter had a notion that Frenchmen were exempt
from this disease. He was, besides, deeply and rancorously prejudiced against
that nation. There will be no difficulty in accounting for this, when it is
known that he had been an English grenadier at Dettingen and Minden. It must
likewise be added, that he was considerably timid, and had sickness in his own
family. Hence it was that the disappearance of Monrose excited in him no
inquisitiveness as to the cause. He did not even mention this circumstance to
others.

The lady was occasionally seen as usual in the street. There were always
remarkable peculiarities in her behavior. In the midst of grave and
disconsolate looks, she never laid aside an air of solemn dignity. She seemed
to shrink from the observation of others, and her eyes were always fixed upon
the ground. One evening Baxter was passing the pump while she was drawing
water. The sadness which her looks betokened, and a suspicion that her father
might be sick, had a momentary effect upon his feelings. He stopped and asked
how her father was. She paid a polite attention to his question, and said
something in French. This and the embarrassment of her air, convinced him that
his words were not understood. He said no more (what indeed could he say?) but
passed on.

Two or three days after this, on returning in the evening to his family, his
wife expressed her surprise in not having seen Miss Monrose in the street that
day. She had not been at the pump, nor had gone, as usual, to market. This
information gave him some disquiet; yet he could form no resolution. As to
entering the house and offering his aid, if aid were needed, he had too much
regard for his own safety, and too little for that of a frog-eating Frenchman,
to think seriously of that expedient. His attention was speedily diverted by
other objects, and Monrose was, for the present, forgotten.

Baxter's profession was that of a porter. He was thrown out of employment by
the present state of things. The solicitude of the guardians of the city was
exerted on this occasion, not only in opposing the progress of disease, and
furnishing provisions to the destitute, but in the preservation of property.
For this end the number of nightly watchmen was increased. Baxter entered
himself in this service. From nine till twelve o'clock at night it was his
province to occupy a certain post.

On this night he attended his post as usual. Twelve o'clock arrived, and he
bent his steps homeward. It was necessary to pass by Monrose's door. On
approaching this house, the circumstance mentioned by his wife recurred to him.
Something like compassion was conjured up in his heart by the figure of the
lady, as he recollected to have lately seen it. It was obvious to conclude that
sickness was the cause of her seclusion. The same, it might be, had confined
her father. If this were true, how deplorable might be their present condition!
Without food, without physician or friends, ignorant of the language of the
country, and thence unable to communicate their wants or solicit succor;
fugitives from their native land, neglected, solitary, and poor.

His heart was softened by these images. He stopped involuntarily when opposite
their door. He looked up at the house. The shutters were closed, so that light,
if it were within, was invisible. He stepped into the porch, and put his eye to
the keyhole. All was darksome and waste. He listened and imagined that he
heard the aspirations of grief. The sound was scarcely articulate, but had an
electrical effect upon his feelings. He retired to his home full of mournful
reflections.

He was willing to do something for the relief of the sufferers, but nothing
could be done that night. Yet succor, if delayed till the morning, might be
ineffectual. But how, when the morning came, should he proceed to effectuate
his kind intentions? The guardians of the public welfare, at this crisis, were
distributed into those who counseled and those who executed. A set of men,
self-appointed to the generous office, employed themselves in seeking out the
destitute or sick, and imparting relief. With this arrangement, Baxter was
acquainted. He was resolved to carry tidings of what he had heard and seen to
one of those persons early the next day.

Baxter, after taking some refreshment, retired to rest. In no long time,
however, he was awakened by his wife, who desired him to notice a certain
glimmering on the ceiling. It seemed the feeble and flitting ray of a distant
and moving light, coming through the window. It did not proceed from the
street, for the chamber was lighted from the side, and not from the front of
the house. A lamp borne by a passenger, or the attendants of an hearse, could
not be discovered in this situation. Besides, in the latter case, it would be
accompanied by the sound of the vehicle, and probably, by weeping and
exclamations of despair. His employment, as the guardian of property, naturally
suggested to him the idea of robbery. He started from his bed, and went to the
window.

His house stood at the distance of about fifty paces from that of Monrose.
There was annexed to the latter, a small garden or yard, bounded by an high
wooden fence. Baxter's window overlooked this space. Before he reached the
window, the relative situation of the two habitations occurred to him. A
conjecture was instantly formed that the glimmering proceeded from this
quarter. His eye, therefore, was immediately fixed upon Monrose's back door. It
caught a glimpse of an human figure, passing into the house, through this door.
The person had a candle in his hand. This appeared by the ligh^ which streamed
after him, and which was per^ceived, though faintly, through a small window of
the dwelling, after the back door was closed*

The person disappeared too quickly to allow him to say whether it was male or
female. This scrutiny confirmed, rather than weakened the apprehensions that
first occurred. He reflected on the desolate and helpless condition of this
family. The father might be sick; and what opposition could be made by the
daughter to the stratagems or violence of midnight plunderers. This was an evil
which it was his duty, in an extraordinary sense, to obviate. It is true, the
hour of watching was passed, and this was not the district assigned to him; but
Baxter was, on the whole, of a generous and intrepid spirit: In the present
case, therefore, he did not hesitate long in forming his resolution. He seized
an hanger that hung at his bedside, and which had hewn many an Hungarian and
French hussar to pieces. With this he descended to the street. He cautiously
approached Monrose's house. He listened at the door, but heard nothing. The
lower apartment, as he discovered through the keyhole, was deserted and dark.
These appearances could not be accounted for. He was, as yet, unwilling to call
or to knock. He was solicitous to obtain some information by silent means, and
without alarming the persons within, who, if they were robbers, might thus be
put upon their guard, and enabled to escape. If none but the family were there,
they would not understand his signals, and might impute the disturbance to the
cause which he was desirous to obviate. What could he do? Must he patiently
wait till some incident should happen to regulate his motions?

In this uncertainty, he bethought himself of going round to the back part of
the dwelling, and watching the door which had heen closed. An open space,
filled with rubbish and weeds, adjoined the house and garden on one side.
Hither he repaired, and raising his head above the fence, at a point directly
opposite the door, waited with considerable impatience for some token or
signal, by which he might be directed in his choice of measures.

Human life abounds with mysterious appearances. A man, perched on a fence, at
midnight, mute and motionless, and gazing at a dark and dreary dwelling, was an
object calculated to rouse curiosity. When the muscular form, and rugged
visage, scarred and furrowed into something like ferocity, were added; when the
nature of the calamity, by which the city was dispeopled, was considered, the
motives to plunder, and the insecurity of property, arising from the pressure
of new wants on the poor, and the flight or disease of the rich, were attended
to, an observer would be apt to admit fearful conjectures.

I know not how long Baxter continued at this post. He remained here, because
he could not, as he conceived, change it for a better. Before his patience was
exhausted, his attention was called by a noise within the house. It proceeded
from the lower room. The sound was that of steps, but this was accompanied with
other inexplicable tokens. The kitchen door at length opened. The figure of
Miss Monrose, pale, emaciated, and haggard, presented itself. Within the door
stood a candle. It was placed on a chair within sight, and its rays streamed
directly against the face of Baxter, as it was reared above the top of the
fence. This illumination, faint as it was, bestowed a certain air of wildness
on features which nature, and the sanguinary habits of a soldier, had
previously rendered, in an eminent degree, harsh and stern. He was not aware of
the danger of discovery, in consequence of this position of the candle. His
attention was, for a few seconds, engrossed by the object before him. At length
he chanced to notice another object.

At a few yards distance from the fence, and within it, some one appeared to
have been digging. An opening was made in the ground, but it was shallow and
irregular. The implement which seemed to have been used, was nothing more than
a fire shovel, for one of these he observed lying near the spot. The lady had
withdrawn from the door, though without closing it. He had leisure, therefore,
to attend to this new circumstance, and to reflect upon the purpose for which
this opening might have been designed.

Death is familiar to the apprehensions of a soldier. Baxter had assisted at
the hasty interment of thousands, the victims of the sword or of pestilence.
Whether it was because this theater of human calamity was new to him, and
death, in order to be viewed with his ancient unconcern, must be accompanied in
the ancient manner, with halberts and tents, certain it is, that Baxter was
irresolute and timid in every thing that respected the yellow fever. The
circumstances of the time suggested that this was a grave, to which some victim
of this disease was to be consigned. His teeth chattered when he reflected how
near he might now be to the source of infection: yet his curiosity retained him
at his post.

He fixed his eyes once more upon the door. In a short time the lady again
appeared at it. She was in a stooping posture, and appeared to be dragging
something along the floor. His blood ran cold at this spectacle. His fear
instantly figured to itself a corpse, livid and contagious. Still he had no
power to move. The lady's strength, enfeebled as it was by grief, and perhaps
by the absence of nourishment, seemed scarcely adequate to the task which she
had assigned herself.

Her burden, whatever it was, was closely wrapped in a sheet. She drew it
forward a few paces, then desistsd, and seated herself on the ground apparently
to recruit her strength, and give vent to the agony of her thoughts in sighs.
Her tears were either exhausted or refused to flow, for ^one were shed by her.
Presently she resumed her undertaking. Baxter's horror increased in proportion
as she drew nearer to the spot where ^he stood, and yet it seemed as if some
fascination had forbidden him to recede.

At length the burden was drawn to the side of the opening in the earth. Here
it seemed as if the mournful task was finished. She threw her^elf once more
upon the earth. Her senses seemed for a time to have forsaken her. She sat
buried in reverie, her eyes scarcely open and fixed upon the ground, and every
feature set to the genuine expression of sorrow. Some disorder, occasioned by
the circumstance of dragging, now took place in the vestment of what he had
rightly ^redicted to be a dead body. The veil by acci^ent was drawn aside, and
exhibited, to the start^ed eye of Baxter, the pale and ghastly visage of ^he
unhappy Monrose.

This incident determined him. Every joint in his frame trembled, and he
hastily withdrew from the fence. His first motion in doing this produced a
noise by which the lady was alarmed: she suddenly threw her eyes upward, and
gained a full view of Baxter's extraordinary countenance, just before it
disappeared. She manifested her terror by a piercing shriek. Baxter did not
stay to mark her subsequent conduct, to confirm or to dissipate her fears, but
retired, in confusion, to his own house.

Hitherto his caution had availed him. He had carefully avoided all employments
and places from which he imagined imminent danger was to be dreaded. Now,
through his own inadvertency, he had rushed, as he believed, into the jaws of
the pest. His senses had not been assailed by any noisome effluvia. This was no
unplausible ground for imagining that this death had some other cause than the
yellow fever. This circumstance did not occur to Baxter. He had been told that
Frenchmen were not susceptible of this contagion. He had hitherto believed this
assertion, but now regarded it as having been fully confuted. He forgot that
Frenchmen were undoubtedly mortal, and that there was no impossibility in
Monrose's dying, even at this time, of a malady different from that which
prevailed.

Before morning he began to feel very unpleasant symptoms. He related his late
adventure to his wife. She endeavored, by what arguments her slender ingenuity
suggested, to quiet his apprehensions, but in vain. He hourly grew worse, and
as soon as it was light, dispatched his wife for a physician. On interrogating
this messenger, the physician obtained information of last night's occurrences,
and this being communicated to one of the dispensers of the public charity,
they proceeded, early in the morning, to Monrose's house. It was closed as
usual. They knocked and called, but no one answered. They examined every avenue
to the dwelling, but none of them were accessible. They passed into the garden,
and observed, on the spot marked out by Baxter a heap of earth. A very slight
exertion was sufficient to remove it and discover the body of the unfortunate
exile beneath.

After unsuccessfully trying various expedients for entering the house, they
deemed themselves authorized to break the door. They entered, ascended the
staircase, and searched every apartment in the house, but no human being was
discoverable. The furniture was wretched and scanty, but there was no proof
that Monrose had fallen a victim to the reigning disease. It was certain that
the lady had disappeared. It was inconceivable whither she had gone.

Baxter suffered a long period of sickness. -- The prevailing malady appeared
upon him in its severest form. His strength of constitution, and the careful
attendance of his wife, were insufficient to rescue him from the grave. His
case may be quoted as an example of the force of imagination. He had probably
already received, through the medium of the air, or by contact of which he was
not conscious, the seeds of this disease. They might perhaps have lain dormant,
had not this panic occurred to endow them with activity.

CHAPTER VIII.
SUCH were the facts circumstantially communicated by Sarah. They afforded to
Constance a theme of ardent meditation. The similitude between her own destiny
and that of this unhappy exile, could not fail to be observed. Immersed in
poverty, friendless, burdened with the maintenance and nurture of her father,
their circumstances were nearly parallel. The catastrophe of her tale, was the
subject of endless but unsatisfactory conjecture.

She had disappeared between the flight of Baxter and the dawn of day. What
path had she taken? Was she now alive? Was she still an inhabitant of this
city? Perhaps there was a coincidence of taste as well as fortunes between
them. The only friend that Constantia ever enjoyed, congenial with her in
principles, sex and age, was at a distance that forbad communication. She
imagined that Ursula Monrose would prove worthy of her love, and felt
unspeakable regret at the improbability of their ever meeting.

Meanwhile the dominion of cold began to be felt, and the contagious fever
entirely disappeared. The return of health was hailed with rapture, by all
ranks of people. The streets were once more busy and frequented. The sensation
of present security seemed to shut out from all hearts the memory of recent
disasters. Public entertainments were thronged with auditors. A new theater had
lately been constructed, and a company of English Comedians had arrived during
the prevalence of the malady. They now began their exhibitions, and their
audiences were overflowing.

Such is the motly and ambiguous condition of human society, such is the
complexity of all effects from what cause soever they spring, that none can
tell whether this destructive pestilence was, on the whole, productive of most
pain of most pleasure. Those who had been sick and had recovered, found, in
this circumstance, a source of exultation. Others made haste, by new marriages,
to supply the place of wives, husbands and children, whom the scarcely
extinguished pestilence had swept away.

Constance, however, was permitted to take no share in the general festivity.
Such was the color of her fate, that the yellow fever, by affording her a
respite from toil, supplying leisure for the acquisition of a useful branch of
knowledge, and leading her to the discovery of a cheaper, more simple, and more
wholesome method of subsistence, had been friendly, instead of adverse, to her
happiness. Its disappearance, instead of relieving her from suffering, was the
signal for the approach of new cares.

Of her ancient customers, some were dead, and others were slow in resuming
their ancient habitations, and their ordinary habits. Meanwhile two wants were
now created and were urgent. The season demanded a supply of fuel, and her rent
had accumulated beyond her power to discharge. M'Crea no sooner returned from
the country, than he applied to her for payment. Some proprietors, guided by
humanity, had remitted their dues, but M'Crea was not one of these. According
to his own representation, no man was poorer than himself, and the punctual
payment of all that was owing to him, was no more than sufficient to afford him
a scanty subsistence.

He was aware of the indigence of the Dudleys, and was therefore extremely
importunate for payment, and could scarcely be prevailed upon to allow them the
interval of a day, for the discovery of expedients. This day was passed by
Constantia in fruitless anxieties. The ensuing evening had been fixed for a
repetition of his visit. The hour arrived, but her invention was exhausted in
vain. M'Crea was punctual to the minute. Constance was allowed no option. She
merely declared that the money demanded she had not to give, nor could she
foresee any period at which her inability would be less than it then was

These declarations were heard by her visitant, with marks of unspeakable
vexation. He did not fail to expatiate on the equity of his demands, the
moderation and forbearance he had hitherto shown, notwithstanding the extreme
urgency of his own wants, and the inflexible rigor with which he had been
treated by his creditors. This rhetoric was merely the prelude to an
intimation that he must avail himself of any lawful means, by which he might
gain possession of his own.

This insinuation was fully comprehended by Constance, but it was heard without
any new emotions. Her knowledge of her landlord's character taught her to
expect but one consequence. He paused to observe what effect would be produced
by this indirect menace. She answered, without any change of tone, that the
loss of habitation and furniture, however inconvenient at this season, must be
patiently endured. If it were to be prevented only by the payment of money, its
prevention was impossible.

M'Crea renewed his regrets that there should be no other alternative. The law
sanctioned his claims and justice to his family, which was already large, and
likely to increase, required that they should not be relinquished, yet such was
the mildness of his temper and his aversion to proceed to this extremity, that
he was willing to dispense with immediate payment on two conditions. First,
that they should leave his house within a week, and secondly, that they should
put into his hands some trinket or moveable, equal in value to the sum
demanded, which should be kept by him as a pledge.

This last hint suggested an expedient for obviating the present distress. The
lute with which Mr. Dudley was accustomed to solace his solitude, was, if
possible, more essential to his happiness than shelter or food. To his daughter
it possessed little direct power to please. It was inestimable merely for her
father's sake. Its intrinsic value was at least equal to the sum due, but to
part with it was to bereave him of a good, which nothing else could supply.
Besides, not being a popular and saleable instrument, it would probably be
contemptuously rejected by the ignorance and avarice of M'Crea.

There was another article in her possession, of some value in traffic, and of
a kind which M'Crea was far more likely to accept. It was the miniature
portrait of her friend, executed by a German artist, and set in gold. This
image was a precious though imperfect substitute for sympathy and intercourse
with the original. Habit had made this picture a source, of a species of
idolatry. Its power over her sensations was similar to that possessed by a
beautiful Madonna over the heart of a juvenile enthusiast. It was the mother of
the only devotion which her education had taught her to consider as beneficial
or true.

She perceived the necessity of parting with it on this occasion, with the
utmost clearness, but this necessity was thought upon with indescribable
repugnance. It seemed as if she had not thoroughly conceived the extent of her
calamity till now. It seemed as if she could have endured the loss of eyes with
less reluctance than the loss of this inestimable relic. Bitter were the
tears which she shed over it as she took it from her bosom, and consigned it to
those rapacious hands, that were stretched out to receive it. She derived some
little consolation from the promises of this man, that he would keep it safely
till she was able to redeem it.

The other condition, that of immediate removal from the house, seemed at first
sight impracticable. Some reflection, however, showed her, that the change
might not only be possible but useful. Among other expedients for diminishing
expense, that of limiting her furniture and dwelling to the cheapest standard,
had often occurred. She now remembered, that the house occupied by Monrose, was
tenantless; that its antiquity, its remote and unpleasant situation, and its
small dimensions, might induce M'Crea, to whom it belonged, to let it at a much
lower price than that which he now exacted. M'Crea would have been better
pleased if her choice had fallen on a different house, but he had powerful
though sordid reasons for desiring the possession of this tenement. He assented
therefore to her proposal, provided her removal took place without delay.

In the present state of her funds this removal was impossible. Mere shelter,
would not suffice during this inclement season. Without fuel, neither cold
could be excluded, nor hunger relieved. There was nothing, convertible into
money, but her lute. No sacrifice was more painful, but an irresistible
necessity demanded it.

Her interview with M'Crea took place while her father was absent from the
room. On his return she related what had happened, and urged the necessity of
parting with his favorite instrument. He listened to her tale with a sigh. Yes,
said he, do what thou will, my child. It is unlikely that any one will purchase
it. It is certain that no one will give for it what I gave: but thou may try.

It has been, to me a faithful friend. I know not how I should have lived
without it. Its notes have cheered me with the sweet remembrances of old times.
It was, in some degree, a substitute for the eyes which I have lost, but now
let it go, and perform for me perhaps the dearest of its services. It may help
us to sustain the severities of this season.

There was no room for delay. She immediately set out in search of a purchaser.
Such an one was most likely to be found in the keeper of a musical repository,
who had lately arrived from Europe. She entertained but slight hopes that an
instrument, scarcely known among her neighbors, would be bought at any price,
however inconsiderable.

She found the keeper of the shop engaged in conversation with a lady, whose
person and face instantly arrested the attention of Constance. A less sagacious
observer would have eyed the stranger with indifference. But Constance was ever
busy in interpreting the language of features and looks. Her sphere of
observation had been narrow, but her habits of examining, comparing and
deducing, had thoroughly exhausted that sphere. These habits were eminently
strong, with relation to this class of objects. She delighted to investigate
the human countenance, and treasured up numberless conclusions as to the
coincidence between mental and external qualities.

She had often been forcibly struck by forms that were accidentally seen, and
which abounded with this species of mute expression. They conveyed at a single
glance, what could not be imparted by volumes. The features and shape sunk, as
it were, into perfect harmony with sentiments and passions. Every atom of the
frame was pregnant with significance. In some, nothing was remarkable but this
power of the outward figure to exhibit the internal sentiments. In others, the
intelligence thus unveiled, was remarkable for its heterogenious or energetic
qualities; for its tendency to fill her heart with veneration or abhorrence, or
to involve her in endless perplexities.

The accuracy and vividness with which pictures of this kind presented
themselves to her imagination, resembled the operations of a sixth sense. It
cannot be doubted, however, that much was owing to the enthusiastic tenor of
her own conceptions, and that her conviction of the truth of the picture,
principally flowed from the distinctness and strength of its hues.

The figure which she now examined, was small but of exquisite proportions. Her
complexion testified the influence of a torrid sun, but the darkness veiled,
without obscuring, the glowing tints of her cheek. The shade was remarkably
deep, but a deeper still was required to become incompatible with beauty. Her
features were irregular, but defects of symmetry were amply supplied by eyes
that anticipated speech and positions which conveyed that to which language was
inadequate.

It was not the chief tendency of her appearance to seduce or to melt. Here Is
were the polished cheek and the mutability of muscle, which belong to woman,
but the genius conspicuous in her aspect, was heroic and contemplative. The
female was absorbed, so to speak, in the rational creature, and the emotions
most apt to be excited in the gazer, partook less of love than of reverence.

Such is the portrait of this stranger, delineated by Constance. I copy it with
greater willingness, because if we substitute a nobler stature, and a
complexion less uniform and delicate, it is suited, with the utmost accuracy,
to herself. She was probably unconscious of this resemblance, but this
circumstance may be supposed to influence her in discovering such attractive
properties in a form thus vaguely seen. These impressions, permanent and cogent
as they were, were gained at a single glance. The purpose which led her thither
was too momentous to be long excluded.

Why, said the master of the shop, this is lucky. Here is a lady who has just
been enquiring for an instrument of this kind. Perhaps the one you have will
suit her. If you will bring it to me, I will examine it, and if it is complete,
will make a bargain with you. -- He then turned to the lady who had first
entered, and a short dialogue in French ensued between them. The man repeated
his assurances to Constance, who, promising to hasten back with the instrument,
took her leave. The lute, in its structure and ornaments, has rarely been
surpassed. When scrutinized by his artist, it proved to be complete, and the
price demanded for it was readily given.

By this means the Dudleys were enabled to change their habitation, and to
supply themselves with fuel. To obviate future exigences, Constantia betook
herself, once more, to the needle. They persisted in the use of their simple
fare, and endeavored to contract their wants and methodize their occupations,
by a standard as rigid as possible. She had not relinquished her design of
adopting a new and more liberal profession, but though, when indistinctly and
generally considered, it seemed easily effected, yet the first steps which it
would be proper to take, did not clearly or readily suggest themselves. For the
present she was contented to pursue the beaten tract, but was prepared to
benefit by any occasion that time might furnish, suitable to the execution of
her plan.

CHAPTER IX.
IT may be asked, if a woman of this character did not attract the notice of
the world. Her station, no less than her modes of thinking, excluded her from
the concourse of the opulent and the gay. She kept herself in privacy, her
engagements confined her to her own fireside, and her neighbors enjoyed no
means of penetrating through that obscurity in which she wrapped herself. There
were, no doubt, persons of her own sex, capable of estimating her worth, and
who could have hastened to raise so much merit from the indigence to which it
was condemned. She might, at least, have found associates and friends justly
entitled to her affection. But whether she were peculiarly unfortunate in this
respect, or whether it arose from a jealous and unbending spirit that would
remit none of its claims to respect, and was backward in its overtures to
kindness and intimacy, it so happened that her hours were, for a long period,
enlivened by no companion but her father and her faithful Lucy. The humbleness
of her dwelling, her plain garb, and the meanness of her occupation, were no
passports to the favor of the rich and vain. These, added to her youth and
beauty, frequently exposed her to insults, from which, though productive for a
time of mortification and distress, she, for the most part, extricated herself
by her spirited carriage, and presence of mind.

One incident of this kind it will be necessary to mention. One evening her
engagements carried her abroad. She had proposed to return immediately, finding
by experience the danger that was to be dreaded by a woman young and
unprotected. Somewhat occurred that unavoidably lengthened her stay, and she
set out on her return at a late hour. One of the other sex offered her his
guardianship, but this she declined, and proceeded homeward alone.

Her way lay through streets but little inhabited, and whose few inhabitants
were of the profligate class. She was conscious of the inconveniences to which
she was exposed, and therefore tripped along with all possible haste. She had
not gone far before she perceived, through the dusk, two men standing near a
porch before her. She had gone too far to recede or change her course without
exciting observation, and she flattered herself that the persons would behave
with decency. Encouraged by these reflections, and somewhat hastening her pace,
she went on. As soon as she came opposite the place where they stood, one of
them threw himself round, and caught her arm, exclaiming, in a broad tone,
"Whither so fast, my love, at this time of night?" -- The other, at the same
time, threw his arms round her waist, crying out, "A pretty prize, by G --:
just in the nick of time."

They were huge and brawny fellows, in whose grasp her feeble strength was
annihilated. Their motions were so sudden, that she had not time to escape by
flight. Her struggles merely furnished them with a subject of laughter. He that
held her waist, proceeded to pollute her cheeks with his kisses, and drew her
into the porch. He tore her from the grasp of him who first seized her, who
seemed to think his property invaded, and said, in a surly tone: "What now,
Jemmy? Damn your heart, do you think I Will be fobbed. Have done with your
slabbering, Jemmy. First come, first served;" and seemed disposed to assert his
claims by force.

To this brutality, Constantia had nothing to oppose but fruitless struggles
and shrieks for help. Succor was, fortunately, at hand. Her exclamations were
heard by a person across the street, who instantly ran, and with some
difficulty disengaged her from the grasp of the ruffians. He accompanied her
the rest of the way, bestowed on her every polite attention, and, though
pressed to enter the house, declined the invitation. She had no opportunity of
examining the appearance of her new friend. This, the darkness of the night and
her own panick, prevented.

Next day a person called upon her whom she instantly recognized to be her late
protector. He came with some message from his sister. His manners were simple
and unostentatious, and breathed the genuine spirit of civility. Having
performed his commission, and once more received the thanks which she poured
forth with peculiar warmth, for his last night's interposition, he took his
leave.

The name of this man was Balfour. He was middle-aged, of a figure neither
elegant nor ungainly, and an aspect that was mild and placid, but betrayed few
marks of intelligence. He was an Adventurer from Scotland, whom a strict
adherence to the maxims of trade had rendered opulent. He was governed by the
principles of mercantile integrity in all his dealings, and was affable and
kind, without being generous, in his treatment of inferiors. He was a stranger
to violent emotions of any kind, and his intellectual acquisitions were limited
to his own profession.

His demeanor was tranquil and uniform. He was sparing of words, and these
were uttered in the softest manner. In all his transactions, he was sedate and
considerate. In his dress and mode of living, there were no appearances of
parsimony, but there were, likewise, as few traces of profusion.

His sister had shared in his prosperity. As soon as his affairs would permit,
he sent for her to Scotland, where she had lived in a state little removed from
penury, and had for some years, been vested with the superintendance of his
household. There was a considerable resemblance between them in person and
character. Her profession, or those arts in which her situation had compelled
her to acquire skill, had not an equal tendency to enlarge the mind, as those
of her brother, but the views of each were limited to one set of objects. His
superiority was owing, not to any inherent difference, but to accident.

Balfour's life had been a model of chastness and regularity: though this was
owing more to constitutional coldness, and a frugal spirit, than to virtuous
forbearance; but, in his schemes for the future, he did not exclude the
circumstance of marriage. Having attained a situation secure, as the nature of
human affairs will admit, from the chances of poverty, the way was sufficiently
prepared for matrimony. His thoughts had been for some time employed in the
selection of a suitable companion, when this rencounter happened with Miss
Dudley.

Balfour was not destitute of those feelings which are called into play by the
sight of youth and beauty in distress. This incident was not speedily
forgotten. The emotions produced by it were new to him. He reviewed then
oftener, and with more complacency, than any which he had before experienced.
They afforded him so much satisfaction, that, in order to preserve them
undiminished, he resolved to repeat his visit. Constantia treated him as one
from whom she had received a considerable benefit. Her sweetness and gentleness
were uniform, and Balfour found that her humble roof promised him more
happiness than his own fireside, or the society of his professional brethren.

He could not overlook, in the course of such reflections as these, the
question relative to marriage, and speedily determined to solicit the honor of
her hand. He had not decided without his usual foresight and deliberation; nor
had he been wanting in the accuracy of his observations and enquiries. Those
qualifications, indeed, which were of chief value in his eyes, lay upon the
surface. He was no judge of her intellectual character, or of the loftiness of
her morality. Not even the graces of person, or features, or manners, attracted
much of his attention. He remarked her admirable economy of time, and money,
and labor, the simplicity of her dress, her evenness of temper, and her love
of seclusion. These were essential requisites of a wife in his apprehension.
The insignificance of his own birth, the lowness of his original fortune, and
the efficacy of industry and temperance to confer and maintain wealth, had
taught him indifference as to birth or fortune in his spouse. His moderate
desires in this respect were gratified, and he was anxious only for a partner
that would aid hint in preserving, rather than in enlarging his property. He
esteemed himself eminently fortunate in meeting with one in whom every
matrimonial qualification concentred.

He was not deficient in modesty, but he fancied that, on this occasion, there
was no possibility of miscarriage. He held her capacity in deep veneration, but
this circumstance rendered him more secure of success. He conceived this union
to be even more eligible with regard to her than to himself; and confided in
the rectitude of her understanding, for a decision favorable to his wishes.

Before any express declaration was made, Constantia easily predicted the event
from the frequency of his visits, and the attentiveness of his manners. It was
no difficult task to ascertain this man's character. Her modes of thinking
were, in few respects, similar to those of her lover. She was eager to
investigate, in the first place, the attributes of his mind. His professional
and household maxims were not of inconsiderable importance, but they were
subordinate considerations. In the poverty of his discourse and ideas, she
quickly found reasons for determining her conduct.

Marriage she had but little considered, as it is in itself. What are the
genuine principles of that relation, and what conduct with respect to it, is
prescribed to rational beings, by their duty, she had not hitherto
investigated: But she was not backward to enquire what are the precepts of
duty, in her own particular case. She knew herself to be young; she was
sensible of the daily enlargement of her knowledge; every day contributed to
rectify some error or confirm some truth. These benefits she owed to her
situation, which, whatever were its evils, gave her as much freedom from
restraint as is consistent with the state of human affairs. Her poverty
fettered her exertions, and circumscribed her pleasures. Poverty, therefore,
was an evil, and the reverse of poverty to be desired. But riches were not
barren of constraint, and its advantages might be purchased at too dear a rate.

Allowing that the wife is enriched by marriage, how humiliating were the
conditions annexed to it in the present case? The company of one with whom we
have no sympathy, nor sentiments in common, is, of all species of solitude, the
most loathsome and dreary. The nuptual life is attended with peculiar
aggravations, since the tie is infrangible, and the choice of a more suitable
companion, if such an one should offer, is for ever precluded. The hardships of
wealth are not incompensated by some benefits, but these benefits, false and
hollow as they are, cannot be obtained by marriage. Her acceptance of Balfour
would merely aggravate her indigence.

Now she was at least mistress of the product of her own labor. Her tasks were
toilsome, but the profits, though slender, were sure, and she administered her
little property in what manner she pleased. Marriage would an^^hilate this
power. Henceforth she would be bereft even of personal freedom. So far from
possessing property, she herself would become the property of another.

She was not unaware of the consequences flowing from differences of capacity;
and, that power, to whomsoever legally granted, will be exercised by the most
addressful; but she derived no encouragement from these considerations. She
would not stoop to gain her end by the hateful arts of the sycophant; and was
too wise to place an unbounded reliance on the influence of truth. The
character, likewise, of this man sufficiently exempted him from either of those
influences.

She did not forget the nature of the altar-vows. To abdicate the use of her
own understanding, was scarcely justifiable in any case, but to vow an
affection that was not felt, and could not be compelled, and to promise
obedience to one, whose judgment was glaringly defective, were acts atrociously
criminal. Education, besides, had created in her an insurmountable abhorrence
of admitting to conjugal privileges, the man who had no claim upon her love. It
could not be denied that a state of abundant accommodation was better than the
contrary, but this consideration, though in the most rational estimate, of some
weight, she was not so depraved and effeminate as to allow to overweigh the
opposite evils. Homely liberty was better than splendid servitude.

Her resolution was easily formed, but there were certain impediments in the
way of its execution. These chiefly arose from deference to the opinion, and
compassion for the infirmities of her father. He assumed no control over her
actions. His reflections in the present case, were rather understood than
expressed. When uttered it was with the mildness of equality, and the modesty
or persuasion. It was this circumstance that conferred upon them all their
force. His decision, on so delicate a topic, was not wanting in sagacity and
moderation; but, as a man, he had his portion of defects, and his frame was
enfeebled by disease and care; yet he set no higher value on the ease and
independance of his former condition, than any man of like experience. He could
not endure to exist on the fruits of his daughter's labor. He ascribed her
decision to a spirit of excessive refinement, and was, of course, disposed to
give little quarter to maiden scruples. They were phantoms, he believed, which
experience would dispel. His morality, besides, was of a much more flexible
kind; and the marriage vows were, in his opinion, formal and unmeaning, and
neither in themselves, nor in the apprehension of the world, accompanied with
any rigorous obligation. He drew more favorable omens from the known capacity
of his daughter, and the flexibility of her lover.

She demanded his opinion and advice. She listened to his reasonings, and
revolved them with candor and impartiality. She stated her objections with
simplicity, but the difference of age and sex was sufficient to preclude
agreement. Arguments were of no use but to prolong the debate; but, happily,
the magnanimity of Mr. Dudley would admit of no sacrifice. Her opinions, it is
true, were erroneous; but he was willing that she should regulate her conduct
by her own conceptions of right, and not by those of another. To refuse
Balfour's offers was an evil, but an evil inexpressibly exceeded by that of
accepting them contrary to her own sense of propriety.

Difficulties, likewise, arose from the consideration of what was due to the
man who had already benefited her, and who, in this act, intended to confer
upon her further benefit. These, though the source of some embarrassments, were
not sufficient to shake her resolution. Balfour could not understand her
principal objections. They were of a size altogether disproportioned to his
capacity. Her moral speculations were quite beyond the sphere of his
reflections. She could not expatiate, without a breach of civility, on the
disparity of their minds, and yet this was the only or principal ground on
which she had erected her scruples.

Her father loved her too well not to be desirous of relieving her from a
painful task, though undertaken without necessity, and contrary to his opinion.
Refer him to me, said he; I will make the best of the matter, and render your
refusal as palatable as possible, but do you authorize me to make it absolute,
and without appeal? --

My dear father! how good you are! but that shall be my province. If I err, let
the consequences of my mistake be confined to myself. It would be cruel indeed,
to make you the instrument in a transaction which your judgment disapproves. My
reluctance was a weak and foolish thing. Strange, indeed, if the purity of my
motives will not bear me out on this, as it has done on many more arduous
occasions. --

Well, be it so; that is best I believe. Ten to one but I, with my want of
eyes, would blunder, while yours will be of no small use, in a contest with a
lover. They will serve you to watch the transitions in his placid physiognomy,
and overpower his discontents.

She was aware of the inconveniences to which this resolution would subject
her, but since they were unavoidable, she armed herself with the requisite
patience. Her apprehensions were not without reason. More than one conference
was necessary to convince him of her meaning, and in order to effect her
purpose, she was obliged to behave with so much explicitness, as to hazard
giving him offense. This affair was productive of no small vexation. He had put
too much faith in the validity of his pretensions, and the benefits of
perseverance, to be easily shaken off.

This decision was not borne by him with as much patience as she wished. He
deemed himself unjustly treated, and his resentment exceeded those bounds of
moderation which he prescribed to himself on all other occasions. From his
anger, however, there was not much to be dreaded, but, unfortunately, his
sister partook of his indignation and indulged her petulance, which was
enforced by every gossiping and tatling propensity, to the irreparable
disadvantage of Constantia.

She owed her support to her needle. She was dependant therefore on the caprice
of customers. This caprice was swayable by every breath, and paid a merely
subordinate regard, in the choice of workwomen, to the circumstances of skill,
cheapness and diligence. In consequence of this, her usual sources of
subsistence began to fail.

Indigence, as well as wealth, is comparative. He, indeed, must be wretched,
whose food, clothing and shelter are limited, both in kind and quantity, by
the standard of mere necessity; who, in the choice of food, for example, is
governed by no consideration but its cheapness, and its capacity to sustain
nature. Yet to this degree of wretchedness was Miss Dudley reduced.

As her means of subsistence began to decay, she reflected on the change of
employment that might become necessary. She was mistress of no lucrative art,
but that which now threatened to be useless. There was but one avenue through
which she could hope to escape from the pressure of absolute want. This, she
regarded with an aversion, that nothing but extreme necessity, and the failure
of every other expedient, would be able to subdue. This was the hiring herself
as a servant. Even that could not answer all her purposes. If a subsistence
were provided by it for herself, whither should her father, and her Lucy betake
themselves for support.

Hitherto her labor had been sufficient to shut out famine and the cold. It is
true she had been cut off from all the direct means of personal or mental
gratification: But her constitution had exempted her from the insalutary
effects of ^edentary application. She could not tell how ^ong she could enjoy
this exemption, but it was ^bsurd to anticipate those evils which might never
arrive. Meanwhile, her situation was not ^estitute of comfort. The indirect
means of in^ellectual improvement, in conversation and re^ection, the
inexpensive amusement of singing, and, above all, the consciousness of
performing ^er duty, and maintaining her independance invi^ate, were still in
her possession. Her lodging was humble, and her fare frugal, but these,
tem^erance and a due regard to the use of money, ^ould require from the most
opulent.

Now, retrenchments must be made even from his penurious provision. Her
exertions might ^mewhat defer, but could not prevent the ruin of her unhappy
family. Their landlord was a severe exacter of his dues. The day of quarterly
payment was past, and he had not failed in his usual punctuality. She was
unable to satisfy his demands, and Mr. Dudley was officially informed, that
unless payment was made before a day fixed, resort would be had to the law, in
that case made and provided.

This seemed to be the completion of their misfortunes. It was not enough to
soften the implacability of their landlord. A respite might possibly be
obtained from this harsh sentence* Entreaties might prevail upon him to allow
o^ their remaining under this roof for some time longer; but shelter at this
inclement season was not enough. Without fire they must perish with the cold;
and fuel could be procured only for money, of which the last shilling was
expended* Food was no less indispensible, and, their credit being gone, not a
loaf could be extorted from the avarice of the bakers in the neighborhood.

The sensations produced by this accumulation of distress may be more easily
conceived than de^scribed. Mr. Dudley sunk into despair, when Lucy informed him
that the billet of wood she was putting on the fire was the last. Well, said
he, the game is up. Where is my daughter? -- The answer was, that she was up
stairs.

Why, there she has been this hour. Tell he^ to come down and warm herself. She
mus^ needs be cold and here is a cheerful blaze. I feel it myself. Like the
lightning that precede^ death, it beams thus brightly, though, in a few
moments, it will be extinguished forever. Let my darling come, and partake of
its comforts before they expire.

Constantia had retired in order to review he^ situation, and devise some
expedients that might alleviate it. It was a sore extremity to which she was
reduced. Things had come to a desperate pass, and the remedy required must be
no less desperate. It was impossible to see her father perish. She herself
would have died before she would have condescended to beg. It was not worth
prolonging a life which must subsist upon alms. She would have wandered into
the fields at dusk, have seated herself upon an unfrequented bank, and serenely
waited the approach of that death, which the rigours of the season would have
rendered sure. But, as it was, it became her to act in a very different manner.

During her father's prosperity, some mercantile intercourse had taken place
between him and a merchant of this city. The latter, on some occasion, had
spent a few nights at her father's house. She was greatly charmed with the
humanity that shone forth in his conversation and behavior. From that time to
this, all intercourse had ceased. She was acquainted with the place of his
abode, and knew him to be affluent. To him she determined to apply as a
suppliant in behalf of her father. She did not inform Mr. Dudley of this
intention, conceiving it best to wait till the event had been ascertained, for
fear of exciting fallacious expectations. She was further deterred by the
apprehension of awakening his pride, and bringing on herself an absolute
prohibition.

She arrived at the door of Mr. Melbourne's house, and enquiring for the master
of it, was informed that he had gone out of town, and was not expected to
return within a week.

Her scheme, which was by no means unplau^ible, was thus completely frustrated.
There was but one other resource, on which she had al^eady deliberated, and to
which she had determined to apply, if that should fail. That was to claim
assistance from the superintendants of the poor. She was employed in
considering to which of them, and in what manner she should make her
application, when she turned the corner of Lombard and Second Streets. That had
scarcely been done, when, casting her eyes mournfully round her, she caught a
glimpse of a person whom she instantly recognized, passing into the
marketplace. She followed him with quick steps, and, on a second examination,
found that she had not been mistaken. This was no other than Thomas Craig, to
whose malignity and cunning, all her misfortanes were imputable.

She was at first uncertain what use to make of this discovery. She followed
him almost instinctively, and saw him at length enter the Indian Queen Tavern.
Here she stopped. She entertained a confused conception, that some beneficial
consequences might be extracted from this event. In the present hurry of her
thoughts she could form no satisfactory conclusion: But it instantly occurred
to her that it would, at least be proper to ascertain the place of his abode.
She stepped into the inn, and made the suitable enquiries. She was informed that
the gentleman had come from Baltimore, a month before, and had since resided at
that house. How soon he meant to leave the city, her informant was unable to
tell.

Having gained this intelligence, she returned home, and once more shut herself
in her chamber to meditate on this new posture of affairs.

CHAPTER X.
CRAIG was indebted to her father. He had defrauded him by the most attrocious
and illicit arts. On either account he was liable to prosecution, but her heart
rejected the thought of being the author of injury to any man. The dread of
punishment, however, might induce him to refund, uncoercively, the whole or
some part of the stolen property. Money was at this moment necessary to
existence, and she conceived herself justly entitled to that, of which her
father had been perfidiously despoiled.

But the law was formal and circuitous. Money itself was necessary to purchase
its assistance. Besides, it could not act with unseen virtue and instantaneous
celerity. The cooperation of advocates and officers was required. They must be
visited, and harangued, and importuned. Was she adequate to the task? Would the
energy of her mind supply the place of experience, and, with a sort of
miraculous efficacy, afford her the knowledge of official processes and dues?
As little, on this occasion, could be expected from her father, as from her. He
was infirm and blind. The spirit that animated his former days was flown. His
heart's blood was chilled by the rigours of his fortune. He had discarded his
indignation and his enmities, and, together with them, hope itself had perished
in his bosom. He waited in tranquil despair, for that stroke which would
deliver him from life, and all the woes that it inherits.

But these considerations were superfluous. It was enough that justice must be
bought, and that she had not the equivalent. Legal proceedings are encumbered
with delay, and her necessities were urgent. Succor, if withheld till the
morrow, would be useless. Hunger and cold would not be trifled with. What
resource was there left in this her uttermost distress? Must she yield, in
imitation of her father, to the cowardly suggestions of despair?

Craig might be rich. His coffers might be stuffed with thousands. All that he
had, according to the principles of social equity, was here is; yet he, to whom
nothing belonged, rioted in superfluity, while she, the rightful claimant, was
driven to the point of utmost need. The proper instrument of her restoration
was law, but its arm was powerless, for she had not the means of bribing it
into activity. But was law the only instrument?

Craig, perhaps, was accessible. Might she not, with propriety, demand an
interview, and lay before him the consequences of his baseness? He was not
divested of the last remains of humanity. It was impossible that he should not
relent at the picture of those distresses of which he was the author. Menaces
of legal prosecution she meant not to use, because she was unalterably resolved
against that remedy. She confided in the efficacy of her pleadings to awaken
his justice. This interview she was determined immediately to seek. She was
aware that by some accident her purpose might be frustrated. Access to his
person, might, for the present, be impossible, or might be denied. It was
proper therefore to write him a letter, which might be substituted in place of
an interview. It behoved her to be expeditious, for the light was failing, and
her strength was nearly exhausted by the hurry of her spirits. Her fingers,
likewise, were benumbed with the cold. She performed her task, under these
disadvantages, with much difficulty. This was the purport of her letter: Thomas
Craig,
AN hour ago I was in Second-Street, and saw you. I followed you till you
entered the Indian Queen-Tavern. Knowing where you are, I am now preparing to
demand an interview. I may be disappointed in this hope, and therefore write
you this.

I do not come to upbraid you, to call you to a legal, or any other account for
your actions. I presume not to weigh your merits. The God of equity be your
judge. May he be as merciful, in the hour of retribution, as I am disposed to
be.

It is only to inform you that my father is on the point of perishing with
want. You know who it was that reduced him to this condition. I persuade myself
I shall not appeal to your justice in vain. Learn of this justice to afford him
instant succor.

You know who it was that took you in, an houseless wanderer; protected and
fostered your youth, and shared with you his confidence and his fortune. It is
he who now, blind and indigent, is threatened, by an inexorable landlord, to be
thrust into the street; and who is, at this moment, without fire and without
bread.

He once did you some little service: now he looks to be compensated. All the
retribution he asks, is to be saved from perishing. Surely you will not spurn
at his claims. Thomas Craig has done nothing that shows him deaf to the cries
of distress. He would relieve a dog from such suffering.

Forget that you have known my father in any character but that of a supplicant
for bread. I promise you that, on this condition, I, also, will forget it. If
you are so far just, you have nothing to fear. Your property and reputation
shall both be safe. My father knows not of your being in this city. His
enmities are extinct, and if you comply with this request, he shall know you
only as a benefactor.

C. Dudley.




Having finished and folded this epistle, she once more returned to the tavern.
A waiter informed her that Craig had lately been in, and was now gone out to
spend the evening. Whither had he gone? she asked.

How was he to know where gentlemen eat their suppers? Did she take him for a
witch? What, in God's name, did she want with him at that hour? Could she not
wait, at least, till he had done his supper? He warranted her pretty face would
bring him home time enough.

Constantia was not disconcerted at this address. She knew that females are
subjected, through their own ignorance and cowardice, to a thousand
mortifications. She set its true value on base and low-minded treatment. She
disdained to notice this ribaldry, but turned away from the servant to meditate
on this disappointment.

A few moments after, a young fellow smartly dressed, entered the apartment. He
was immediately addressed by the other, who said to him, Well, Tom, where is
your master. There Is a lady wants him, pointing to Constantia, and laying a
grinning emphasis on the word lady. She turned to the new-comer: Friend, are
you Mr. Craig's servant?

The fellow seemed somewhat irritated at the bluntness of her interrogatory.
The appellation of servant sat uneasily, perhaps, on his pride, especially as
coming from a person of her appearance. He put on an air of familiar ridicule,
and surveyed her in silence. She resumed, in an authoritative tone, where does
Mr. Craig spend this evening? I have business with him of the highest
importance, and that will not bear delay. I must see him this night. -- He
seemed preparing to make some impertinent answer, but she anticipated it. You
had better answer me with decency. If you do not, your master shall hear of it.

This menace was not ineffectual. He began to perceive himself in the wrong,
and surlily muttered, Why, if you must know, he is gone to Mr. Ormond's. And
where lived Mr. Ormond? In Arch-Street; he mentioned the number on her
questioning him to that effect.

Being furnished with this information, she left them. Her project was not to
be thwarted by slight impediments, and she forthwith proceeded to Ormond's
dwelling. Who was this Ormond? she enquired of herself as she went along:
whence originated, and of what nature is the connection between him and Craig?
Are they united by union of designs and sympathy of character, or is this
stranger a new subject on whom Craig is practicing his arts? The last
supposition is not impossible. Is it not my duty to disconcert his
machinations, and save a new victim from his treachery? But I ought to be sure
before I act. He may now be honest, or tending to honesty, and my interference
may cast him backward, or impede his progress.

The house to which she had been directed was spacious and magnificent. She was
answered by a servant, whose uniform was extremely singular and fanciful, and
whose features and accents bespoke him to be English, with a politeness to
which she knew that the simplicity of her garb gave her no title. Craig, he
told her, was in the drawing room above stairs. He offered to carry him any
message, and ushered her, meanwhile, into a parlour. She was surprised at the
splendor of the room. The ceiling was painted with a gay design, the walls
stuccoed in relief, and the floor covered with a Persian carpet, with suitable
accompaniments of mirrors, tables and sofas.

Craig had been seated at the window above. His suspicions were ever on the
watch. He suddenly espied a figure and face on the opposite side of the street,
which an alteration of garb and the improvements of time, could not conceal
from his knowledge. He was startled at this incident, without knowing the
extent of its consequences. He saw her cross the way opposite this house, and
immediately after heard the bell ring. Still he was not aware that he himself
was the object of this visit, and waited, with some degree of impatience, for
the issue of this adventure.

Presently he was summoned to a person below, who wished to see him. The
servant shut the door, as soon as he had delivered the message, and retired.

Craig was thrown into considerable perplexity, It was seldom that he was
wanting in presence of mind and dexterity, but the unexpectedness of this
incident, made him pause. He had not forgotten the awful charms of his
summoner. He shrunk at the imagination of her rebukes. What purpose could be
answered by admitting her? It was, undoubtedly, safest to keep at a distance,
but what excuse should be given for refusing this interview? He was roused from
his reverie by a second and more urgent summons. The person could not
conveniently wait; her business was of the utmost moment, and would detain him
but a few minutes.

The anxiety which was thus expressed to see him, only augmented his solicitude
to remain invisible. He had papers before him which he had been employed in
examining. This suggested an excuse. Tell her that I am engaged just now, and
cannot possibly attend to her. Let her leave her business. If she has any
message you may bring it to me.

It was plain to Constance that Craig suspected the purpose of her visit. This
might have come to his knowledge by means impossible for her to divine. She now
perceived the wisdom of the precaution she had taken. She gave her letter to
the servant with this message: Tell him I shall wait here for an answer, and
continue to wait till I receive one.

Her mind was powerfully affected by the criticalness of her situation. She had
gone thus far, and saw the necessity of persisting to the end. The goal was
within view, and she formed a sort of desperate determination not to relinquish
the pursuit. She could not overlook the possibility that he might return no
answer, or return an unsatisfactory one. In either case, she was resolved to
remain in the house till driven from it by violence. What other resolution
could she form? To return to her desolate home, penniless, was an idea not to
be endured.

The letter was received, and perused. His conscience was touched, but
compunction was a guest, whose importunities he had acquired a peculiar
facility of eluding. Here was a liberal offer. A price was set upon his
impunity. A small sum, perhaps, would secure him from all future molestation.
-- She spoke, to be sure, in a damned high tone. 'Twas a pity that the old man
should be hungry before supper-time. Blind too! Harder still, when he cannot
find his way to his mouth. Rent unpaid, and a flinty-hearted landlord. A pretty
pickle to be sure. Instant payment she says. Will Not part without it. Must come
down with the stuff. I know this girl: When her heart is once set upon a thing,
all the devils will not turn her out of her way. She promises silence. I cannot
pretend to bargain with her. I Would as lief be ducked, as meet her face to face. I
know she will do what she promises. That was always her grand failing. How the
little witch talks! Just the dreamer she ever was! Justice! Compassion! Stupid
fool! One would think she would learned something of the world by this time.

He took out his pocket book. Among the notes it contained the lowest was fifty
dollars. This was too much, yet there was no alternative, something must be
given. She had detected his abode, and he knew it was in the power of the
Dudleys to ruin his reputation, and obstruct his present schemes. It was
probable, that if they should exert themselves, their cause would find
advocates and patrons. Still the gratuitous gift of fifty dollars, sat uneasily
upon his avarice. One idea occurred to reconcile him to the gift. There was a
method he conceived of procuring the repayment of it with interest. He enclosed
the note in a blank piece of paper and sent it to her.

She received the paper, and opened it with trembling fingers. When she saw
what were its contents, her feelings amounted to rapture. A sum like this was
affluence to her in her present condition. At least it would purchase present
comfort and security. Her heart glowed with exultation, and she seemed to tread
with the lightness of air, as she hied homeward. The langour of a long fast,
the numbness of the cold, were forgotten. It is worthy of remark how much of
human accommodation was comprised within this small compass; and how sudden was
this transition from the verge of destruction to the summit of security.

Her first business was to call upon her landlord and pay him his demand. On
her return she discharged the little debts she had been obliged contract, and
purchased what was immediately necessary. Wood she could borrow from her next
neighbor, and this she was willing to do, now that she had the prospect of
repaying it.

CHAPTER XI.
ON leaving Mr. Ormond's house, Constance was met by that gentleman. He saw her
as she came out, and was charmed with the simplicity of her appearance. On
entering, he interrogated the servant as to the business that brought her
^hither.

So, said he, as he entered the drawing room, where Craig was seated, you have
had a visitant. She came, it seems, on a pressing occasion, and would be put
off with nothing but a letter.

Craig had not expected this address, but it only precipitated the execution of
a design that he had formed. Being aware of this or similar accidents, he had
constructed and related on a previous occasion to Ormond, a story suitable to
his purpose.

Aye, said he, in a tone of affected compassion, it is a sad affair enough. I
am sorry it is not in my power to help the poor girl. She is wrong in imputing
her father's misfortunes to me, but I know the source of her mistake. Would to
heaven it was in my power to repair the wrongs they have suffered, not from me,
but from one whose relationship is a disgrace to me.

Perhaps, replied the other, you are willing to explain this affair.

Yes, I wish to explain it. I was afraid of some such accident as this. An
explanation is due to my character. I have already told you my story. I
mentioned to you a brother of mine. There is scarcely thirteen months
difference in our ages. There is a strong resemblance between him and me, in
our exterior, though I hope there is none at all in our minds. This brother was
a partner of a gentleman, the father of this girl, at New York. He was, a long
time, nothing better than an apprentice to Mr. Dudley, but he advanced so much
in the good graces of his master, that he finally took him into partnership. I
did not know till I arrived on the continent, the whole of his misconduct. It
appears that he embezzled the property of the house, and fled away with it, and
the consequence was, that his quondam master was ruined. I am often mistaken
for my brother, to my no small inconvenience: but all this I told you formerly.
See what a letter I just now received from this girl.

Craig was one of the most plausible of men. His character was a standing proof
of the vanity of physiognomy. There were few men who could refuse their
confidence to his open and ingenuous aspect. To this circumstance, perhaps, he
owed his ruin. His temptations to deceive were stronger than what are incident
to most other men. Deception was so easy a task, that the difficulty lay, not
in infusing false opinions respecting him, but in preventing them from being
spontaneously imbibed. He contracted habits of imposture imperceptibly. In
proportion as he deviated from the practice of truth, he discerned the
necessity of extending and systematizing his efforts, and of augmenting the
original benignity and attractiveness of his looks, by studied additions. The
further he proceeded, the more, difficult it was to return. Experience and
habit added daily to his speciousness, till at length, the world perhaps might
have been searched in vain for his competitor.

He had been introduced to Ormond under the most favorable auspices. He had
provided against a danger which he knew to be imminent, by relating his own
story as if it were his brother's. He had, however, made various additions to
it, serving to aggravate the heinousness of his guilt. This arose partly from
policy, and partly from the habit of lying, which was prompted by a fertile
invention, and rendered inveterate by incessant exercise. He interwove in his
tale, an intrigue between Miss Dudley and his brother. The former was seduced,
and this man had employed his skill in chirographical imitation, in composing
letters from Miss Dudley to his brother, which sufficiently attested her
dishonor. He and his brother, he related, to have met in Jamaica, where the
latter died, by which means his personal property and papers came into his
possession.

Ormond read the letter which his companion presented to him on this occasion.
The papers which Craig had formerly permitted him to inspect, had made him
familiar with her handwriting. The penmanship was, indeed, similar, yet this
was written in a spirit not quite congenial with that which had dictated her
letters to her lover. But he reflected that the emergency was extraordinary,
and that the new scenes through which she had passed, had, perhaps, enabled her
to retreave her virtue and enforce it. The picture which she drew of her
father's distresses, affected him and his companion very differently. He
pondered on it for some time, in silence; he then looked up, and with his usual
abruptness said, I suppose you gave her something?

No. I was extremely sorry that it was not in my power. I have nothing but a
little trifling silver about me. I have no more at home than will barely
suffice to pay my board here, and my expenses to Baltimore. Till I reach there
I cannot expect a supply. I was less uneasy I confess, on this account, because
I knew you to be equally willing and much more able to afford the relief she
asks.

This, Mr. Ormond had predetermined to do. He paused only to deliberate in what
manner it could, with most propriety, be done. He was always willing, when he
conferred benefits, to conceal the author. He was not displeased when gratitude
was misplaced, and readily allowed his instruments to act as if they were
principals. He questioned not the veracity of Craig, and was, therefore,
desirous to free him from the molestation that was threatened in the way which
had been prescribed. He put a note of one hundred dollars into his hand, and
enjoined him to send it to the Dudleys that evening, or early the next morning.
I am pleased, he added, with the style of this letter: It can be of no service
to you; leave it in my possession.

Craig would much rather have thrown it into the fire; but he knew the
character of his companion, and was afraid to make any objection to his
request. He promised to send, or carry the note, the next morning, before he
set out on his intended journey.

This journey was to Baltimore, and was undertaken so soon merely to oblige his
friend, who was desirous of remitting to Baltimore a considerable sum in
English guineas, and who had been for some time in search of one who might
execute this commission with fidelity. The offer of Craig had been joyfully
accepted, and next morning had been the time fixed for his departure, a period
the most opportune for Craig's designs, that could be imagined. -- To return to
Miss Dudley.

The sum that remained to her after the discharge of her debts, would quickly
be expended. It was no argument of wisdom to lose sight of the future in the
oblivion of present care. The time would inevitably come when new resources
would be necessary. Every hour brought nearer the period without facilitating
the discovery of new expedients. She related the recent adventure to her
father. He acquiesced in the propriety of her measures, but the succor that
she had thus obtained consoled him but little. He saw how speedily it would
again be required, and was hopeless of a like fortunate occurrence.

Some days had elapsed, and Constantia had been so fortunate as to procure some
employment. She was thus engaged in the evening when they were surprised by a
visit from their landlord. This was an occurrence that foreboded them no good.
He entered with abruptness and scarcely noticed the salutations that he
received. His bosom swelled with discontent, which seemed ready to be poured
out upon his two companions. To the enquiry as to the condition of his health
and that of his family, he surlily answered; Never mind how I am: None the
better for my tenants I think. Never was a man so much plagued as I have been;
what with one putting me off from time to time: What with another quarrelling
about terms, and denying his agreement, and another running away in my debt, I
expect nothing but to come to poverty, God help me, at last: but this was the
worst of all. I was never before treated so in all my life. I don't know what
or when I shall get to the end of my troubles. To be fobbed out of my rent and
twenty five dollars into the bargain! It is very strange treatment, I assure
you, Mr. Dudley.

What is it you mean? replied that gentleman. You have received your dues, and
--

Received my dues, indeed! High enough too! I have received none of my dues. I
have been imposed upon. I have been put to very great trouble and expect some
compensation. There is no knowing the character of one's tenants. There is
nothing but knavery in the world, one would think. I Am sure no man has suffered
more by bad tenants than I have. But this is the strangest treatment I ever met
with. Very strange indeed Dudley, and I must be paid without delay. To lose my
rent and twenty five dollars into the bargain, is too hard. I never met with
the equal of it, not I: Besides, I would not be put to all this trouble for
twice the sum.

What does all this mean, Mr. M'Crea? You seem inclined to scold, but I cannot
conceive why you came here for that purpose. This behavior is improper --

No, its very proper, and I want payment of my money. Fifty dollars you owe me.
Miss comes to me to pay me my rent as I thought. She brings me a fifty dollar
note; I changes it for her, for I thought to be sure, I was quite safe: but,
behold, when I sends it to the bank to get the money, they sends me back word
that it is forged, and calls on me, before a magistrate to tell them where I got
it from. I Am sure I never was so flustered in my life. I would not have such a
thing for ten times the sum.

He proceeded to descant on his loss without any interruption from his
auditors, whom this intelligence had struck dumb. Mr. Dudley instantly saw the
origin, and full extent of this misfortune. He was, nevertheless, calm, and
indulged in no invectives against Craig. It is all of a piece, said he: Our
ruin is inevitable. Well, then, let it come.

After M'Crea had railed himself weary, he flung out of the house, warning them
that, next morning he should destrain for his rent, and, at the same time, sue
them for the money that Constance had received in exchange for her note.

Miss Dudley was unable to pursue her task. She laid down her needle, and fixed
her eyes upon her father. They had been engaged in earnest discourse when their
landlord entered. Now there was a pause of profound silence, till the
affectionate Lucy, who sufficiently comprehended this scene, gave vent to her
affliction in sobs. Her mistress turned to her:

Cheer up, my Lucy. We shall do well enough my girl. Our state is bad enough,
without doubt, but despair will make it worse.

The anxiety that occupied her mind related less to herself, than to her
father. He, indeed, in the present instance, was exposed to prosecution. It was
he who was answerable for the debt, and whose person would be thrown into
durance by the suit that was menaced. The horrors of a prison had not hitherto
been experienced, or anticipated. The worst evil that she had imagined was
inexpressibly inferior to this. The idea had in it something of terrific and
loathsome. The mere supposition of its being possible was not to be endured. If
all other expedients should fail, she thought of nothing less than desperate
resistance. No. It was better to die than to go to prison.

For a time, she was deserted of her admirable equanimity. This no doubt, was
the result of surprise. She had not yet obtained the calmness necessary to
deliberation. During this gloomy interval, she would, perhaps, have adopted any
scheme, however dismal and atrocious, which her father's despair might suggest.
She would not refuse to terminate her own and her father's unfortunate
existence, by poison or the chord.

This confusion of mind could not exist long. It gradually gave place to
cheerful prospects. The evil perhaps was not without its timely remedy. The
person whom she had set out to visit, when her course was diverted by Craig,
she once more resolved to apply to; to lay before him, without reserve, her
father's situation, to entreat pecuniary succor, and to offer herself as a
servant in his family, or in that of any of his friends who stood in need of
one. This resolution, in a slight degree, consoled her; but her mind had been
too thoroughly disturbed to allow her any sleep during that night.

She equipped herself betimes, and proceeded with a doubting heart to the house
of Mr. Melbourne. She was informed that he had risen, but was never to be seen
at so early an hour. At nine o'clock he would be disengaged, and she would be
admitted. In the present state of her affairs, this delay was peculiarly
unwelcome. At breakfast, her suspense and anxieties would not allow her to eat
a morsal, and when the hour approached, she prepared herself for a new attempt.

As she went out, she met at the door a person whom she recognized, and whose
office she knew to be that of a constable. Constantia had exercised, in her
present narrow sphere, that beneficence which she had formerly exerted in a
larger. There was nothing, consistent with her slender means, that she did not
willingly perform for the service of others. She had not been sparing of
consolation and personal aid in many cases of personal distress that had
occurred in her neighborhood. Hence, as far as she was known, she was
reverenced.

The wife of their present visitant had experienced her succor and sympathy,
on occasion of the death of a favorite child. The man, notwithstanding his
office, was not of a rugged or ungrateful temper. The task that was now imposed
upon him, he undertook with extreme reluctance. He was somewhat reconciled to
it by the reflection that another might not perform it with that gentleness and
lenity which he found in himself a disposition to exercise on all occasions,
but particularly on the present.

She easily guessed at his business, and having greeted him with the utmost
friendliness, returned with him into the house. She endeavored to ^emove the
embarrassment that hung about him, but in vain. Having levied what the law very
properly calls a distress, he proceeded, after much hesitation, to inform
Dudley that he was charged with a message from a Magistrate, summoning him to
come forthwith, and account for having a forged bank-note in his possession.

M'Crea had given no intimation of this. The painful surprise that it produced,
soon yielded to a just view of this affair. Temporary inconvenience and
vexation was all that could be dreaded from it. Mr. Dudley hated to be seen or
known. He usually walked out in the dusk of evening, but limited his
perambulations to a short space: At all other times, he was obstinately
recluse. He was easily persuaded by his daughter to allow her to perform this
unwelcome office in his stead. He had not received, nor even seen the note. He
would have willingly spared her the mortification of a judicial examination,
but he knew that this was unavoidable. Should he comply with this summons
himself, his daughter's presence would be equally necessary.

Influenced by these considerations, he was willing that his daughter should
accompany the messenger, who was content that they should consult their mutual
convenience in this respect. This interview was to her, not without its
terrors, but she cherished the hope that it might ultimately conduce to good.
She did not forese^ the means by which this would be effected, bu^ her heart
was lightened by a secret and inexplicable faith in the propitiousness of some
ever^ that was yet to occur. This faith was powerfully enforced when she
reached the magistrate's doo^ and found that he was no other than Melbourne,
whose succor she intended to solicit. She was speedily ushered, not into his
office, but into ^ private apartment, where he received her alone*

He had been favorably prepossessed with regard to her character by the report
of the officer, who, on being charged with the message, had accounted for the
regret which he manifested, by dwelling on the merits of Miss Dudley. He
behaved with grave civility, requested her to be seated, and accurately
scrutinized her appearance. She found herself not decived in her preconceptions
of this gentleman's character, and drew a favorable omen as to the event of
this interview, by what had already taken place. He viewed her in silence for
some time, and then, in a conciliating tone, said:

It seems to me, madam, as if I had seen you before. Your face, indeed, is of
that kind which, when once seen, is not easily forgotten. I know it is a long
time since, but I cannot tell when or where. If you will not deem me
impertinent, I will venture to ask you to assist my conjectures. Your name as I
am informed, is Acworth -- I ought to have mentioned that Mr. Dudley on his
removal from New York, among other expedients to obliterate the memory of his
former condition, and conceal his poverty from the world, had made this change
in his name.

That, indeed, said the lady, is the name, which my father, at present, bears.
His real name is Dudley. His abode was formerly in Queen Street, New York. Your
conjecture, Sir, is not erroneous. This is not the first time we have seen each
other. I well recollect your having been at my father's house in the days of
^is prosperity.

Is it possible? exclaimed Mr. Melbourne, ^tarting from his seat in the first
impulse of his as^onishment: Are you the daughter of my friend Dudley, by whom
I have so often been hospitaly entertained. I have heard of his misfortunes,
but knew not that he was alive, or in what part of the world he resided.

You are summoned on a very disagreeable affair, but I doubt not you will
easily exculpate your father. I am told that he is blind, and that his
situation is by no means as comfortable as might be wished. I am grieved that
he did not confide in the friendship of those that knew him. What could prompt
him to conceal himself?

My father has a proud spirit. It is not yet broken by adversity. He disdains
to beg, but I must now assume that office for his sake. I came hither this
morning to lay before you his situation, and to entreat your assistance to save
him from a prison. He cannot pay for the poor tenement he occupies, and our few
goods are already under distress. He has, likewise, contracted a debt. He is, I
suppose, already sued on this account, and must go to gaol unless saved by the
interposition of some friend.

It is true, said Melbourne, I yesterday granted a warrant against him at the
suit of Malcolm M'Crea. Little did I think that the defendant was Stephen
Dudley; but you may dismiss all apprehensions on that score. That affair shall
be settled to your father's satisfaction: Meanwhile, we will, if you please,
dispatch this unpleasant business respecting a counterfeit note, received in
payment from you by this M'Cea.

Miss Dudley satisfactorily explained that affair. She stated the relation in
which Craig had formerly stood to her father, and the acts of which he had been
guilty. She slightly touched on the distresses which the family had undergone
during their abode in this city, and the means by which she had been able to
preserve her father from want. She mentioned the circumstances which compelled
her to seek his charity as the last resource, and the casual encounter with
Craig, by which she was for the present diverted from that design. She laid
before him a copy of the letter she had written, and explained the result in
the gift of the note which now appeared to be a counterfeit. She concluded with
stating her present views, and soliciting him to receive her into his family,
in quality of servant, or use his interest with some of his friends to procure
a provision of this kind. This tale was calculated deeply to affect a man of
Mr. Melbourne's humanity.

No, said he, I cannot listen to such a request. My inclination is bounded by
my means. These will not allow me to place you in an independent situation; but
I will do what I can. With your leave, I will introduce you to my wife, in your
true character. Her good sense will teach her to set a just value on your
friendship. There is no disgrace in earning your subsistence by your own
industry. She and her friends will furnish you with plenty of materials, but if
there ever be a deficiency, look to me for a supply.

Constantia's heart overflowed at this declaration. Her silence was more
eloquent than any words could have been. She declined an imme^iate introduction
to his wife, and withdrew, but not till her new friend had forced her to ac^ept
some money.

Place it to account, said he. It is merely pay^ng you before hand, and
discharging a debt at ^he time when it happens to be most useful to the
^reditor.

To what entire and incredible reverses is the ^nor of human life subject. A
short minute ^all effect a transition from a state utterly des^ute of hope, to
a condition where all is serene and abundant. The path, which we employ all our
exertions to shun, is often found, upon trial, to be the true road to
prosperity.

Constantia retired from this interview with an heart bounding with exultation.
She related to her father all that had happened. He was pleased on her account,
but the detection of his poverty by Melbourne was the parent of new
mortification. His only remaining hope relative to himself, was that he should
die in his obscurity, whereas, it was probable that his old acquaintance would
trace him to his covert. This prognostic filled him with the deepest
inquietude, and all the reasonings of his daughter were insufficient to appease
him.

Melbourne made his appearance in the afternoon. He was introduced, by
Constantia, to he^ father. Mr. Dudley's figure was emaciated, an^ his features
corroded by his ceaseless melancholy* His blindness produced in them a woeful
and wildering expression. His dress betokened hi^ penury, and was in unison
with the meanness (...) his habitation and furniture. The visitant wa^ struck
with the melancholy contrast, which these appearances exhibited, to the
joyousness an^ splendor that he had formerly witnessed.

Mr. Dudley received the salutations of h^ guest with an air of embarrassment
and dejection* He resigned to his daughter the task of sustai^ing the
conversation, and excused himself from complying with the urgent invitations of
Me^bourne, while at the same time, he studious forbore all expressions tending
to encourage a^ kind of intercourse between them.

The guest came with a message from his wi^^ who entreated Miss Dudley's
company to tea wi^ her that evening, adding that she should be e^tirely alone.
It was impossible to refuse co^^ance with this request. She cheerfully
assented, and, in the evening, was introduced to Mrs. Melbourne, by her husband.

Constantia found in this lady nothing that called for reverence or admiration,
though she could not deny her some portion of esteem. The impression which her
own appearance and conversation made upon her entertainer, was much more
powerful and favorable. A consciousness of her own worth, and disdain of the
malevolence of fortune, perpetually shone forth in her behavior. It was
modelled by a sort of mean between presumption on the one hand, and humility on
the other. She claimed no more than what was justly due to her, but she claimed
no less. She did not soothe our vanity nor fascinate our pity by diffident
reserves and flutterings. Neither did she disgust by arrogant negligence, and
uncircumspect loquacity.

At parting, she received commissions in the way of her profession, which
supplied her with abundant and profitable employment. She abridged her visit on
her father's account, and parted from her new friend just early enough to avoid
meeting with Ormond, who entered the house a few minutes after she had left it.

What pity, said Melbourne to him, you did not come a little sooner. You
pretend to be a judge of beauty. I should like to have heard your opinion of a
face that has just left us.

Describe it, said the other.

That is beyond my capacity. Complexion, and hair, and eyebrows may be painted,
but these are of no great value in the present case. It is in the putting them
together, that nature has here shown her skill, and not in the structure of
each of the parts, individually considered. Perhaps you may at some time meet
each other here. If a lofty fellow like you, now, would mix a little common
sense with his science, this girl might hope for an husband, and her father for
a natural protector.

Are they in search of one or the other?

I cannot say they are. Nay, I imagine they would bear any imputation with more
patience than that, but certain I am, they stand in need of them. How much
would it be to the honor of a man like you rioting in wealth, to divide it with
one, lovely and accomplished as this girl is, and struggling with indigence.

Melbourne then related the adventure of the morning. It was easy for Ormond to
perceive that this was the same person of whom he already had some knowledge --
but there were some particulars in the narrative that excited surprise. A note
had been received from Craig, at the first visit in the evening, and this note
was for no more than fifty dollars. This did not exactly tally with the
information received from Craig. But this note was forged. Might not this girl
mix a little imposture with her truth? Who knows her temptations to hypocrisy?
It might have been a present from another quarter, and accompanied with no very
honorable conditions. Exquisite wretch! Those whom honesty will not let live,
must be knaves. Such is the alternative offered by the wisdom of society.

He listened to the tale with apparent indifference. He speedily shifted the
conversation to new topics, and put an end to his visit sooner than ordinary.

CHAPTER XII.
I KNOW no task more arduous than a just delineation of the character of
Ormond. To scrutinize, and ascertain our own principles are abundantly
difficult. To exhibit these principles to the world with absolute sincerity,
can scarcely be expected. We are prompted to conceal and to feign by a thousand
motives; but truly to poartray the motives, and relate the actions of another,
appears utterly impossible. The attempt, however, if made with fidelity and
diligence, is not without its use.

To comprehend the whole truth, with regard to the character and conduct of
another, may be denied to any human being, but different observers will have,
in their pictures, a greater or less portion of this truth. No representation
will be wholly false, and some though not perfectly, may yet be considerably
exempt from error.

Ormond was, of all mankind, the being most difficult and most deserving to be
studied. A fortunate concurrence of incidents has unveiled his actions to me
with more distinctness than to any other. My knowledge is far from being
absolute, but I am conscious of a kind of duty, first to my friend, and
secondly to mankind, to impart the knowledge I possess.

I shall omit to mention the means by which I became acquainted with his
character, nor shall I enter, at this time, into every part of it. His
political projects are likely to possess an extensive influence on the future
condition of this western world. I do not conceive myself authorized to
communicate a knowledge of his schemes, which I gained, in some sort,
surreptitiously, or at least, by means of which he was not apprized. I shall
merely explain the maxims by which he was accustomed to regulate his private
deportment.

No one could entertain loftier conceptions of human capacity than Ormond, but
he carefully distinguished between men, in the abstract, and men as they are.
The former were beings to be impelled, by the breath of accident, in a right or
a wrong road, but whatever direction they should receive, it was the property
of their nature to persist in it. Now this impulse had been given. No single
being could rectify the error. It was the business of the wise man to form a
just estimate of things, but not to attempt, by individual efforts, so
chimerical an enterprise as that of promoting the happiness of mankind. Their
condition was out of the reach of a member of a corrupt society to control. A
mortal poison per^aded the whole system by means of which every thing received
was converted into bane and purulence. Efforts designed to ameliorate the
condition of an individual, were sure of answering a contrary purpose. The
principles of the social machine must be rectified, before men can be
beneficially active. Our motives may be neutral or beneficent, but our actions
tend merely to the production of evil.

The idea of total forbearance was not less delusive. Man could not be
otherwise than an cause of perpetual operation and efficacy. He was part of a
machine, and as such had not power to withhold his agency. Contiguousness to
other parts, that is, to other men, was all that was necessary to render him a
powerful concurrent. What then was the conduct incumbent on him* Whether he
went forward, or stood still, whether his motives were malignant, or kind, or
indifferent, the mass of evil was equally and necessarily augmented. It did not
follow from these preliminaries that virtue and duty were terms without a
meaning, but they require us to promote our own happiness and not the happiness
of others. Not because the former end is intrinsically preferable, not because
the happiness of others is unworthy of primary consideration, but because it is
not to be attained. Our power in the present state of things is subjected to
certain limits. A man may reasonably hope to accomplish his end, when he
proposes nothing but his own good: Any other point is inaccessible.

He must not part with benevolent desire: This is a constituent of happiness.
He sees the value of general and particular felicity; he sometimes paints it to
his fancy, but if this be rarely done, it is in consequence of virtuous
sensibility, which is afflicted on observing that his pictures are reversed in
the real state of mankind. A wise man will relinquish the pursuit of general
benefit, but not the desire of that benefit, or the perception of that in which
this benefit consists, because these are among the ingredients of virtue and
the sources of his happiness.

Principles, in the looser sense of that term, have little influence on
practice. Ormond was, for the most part, governed, like others, by the
influences of education and present circumstances. It required a vigilant
discernment to distinguish whether the stream of his actions flowed from one or
the other. His income was large, and he managed it nearly on the same
principles as other men. He thought himself entitled to all the splendor and
ease which it would purchase, but his taste was elaborate and correct. He
gratified his love of the beautiful, because the sensations it afforded were
pleasing, but made no sacrifices to the love of distinction. He gave no
expensive entertainments for the sake of exciting the admiration of stupid
gazers, or the flattery or envy of those who shared them. Pompous equipage and
retinue were modes of appropriating the esteem of mankind which he held in
profound contempt. The garb of his attendants was fashioned after the model
suggested by his imagination, and not in compliance with the dictates of custom.

He treated with systematic negligence, the ettiquette that regulates the
intercourse of persons of a certain class. He, every where, acted, in this
respect, as if he were alone, or among familiar associates. The very
appellations of Sir, and Madam, and Mister, were, in his apprehension, servile
and ridiculous, and as custom or law had annexed no penalty to the neglect of
these, he conformed to his own opinions. It was easier for him to reduce his
notions of equality to practice than for most others. To level himself with
others was an act of condescension and not of arrogance. It was requisite to
descend rather than to rise; a task the most easy, if we regard the obstacles
flowing from the prejudice of mankind, but far most difficult, if the motives
of the agent be considered.

That in which he chiefly placed his boast, was his sincerity. To this he
refused no sacrifice. In consequence of this, his deportment was disgusting to
weak minds, by a certain air of ferocity and haughty negligence. He was without
the attractions of candor, because he regarded not the happiness of others,
but in subservience to his sincerity. Hence it was natural to suppose that the
character of this man was easily understood. He affected to conceal nothing. No
one appeared more exempt from the instigations of vanity. He set light by the
good opinions of others, had no compassion for their prejudices, and hazarded
assertions in their presence which he knew would be, in the highest degree,
shocking to their previous notions. They might take it, he would say, as they
list. Such were his conceptions, and the last thing he would give up was the
use of his tongue. It was his way to give utterance to the suggestions of his
understanding. If they were disadvantageous to him in the opinions of others,
it was well. He did not wish to be regarded in any light, but the true one. He
was contented to be rated by the world, at his just value. If they esteemed him
for qualities he did not possess, was he wrong in rectifying their mistake: But
in reality, if they valued him for that to which be had no claim, and which he
himself considered as contemptible, he must naturally desire to show them their
error, and forfeit that praise which, in his own opinion, was a badge of infamy.

In listening to his discourse, no one^s claim to sincerity appeared less
questionable. A somewhat different conclusion would be suggested by a survey of
his actions. In early youth he discovered in himself a remarkable facility in
imitating the voice and gestures of others. His memory was eminently retentive,
and these qualities would have rendered his career, in the theatrical
profession, illustrious, had not his condition raised him above it. His talents
were occasionally exerted for the entertainment of convivial parties, and
private circles, but he gradually withdrew from such scenes, as he advanced in
age, and devoted his abilities to higher purposes.

His aversion to duplicity had flowed from experience of its evils. He had
frequently been made its victim; In consequence of this his temper had become
suspicious, and he was apt to impute deceit on occasions when others, of no
inconsiderable sagacity, were abundantly disposed to confidence. One
transaction had occurred in his life, in which the consequences of being misled
by false appearances were of the utmost moment to his honor and safety. The
usual mode of solving his doubts, he deemed insufficient, and the eagerness of
his curiosity tempted him, for the first time, to employ, for this end, his
talents at imitation. He therefore assumed a borrowed character and guise, and
performed his part with so much skill as fully to accomplish his design. He
whose mask, would have secured him from all other attempts, was thus taken
through an avenue which his caution had overlooked, and the hypocrisy of his
pretensions unquestionably ascertained.

Perhaps, in a comprehensive view, the success of this expedient was
unfortunate. It served to recommend this method of encountering deceit, and
informed him of the extent of those powers which are so liable to be abused. A
subtlety much inferior to Ormond's would suffice to recommend this mode of
action. It was defensible on no other principle than necessity. The treachery
of mankind compelled him to resort to it. I^ they should deal in a manner as
upright and explicit as himself, it would be superfluous. But since they were
in the perpetual use of stratagems and artifices, it was allowable, he thought,
to wield the same arms.

It was easy to perceive, however, that this practice was recommended to him by
other considerations. Ho was delighted with the power it conferred. It enabled
him to gain access, as if by supernatural means, to the privacy of others, and
baffle their profoundest contrivances to hide themselves from his view. It
flattered him with the possession of something like Omniscience. It was besides
an art, in which, as in others, every accession of skill, was a source of new
gratification. Compared with this the performance of the actor is the sport of
children. This profession he was accustomed to treat with merciless ridicule,
and no doubt, some of his contempt arose from a secret comparison, between the
theatrical species of imitation and his own. He blended in his own person the
functions of poet and actor, and his dramas were not fictitious but real. The
end that he proposed was not the amusement of a playhouse mob. His were scenes
in which hope and fear exercised a genuine influence, and in which was
maintained that resemblance to truth, so audaciously and grossly violated on
the stage.

It is obvious how many singular conjunctures must have grown out of this
propensity. A mind of uncommon energy like Ormond's, which had occupied a wide
sphere of action, and which could not fail of confederating its efforts with
those of minds like itself, must have given birth to innumerable incidents, not
unworthy to be exhibited by the most eloquent historian. It is not my business
to (...) ^te any of these. The fate of Miss Dudley is i^^^mately connected with
his. What influence he obtained over her destiny, in consequence of this
dexterity, will appear in the sequel.

It arose from these circumstances, that no one was more impenetrable than
Ormond, though no one's real character seemed more easily discerned. The
projects that occupied his attention were diffused over an ample space; and his
instruments and coadjutors were culled from a field, whose bounds were those of
the civilized world. To the vulgar eye, therefore, he appeared a man of
speculation and seclusion, and was equally inscrutible in his real and assumed
characters. In his real, his intents were too lofty and comprehensive, as well
as too assiduously shrouded from profane inspection, for them to scan. In the
latter, appearances were merely calculated to mislead and not to enlighten.

In his youth he had been guilty of the usual excesses incident to his age and
character. These had disappeared and yielded place to a more regular and
circumspect system of action. In the choice of his pleasures he still exposed
himself to the censure of the world. Yet there was more o^ grossness and
licentiousness in the expression o^ his tenets, than in the tenets themselves.
So fa^ as temperance regards the maintenance of health no man adhered to its
precepts with more fidelity, but he esteemed some species of connection with
the other sex as venial, which mankind in general are vehement in condemning.

In his intercourse with women, he deemed him self superior to the allurements
of what is called love. His inferences were drawn from a consideration of the
physical propensities of an human being. In his scale of enjoyments the
gratifications which belonged to ^^ese, were placed a the bottom. Yet he did
not entirely disdai^ them, and when they could be purchased without the
sacrifice of superior advantages, they were sufficiently acceptable.

His mistake on this head was the result of hi^ ignorance. He had not hitherto
met with a female worthy of his confidence. Their view were limited and
superficial, or their understandings were betrayed by the tenderness of their
hearts. He found in them no intellectual energy, no superiority to what he
accounted vulgar prejudice, and no affinity with the sentiments which he
cherished with most devotion. Their presence had been capable of exciting no
emotion which he did not quickly discover to be vague and sensual; and the
uniformity of his experience at length instilled into him a belief, that the
intellectual constitution of females was essentially defective. He denied the
reality of that passion which claimed a similitude or sympathy of minds as one
of its ingredients.

CHAPTER XIII.
HE resided in New York some time before he ^ook up his abode in Philadelphia.
He had some ^ecuniary concerns with a merchant of that ^lace. He occasionally
frequented his house, ^nding, in the society which it afforded him, ^ope for
amusing speculation, and opportunities (...) gaining a species of knowledge of
which at ^at time he stood in need. There was one ^^ughter of the family who of
course constituted member of the domestic circle.

Helena Cleves was endowed with every femine and fascinating quality. Her
features were ^odified by the most transient sentiments and ^ere the seat of a
softness at all times blushful ^d bewitching. All those graces of symmetry,
^oothness and luster, which assemble in the ^agination of the painter when he
calls from the bosom of her natal deep, the Paphian divinity, blended their
perfections in the shape, complexion and hair of this lady. Her voice was
naturally thrilling and melodious, and her utterance clear and distinct. A
musical education had added to all these advantages the improvements of art,
and no one could swim in the dance with such airy and transporting elegance.

It is obvious to enquire whether her mental, were, in any degree, on a level
with her exterior accomplishments. Should you listen to her talk, you would be
liable to be deceived in this respect. Her utterance was so just, her phrases
so happy, and her language so copious and correct, that the hearer was apt to
be impressed with an ardent veneration of her abilities, but the truth is, she
was calculated to excite emotions more voluptuous than dignified. Her presence
produced a trance of the senses rather than an illumination of the soul. It was
a topic of wonder how she should have so carefully separated the husk from the
kernel, and be so absolute a mistress of the vehicle of knowledge, with so
slender means of supplying it: Yet it is difficult to judge but from
comparison. To say that Helena Cleves was silly or ignorant would be hatefully
unjust. Her understanding bore no disadvantageous comparison with that of the
majority of he^ sex, but when placed in competition with that (...) some
eminent females or of Ormond, it was exposed to the risque of contempt.

This lady and Ormond were exposed to mutual examination. The latter was not
unaffected by the radiance that environed this girl, but her true character was
easily discovered, and he was accustomed to regard her merely as an object
charming to the senses. His attention to her was dictated by this principle.
When she sung or talked, it was not unworthy of the strongest mind to be
captivated with her music and her elocution: But these were the limits which he
set to his gratifications. That sensations of a different kind, never ruffled
his tranquillity must not be supposed, but he too accurately estimated their
consequences to permit himself to indulge them.

Unhappily the lady did not exercise equal fortitude. During a certain interval
Ormond's visits were frequent, and she insensibly contracted for him somewhat
more than reverence. The tenor of his discourse was little adapted to cherish
her hopes. In the declaration of his opinions he was never withheld by scruples
of decorum, or a selfish regard to his own interest. His matrimonial tenets
were harsh and repulsive. A woman of keener penetration would have predicted
from them, the disappointment of her wishes, but Helena's mind was uninnured to
the discussion of logical points and the tracing of remote consequences. His
presence inspired feelings which would not permit her to bestow an impartial
attention on his arguments. It is not enough to say that his reasonings failed
to convince her: The combined influence of passion and an unenlightened
understanding hindered her from fully comprehending them. All she gathered was
a vague conception of something magnificent and vast in his character.

Helena was destined to experience the vicissitudes of fortune. Her father died
suddenly and left her without provision. She was compelled to accept the
invitations of a kinswoman, and live, in some sort, a life of dependence. She
was not qualified to sustain this reverse of fortune, in a graceful manner. She
could not bear the diminution of her customary indulgences, and to these
privations were added the inquietudes of a passion which now began to look with
an aspect of hopelessness.

These events happened in the absence of Ormond. On his return he made himself
acquainted with them. He saw the extent of this misfortune to a woman of
Helena's character, but knew not in what manner it might be effectually
obviated. He esteemed it incumbent on him to pay her a visit in her new abode.
This token at leas^ of respect or remembrance his duty appeared to prescribe.

This visit was unexpected by the lady. Surprise is the enemy of concealment.
She was oppressed with a sense of her desolate situation She was sitting in her
own apartment in a museful posture. Her fancy was occupied with the image of
Ormond, and her tears were flowing a^ the thought of their eternal separation,
when h^ entered softly and unperceived by her. A tap^ upon the shoulder was the
first signal of his presence. So critical an interview could not fail o^
unveiling the true state of the lady's heart. Ormond's suspicions were excited,
and these suspicions speedily led to an explanation.

Ormond retired to ruminate on this discovery. I have already mentioned his
sentiments respecting love. His feelings relative to Helena did not contradict
his principles, yet the image which had formerly been exquisite in loveliness,
had now suddenly gained unspeakable attractions* This discovery had set the
question in a new light. It was of sufficient importance to make him
deliberate. He reasoned somewhat in the following manner.

Marriage is absurd. This flows from the general and incurable imperfection of
the female character. No woman can possess that worth which would induce me to
enter into this contract, and bind myself without power of revoking the decree,
to her society. This opinion may possibly be erroneous, but it is undoubtedly
true with respect to Helena, and the uncertainty of the position in general,
will increase the necessity of caution in the present case. That woman may
exist whom I should not fear to espouse. This is not her. Some accident may
cause our meeting. Shall I then disable myself, by an irrevocable obligation,
from profiting by so auspicious an occurrence?

This girl's society was to be enjoyed in one of two ways. Should he consult
his inclination there was little room for doubt. He had never met with one more
highly qualified for that species of intercourse which he esteemed rational. No
man more abhored the votaries of licentiousness. Nothing was more detestable to
him than a mercenary alliance. Personal fidelity and the existence of that
passion, of which he had, in the present case, the good fortune to be the
object, were indispensible in his scheme. The union was indebted for its value
on the voluntariness with which it was formed, and the entire acquiescence of
the judgment of both parties in its rectitude. Dissimulation and artifice were
wholly foreign to the success of his project. If the lady thought proper to
assent to his proposal, it was well. She did so because assent was more
eligible than refusal.

She would, no doubt, prefer marriage. She would deem it more conducive to
happiness. This was an error. This was an opinion, his reasons for which he was
at liberty to state to her; at least it was justifiable in refusing to subject
himself to loathsome and impracticable obligations. Certain inconveniences
attended women who set aside, on these occasions, the sanction of law, but
these were imaginary. They owed their force to the errors of the sufferer. To
annihilate them, it was only necessary to reason justly, but allowing these
inconveniences their full weight and an indistructable existance, it was but a
choice of evils. Were they worse in this lady's apprehension, than an eternal
and hopeless separation? Perhaps they were. If so, she would make her election
accordingly. He did nothing but lay the conditions before her. If his scheme
should obtain the concurrence of her unbiassed judgment he should rejoice. If
not, her conduct should be uninfluenced by him. Whatever way she should decide,
he would assist her in adhering to her decision, but would, meanwhile, furnish
her with the materials of a right decision.

This determination was singular. Many will regard it as incredible. No man, it
will be thought can put this deception on himself, and imagine that there was
genuine beneficence in a scheme like this. Would the lady more consult her
happiness by adopting than by rejecting it? There can be but one answer. It
cannot be supposed that Ormond, in stating this proposal, acted with all the
impartiality that he pretended; that he did not employ falacious exaggerations
and ambiguous expedients; that he did not seize every opportunity of triumphing
over her weakness, and building his success rather on the illusions of her
heart than the convictions of her understanding. His conclusions were specious
but delusive, and were not uninfluenced by improper byasses; but of this he
himself was scarcely conscious, and it must be, at least, admitted that he
acted with scrupulous sincerity.

An uncommon degree of skill was required to introduce this topic so as to
avoid the imputation of an insult. This scheme was little in unison with all
her preconceived notions. No doubt, the irksomeness of her present situation,
the allurements of luxury and ease, which Ormond had to bestow, and the revival
of her ancient independance and security, had some share in dictating her
assent.

Her concurrence was by no means cordial and unhesitating. Remorse and the
sense of dishonor pursued her to her retreat, though chosen with a view of
shunning their intrusions, and it was only when the reasonings and
blandishments of her lover were exhibited, that she was lulled into temporary
tranquillity.

She removed to Philadelphia. Here she enjoyed all the consolations of
opulence. She was mistress of a small but elegant mansion. She possessed all
the means of solitary amusement, and frequently enjoyed the company of Ormond.
These however were insufficient to render her happy. Certain reflections might,
for a time, be repressed or divested of their sting, but they insinuated
themselves at every interval, and imparted to her mind, a hue of dejection from
which she could not entirely relieve herself.

She endeavored to acquire a relish for the pursuits of literature, by which
her lonely hours might be cheered; but of this, even in the blith^omeness and
serenity of her former days, she was ^ncapable. Much more so now when she was
the prey of perpetual inquietude. Ormond perceived this change, not without
uneasiness. All his efforts to reconcile her to her present situation were
fruitless. They produced a momentary effect upon her. The softness of her
temper and her attachment to him, would, at his bidding, restore her to
vivacity and ease, but the illumination seldom endured longer than his
presence* and the novelty of some amusement which he had furnished her.

At his next visit, perhaps, he would find that a new task awaited him. She
indulged herself it no recriminations or invectives. She could no^ complain
that her lover had deceived her. She had voluntarily and deliberately accepted
the conditions prescribed. She regarded her own disposition to repine as a
species of injustice. She laid no claim to an increase of tenderness. She
hinted not a wish for a change of situation: ye she was unhappy. Tears stole
into her eyes, and her thoughts wandered into gloomy reverie, at moments when
least aware of their reproach, and least willing to indulge them.

Was a change to be desired? Yes; provided that change was equally agreeable to
Ormond* and should be seriously proposed by him, of this she had no hope. As
long as his accents rung in her ears, she even doubted whether it were to be
wished. At any rate, it was impossible to gain his approbation to it. Her
destiny was fixed. It was better than the cessation of all intercourse, yet her
heart was a stranger to all permanent tranquillity.

Her manners were artless and ingenuous. In company with Ormond her heart was
perfectly unveiled. He was her divinity to whom every sentiment was visible,
and to whom she spontaneously uttered what she thought, because the employment
was pleasing; because he listened with apparent satisfaction; and because, in
fine, it was the same thing to speak and to think in his presence. There was no
inducement to conceal from him the most evanescent and fugitive ideas.

Ormond was not an inattentive or indifferent spectator of those appearances.
His friend was unhappy. She shrunk aghast from her own reproaches and the
contumelies of the world. This morbid sensibility he had endeavored to cure,
but hitherto in vain. What was the amount of her unhappiness? Her spirits had
formerly been gay, but her gaiety was capable of yielding place to
soul-ravishing and solemn tenderness. Her sedateness was, at those times, the
offspring not of reflection but of passion. There still remained much of her
former self. He was seldom permitted to witness more than the traces of sorrow.
In answer to his enquiries, she, for the most part, described sensations that
were gone, and which she flattered himself and him would never return; but this
hope was always doomed to disappointment. Solitude infalibly conjured up the
ghost which had been laid, and it was plain that argument was no adequate
remedy for this disease.

How far would time alleviate its evils? When the novelty of her condition
should disappear, would she not regard it with other eyes? By being familiar
with contempt, it will lose its ^ting; but is that to be wished? Must not the
character be thoroughly depraved, before the ^corn of our neighbors shall
become indifferent? ^ndifference, flowing from a sense of justice, and a
persuasion that our treatment is unmerited, is characteristic of the noblest
minds, but indifference to obloquy because we are habituated to it, ^s a token
of peculiar baseness. This therefore was a remedy to be ardently deprecated.

He had egregiously over-rated the influence ^f truth and his own influence. He
had hoped that his victory was permanent. In order to the ^^ccess of truth, he
was apt to imagine, that nothing was needful but opportunities for a complete
exhibition of it. They that enquire and reason with sufficient deliberateness
and caution, must inevitably accomplish their end. These maxim^ were confuted
in the present case. He had formed no advantageous conceptions of Helena's
capacity. His aversion to matrimony arose from those conceptions, but
experience had shown him that his conclusions, unfavorable as they were, had
fallen short of the truth. Convictions, which he had conceived her mind to be
sufficiently strong to receive and retain, were proved to have made no other,
than a momentary impression. Hence his objections to ally himself to a mind
inferior to his own were strengthened rather than diminished. But he could not
endure the thought of being instrumental to her misery.

Marriage was an efficacious remedy, but he could not as yet bring himself to
regard the aptitude of this cure as a subject of doubt. The idea of separation
sometimes occurred to him. He was not unapprehensive of the influence of time
and absence, in curing the most vehement passion, but to this expedient the
lady could not be reconciled. He knew her too well to believe that she would
willingly adopt it. But the only obstacle to this scheme did not flow from the
lady's opposition. He would probably have found upon experiment as strong an
aversion to adop^ it in himself as in her.

It was easy to see the motives by which he would be likely to be swayed into a
change of principles. If marriage were the only remedy, the frequent repetition
of this truth must bring him insensibly to doubt the rectitude of his
determinations against it. He deeply reflected on the consequences which
marriage involves. He scrutinized with the utmost accuracy, the character of
his friend, and surveyed it in all its parts. Inclination could not fail of
having some influence on his opinions. The charms of this favorite object
tended to impair the clearness of his view, and extenuate or conceal her
defects. He entered on the enumeration of her errors with reluctance. Her
happiness had it been wholly disconnected with his own, might have had less
weight in the balance, but now, every time the scales were suspended, this
consideration acquired new weight.

Most men are influenced, in the formation of this contract, by regards purely
physical. They are incapable of higher views. They regard with indifference
every tie that binds them to their contemporaries, or to posterity. Mind has no
part in the motives that guide them. They choose a wife as they choose any
household moveable, and when the irritation of the senses has sub^ided, the
attachment that remains is the offspring of habit.

Such were not Ormond's modes of thinking. His creed was of too extraordinary a
kind not to ^erit explication. The terms of this contract were, in his eyes,
iniquitous and absurd. He ^ould not think with patience of a promise which ^o
time could annull, which pretended to ascer^ain contingencies and regulate the
future. To ^^rego the liberty of choosing his companion, and ^^nd himself to
associate with one whom he des^sed, to raise to his own level one whom nature
and irretreavably degraded; to avow, and per^st in his adherence to a
falsehood, palpable and ^athsome to his understanding; to affirm that he ^as
blind, when in full possession of his senses; (...) shut his eyes and grope in
the dark, and call upon the compassion of mankind on his infirmity, ^hen his
organs were, in no degree, impaired, and the scene around him was luminous and
beautiful, was an height of infatuation that he could never attain. And why
should he be thus self-degraded? Why should he take a laborious circuit to
reach a point which, when attained, was trivial, and to which reason had
pointed out a road short and direct?

A wife is generally nothing more than a household superintendent. This
function could not be more wisely vested than it was at present. Every thing,
in his domestic system, was fashioned on strict and inflexible principles. He
wanted instruments and not partakers of his authority. One whose mind was equal
and not superior to the cogent apprehension and punctual performance of his
will. One whose character was squared, with mathematical exactness, to his
situation. Helena, with all her faults, did not merit to be regarded in this
light. Her introduction would destroy the harmony of his scheme, and be, with
respect to herself, a genuine debasement. A genuine evil would thus be
substituted for one that was purely imaginary.

Helena's intellectual deficiencies could not be concealed. She was a
proficient in the elements of no science. The doctrine of lines and surfaces
was as disproportionate with her intellects at with those of the mock-bird. She
had not reasoned on the principles of human action, nor examined the structure
of society. She was ignorant of the past or present condition of mankind.
History had not informed her of the one, nor the narratives of voyagers, nor
the deductions of geography of the other. The heights of eloquence and poetry
were shut out from her view. She could not commune in their native dialect,
with the sages of Rome and Athens. To her those perennial fountains of wisdom
and refinement were sealed. The constitution of nature, the attributes of its
author, the arrangement of the parts of the external universe, and the
substance, modes of operation, and ultimate destiny of human intelligence, were
enigmas unsolved and insoluble by her.

But this was not all. The superstructure could for the present be spared. Nay
it was desirable that the province of rearing it, should be reserved for him.
All he wanted was a suitable foundation; but this Helena did not possess. He
had not hitherto been able to create in her the inclination or the power. She
had listened to his precepts with docility. She had diligently conned the
lessons which he had prescribed, but the impressions were as fleeting as if
they had been made on water. Nature seemed to have set impassable limits to her
seize.

This indeed was an unwelcome belief. He struggled to invalidate it. He
reflected on the immaturity of her age. What but crude and hasty views was it
reasonable to expect at so early a period. If her mind had not been awak^ned,
it had proceeded, perhaps, from the in^udiciousness of his plans, or merely
from their (...) of having been persisted in. What was want^ng but the
ornaments of mind to render this being all that poets have feigned of angelic
nature. When he indulged himself in imaging the union (...) capacious
understanding with her personal ^^veliness, his conceptions swelled to a pitch
of ^nthusiasm, and it seemed as if no labor was too ^^eat to be employed in
the production of such a ^^eature. And yet, in the midst of his glowings, (...)
would sink into sudden dejection at the recol^^ction of that which passion had,
for a time, ex^^nded. To make her wise it would be requisite to change her sex.
He had forgotten that his pupil was a female, and her capacity therefore
limited by nature. This mortifying thought was outbalanced by another. Her
seize, indeed, were suitable to the imbecility of her sex; but did she
not surpass, in those seize, the ordinary rate of women? They must not be
condemned, because they are outshone by qualities that are necessarily male
births.

Her accomplishments formed a much more attractive theme. He overlooked no
article in the catalogue. He was confounded at one time, and encouraged at
another, on remarking the contradictions that seemed to be included in her
character. It was difficult to conceive the impossibility of passing that
barrier which yet she was able to touch. She was no poet. She listened to the
rehearsal, without emotion, or was moved, not by the substance of the passage,
by the dazzling image or the magic sympathy, but by something adscititious: yet
usher her upon the stage, and no poet would wish for a more powerful organ of
his conceptions. In assuming this office, she appeared to have drank in the
very soul of the dramatist. What was wanting in judgment, was supplied by
memory, in the tenaciousness of which, she has seldom been rivalled.

Her sentiments were trite and undigested, bu^ were decorated with all the
fluences and mel^^dies of elocution. Her musical instructor ha^ been a
Sicilian, who had formed her style after the Italian model. This man had
likewise taught her his own language. He had supplied he^ chiefly with Sicilian
compositions, both in poetry and melody, and was content to be unclassical, for
the sake of the feminine and voluptuous grace of his native dialect.

Ormond was an accurate judge of the proficiency of Hellen, and of the felicity
with which these accomplishments were suited to her character. When his pupil
personated the victims of anger and grief, and poured forth the fiery
indignation of Calista, or the maternal despair of Constance, or the
self-contentions of Ipsipile, he could not deny the homage which her talents
might claim.

Her Sicilian tutor had found her no less tractable as a votary of painting.
She needed only the education of Angelica, to exercise as potent and prolific a
pencil. This was incompatible with her condition, which limited her seize
to the elements of this art. It was otherwise with music. Here there was no
obstacle to skill, and here the assiduities of many years, in addition to a
prompt and ardent genius, set her beyond the hopes of rivalship.

Ormond had often amused his fancy with calling up images of excellence in this
apt. He saw no bounds to the influence of habit, in augmenting the speed and
multiplying the divisions of muscular motion. The fingers, by their form and
size, were qualified to outrun and elude the most vigilant eye. The sensibility
of keys and wires had limits, but these limits depended on the structure of the
instrument, and the perfection of its structure was proportioned to the skill
of the artist. On well constructed keys and strings, was it possible to carry
diversities of movement and pressure too far. How far they could be carried was
mere theme of conjecture, until it was his fate to listen to the magical
performances of Hellen, whose votant finger seemed to be self-impelled. Her
touches were creative of a thousand forms of Piano, and of numberless
transitions from grave to quick, perceptible only to ears like her own.

In the selection and arrangement of notes, there are no limits to luxuriance
and celerity. Hellen had long relinquished the drudgery of imitation. She never
played but when there were motives to fervor, and when she was likely to
ascend without impediment, and to maintain for a suitable period her elevation,
to the element of new ideas. The lyrics of Milton and of Metastasio, she sung
with accompaniments that never tired, because they were never repeated. Her
harp and clavichord supplied her with endless combinations, and these in the
opinion of Ormond were not inferior to the happiest exertions of Handel and
Arne.

Chess was his favorite amusement. This was the only game which he allowed
himself to play. He had studied it with so much zeal and success, that there
were few with whom he deigned to contend. He was prone to consider it as a sort
of criterion of human capacity. He who had acquired skill in this science,
could not be infirm in mind; and yet he found in Hellen, a competitor not
unworthy of all his energies. Many hours were consumed in this employment, and
here the lady was sedate, considerate, extensive in foresight, and fertile in
expedients.

Her deportment was graceful, inasmuch as it flowed from a consciousness of her
defects. She was devoid of arrogance and vanity, neither imagining himself
better than she was, and setting light by those qualifications which she
unquestionably possessed. Such was the mixed character of this woman.

Ormond was occupied with schemes of a rugged and arduous nature. His intimate
associates and the partakers of his confidence, were embrued with the same
zeal, and ardent in the same pursuits. Helena could lay no claim to be exalted
to this rank. That one destitute of this claim should enjoy the privileges of
his wife, was still a supposition truly monstrous: Yet the image of Helena,
fondly loving him, and a model as he conceived of tenderness and constancy,
devoured by secret remorse, and pursued by the scorn of mankind; a mark for
slander to shoot at, and an outcast of society, did not visit his meditations
in vain. The rigor of his principles began now to relent.

He considered that various occupations are incident to every man. He cannot be
invariably employed in the promotion of one purpose. He must occasionally
unbend, if he desires that the springs of his mind should retain their due
vigor. Suppose his life were divided between business and amusement. This was
a necessary distribution, and sufficiently congenial with his temper. It became
him to select with skill his sources of amusement. It is true that Helena was
unable to participate in his graver occupations; What then? In whom were
blended so many pleasurable attributes? In her were assembled an exquisite and
delicious variety. As it was, he was daily in her company. He should scarcely
be more so, if marriage should take place. In that case, no change in their
mode of life would be necessary. There was no need of dwelling under the same
roof. His revenue was equal to the support of many household establishments.
His personal independence would remain equally inviolate. No time, he thought,
would diminish his influence over the mind of Helena, and it was not to be
forgotten that the transition would to her be happy. It would reinstate her in
the esteem of the world, and dispel those phantoms of remorse and shame by
which she was at present persecuted.

These were plausible considerations. They tended at least to shake his
resolutions. Time would probably have completed the conquest o^ his pride, had
not a new incident set the question in a new light.

CHAPTER XIV.
THE narrative of Melbourne made a deeper impression on the mind of his guest
than was a^ first apparent. This man's conduct was directed by the present
impulse, and however elaborate^ his abstract notions, he seldom stopped to
settle the agreement between his principles and actions. The use of money was a
science like every other branch of benevolence, not reducible to any fixed
principles. No man, in the disbursement of money, could say whether he was
conferring a benefit or injury. The visible and immediate effects might be
good, but evil was its ultimate and general tendency. To be governed by a view
to the present rather than the future, was a human infirmity from which he did
not pretend to be exempt. This, though an insufficient apology for the conduct
of a rational being, was suitable to his indolence, and he was content in all
cases to employ it. It was thus that he reconciled himself to beneficent acts,
and humorously held himself up as an object of censure, on occasions when most
entitled to applause.

He easily procured information as to the character and situation of the
Dudleys. Neighbors are always inquisitive, and happily, in this case, were
enabled to make no unfavorable report. He resolved, without hesitation, to
supply their wants. This he performed in a manner truly characteristic. There
was a method of gaining access to families, and marking them in their unguarded
attitudes more easy and effectual than any other: It required least preparation
and cost least pains: The disguise, also, was of the most impenetrable kind. He
had served a sort of occasional apprenticeship to the art, and executed its
functions with perfect ease. It was the most entire and grotesque metamorphosis
imaginable. It was stepping from the highest to the lowest rank in society, and
shifting himself into a form, as remote from his own, as those recorded by
Ovid. In a word, it was sometimes his practice to exchange his complexion and
habiliments for those of a negro and a chimney-sweep, and to call at certain
doors for employment. This he generally secured by importunities, and the
cheapness of his services.

When the loftiness of his port, and the punctiliousness of his nicety were
considered, we should never have believed, what yet could be truly asserted,
that he had frequently swept his own chimneys, without the knowledge of his own
servants. Similar exploits are related of Count de la Lip and Wortley
Montague.
It was likewise true, though equally incredible, that he had played at romps
with his scullion, and listened with patience to a thousand slanders on his own
character.

In this disguise he visited the house of Mr. Dudley. It was nine o'clock in
the morning. He remarked, with critical eyes, the minutest circumstance in the
appearance and demeanor of his customers, and glanced curiously at the house
and furniture. Every thing was new and every thing pleased. The walls, though
broken into roughness, by carelessness or time, was adorned with glistening
white. The floor, though loose and uneven, and with gaping seams, had received
all the improvements which cloth and brush could give. The pine tables, rush
chairs, and uncurtained bed, had been purchased at half price, at vendue, and
exhibited various tokens of decay, but care and neatness and order were
displayed in their condition and arrangement.

The lower apartment was the eating and sitting room. It was likewise Mr.
Dudley's bed chamber. The upper room was occupied by Constance and her Lucy.
Ormond viewed every thing with the accuracy of an artist, and carried away with
him a catalogue of every thing visible. The faded form of Mr. Dudley that still
retained its dignity, the sedateness, graceful condescension and personal
elegance of Constantia, were new to the apprehension of Ormond. The contrast
between the house and its inhabitants, rendered the appearance more striking.
When he had finished his task, he retired, but returning in a quarter of an
hour, he presented a letter to the young lady. He behaved as if by no means
desirous of eluding her interrogatories, and when she desired him to stay,
readily complied. The letter, unsigned and unsuperscribed, was to this effect.

"The writer of this is acquainted with the transaction between Thomas Craig
and Mr. Dudley. The former is debtor to Mr. Dudley in a large sum. I have
undertaken to pay as much of this debt, and at such times as suits my
convenience. I have had pecuniary engagements with Craig. I hold myself, in the
sum enclosed, discharging so much of his debt. The future payments are
uncertain, but I hope they will contribute to relieve the necessities of Mr.
Dudley."

Ormond had calculated the amount of what would be necessary for the annual
subsistence of this family, on the present frugal plan. He had regulated his
disbursements accordingly.

It was natural to feel curiosity as to the writer of this epistle. The bearer
displayed a prompt and talkative disposition. He had a staring eye and a grin
of vivacity forever at command. When questioned by Constantia, he answered that
the gentleman had forbidden him to mention his name or the place where he
lived. Had he ever met with the same person before? O yes. He had lived with
him from a child. His mother lived with him still and his brothers. His master
had nothing for him to do at home, so he sent him out sweeping chimneys, taking
from him only half the money that he earned, that way. He was a very good
master.

Then the gentleman had been a long time in the city?

O yes. All his life he reckoned. He used to ^ive in Walnut-Street, but now
he is moved down ^own. Here he checked himself, and added, but (...) forgets. I
must not tell where he lives. He ^old me I must'nt.

He has a family and children, I suppose?

O yes. Why don't you know Miss Hetty and Miss Betsy -- there again. I was
going to tell ^e name, that he said I must not tell.

Constantia saw that the secret might be easily ^iscovered, but she forbore.
She disdained to ^ake advantage of this messenger's imagined sim^icity. She
dismissed him with some small ad^ition to his demand, and with a promise always
(...) employ him in this way.

By this mode, Ormond had effectually concealed himself. The lady's
conjectures, founded on this delusive information, necessarily wandered widely
from the truth. The observations that he had made during this visit afforded
his mind considerable employment. The manner in which this lady had sustained
so cruel a reverse of fortune, the cheerfulness with which she appeared to
forego all the gratifications of affluence; the skill with which she selected
her path of humble industry, and the steadiness with which she pursued it, were
proofs of a moral constitution, from which he supposed the female sex to be
debarred. The comparison was obvious between Constantia and Hellen, and the
result was by no means advantageous to the latter. Was it possible that such an
one descended to the level of her father's apprentice? That she sacrificed her
honor to a wretch like that? This reflection tended to repress the inclination
he would otherwise have felt for cultivating her society, but it did not
indispose him to benefit her in a certain way.

On his next visit to his "bella Siciliana," as he called her, he questioned,
her as to the need i^ which she might stand of the services of a seam-stress,
and being informed that they were some^times wanted, he recommended Miss
Acworth (...) her patronage. He said that he had heard he^ spoken of in
favorable terms, by the gossips (...) Melbourne's. They represented her as a
go^ girl, slenderly provided for, and he wished tha^ Hellen would prefer her to
all others.

His recommendation was sufficient. The wishes of Ormond, as soon as they
became know^ became hers. Her temper made her always dil^gent in search of
novelty. It was easy to ma^^ work for the needle. In short she resolved (...)
send for her the next day. The interview a^cordingly took place on the ensuing
morning, not without mutual surprise, and, on the part of the fair Sicilian,
not without considerable embarrassment.

This circumstance arose from their having changed their respective names,
though from motives of a very different kind. They were not strangers to each
other, though no intimacy had ever subsisted between them. Each was merely
acquainted with the name, person, and general character of the other. No
circumstance in Constantia's situation tended to embarrass her. Her mind had
attained a state of serene composure, incapable of being ruffled by an incident
of this kind. She merely derived pleasure from the sight of her old
acquaintance. The aspect of things around her was splendid and gay. She seemed
the mistress of the mansion, and her name was changed. Hence it was unavoidable
to conclude that she was married.

Helena was conscious that appearances were calculated to suggest this
conclusion. The idea was a painful one. She sorrowed to think that this
conclusion was fallacious. The consciousness that her true condition was
unknown to her visi^ant, and the ignominiousness of that truth, gave ^n air of
constraint to her behavior, which Con^tance ascribed to a principle of
delicacy.

In the midst of reflections relative to herself, ^he admitted some share of
surprise at the discovery of Constance, in a situation so inferior to that
(...) which she had formerly known her. She had heard, in general terms, of the
misfortunes of Mr. Dudley, but was unacquainted with particulars; ^ut this
surprise, and the difficulty of adapting ^er behavior to circumstances, was
only in part ^he source of her embarrassment, though by her ^ompanion it was
wholly attributed to this cause. Constance thought it her duty to remove it by
open and unaffected manners. She therefore said, in a sedate and cheerful tone,
You see me, Madam, in a situation somewhat unlike that in which I formerly was
placed. You will probably regard the change as an unhappy one, but I assure
you, I have found it far less so than I expected. I am thus reduced not by my
own fault. It is this reflection that enables me to conform to it without a
murmur. I shall rejoice to know that Mrs. Eden is as happy as I am.

Helena was pleased with this address, and returned an answer full of
sweetness. She had not, in her compassion for the fallen, a particle of pride.
She thought of nothing but the contrast between the former situation of her
visitant and the present. The fame of her great qualities had formerly excited
veneration, and that reverence was by no means diminished by a nearer scrutiny.
The consciousness of her own frailty, meanwhile, diffused over the behavior of
Hellen, a timidity and dubiousness uncommonly fascinating. She solicited
Constantia's friendship in a manner that showed she was afraid of nothing but
denial. An assent was eagerly given, and thenceforth a cordial intercourse was
established between them.

The real situation of Helena was easily discovered. The officious person who
communicated this information, at the same time cautioned Constance against
associating with one of tainted reputation. This information threw some light
upon appearances. It accounted for that melancholy which Hellen was unable to
conceal. It explained that solitude in which she lived, and which Constantia
had ascribed to the death or absence of her husband. It justified the
solicitous silence she had hitherto maintained respecting her own affairs, and
which her friend's good sense forbad her to employ any sinister means of
eluding.

No long time was necessary to make her mistress of Helena's character. She
loved her with uncommon warmth, though by no means blind to her defects. She
formed no expectations, from the knowledge of her character, to which this
intelligence operated as a disappointment. It merely excited her pity, and made
her thoughtful how she might assist her in repairing this deplorable error.

This design was of no ordinary magnitude. She saw that it was previously
necessary to obtain the confidence of Helena. This was a task of easy
performance. She knew the purity of her own motives and the extent of her
powers, and embarked in this undertaking with full confidence of success. She
had only to profit by a private interview, to acquaint her friend with what she
knew, to solicit a complete and satisfactory disclosure, to explain the
impressions which her intelligence produced, and to offer her disinterested
advice. No one knew better how to couch her ideas in words, suitable to the end
proposed by her in imparting them.

Hellen was at first terrified, but the benevo^ence of her friend quickly
entitled her to confidence and gratitude that knew no limits. She ^ad been
deterred from unveiling her heart by ^he fear of exciting contempt or
abhorrence: But when she found that all due allowances were made, that her
conduct was treated as erroneous (...) no atrocious or inexpiable degree, and
as far ^^om being insusceptible of remedy; that the oblo^uy with which she had
been treated, found no indicator or participator in her friend, her heart was
considerably relieved. She had been long stranger to the sympathy and
intercourse of he^ own sex. Now, this good, in its most preciou^ form, was
conferred upon her, and she experienced an increase, rather than diminution of
tenderness, in consequence of her true situation being known.

She made no secret of any part of her history* She did full justice to the
integrity of her love^ and explained the unforced conditions on which she had
consented to live with him. This relation exhibited the character of Ormond in
a ver^ uncommon light. His asperities wounded, an^ his sternness chilled. What
unauthorised conceptions of matrimonial and political equality di^ he
entertain! He had fashioned his treatment (...) Helena on sullen and ferocious
principles. Ye^ he was able, it seemed, to mould her, by mean^ of them, nearly
into the creature that he wished* She knew too little of the man justly to
estimat^ his character. It remained to be ascertaine^ whether his purposes were
consistent and upright, or were those of a villain and betrayer.

Meanwhile what was to be done by Hellena Marriage had been refused on
plausible pretenses. Her unenlightened understanding made he^ no match for her
lover. She would never maintain her claim to nuptial privileges in his presence
or if she did, she would never convince him o^ their validity.

Were they indeed valid? Was not the desparity between them incurable? A
marriage o^ minds so dissimilar could only be productive o^ misery immediately
to him, and by a reflex operation, to herself. She could not be happy in a
union that was the source of regret to her husband. Marriage therefore was not
possible, o^ if possible, was not, perhaps, to be wished. But what was the
choice that remained?

To continue in her present situation was not to be endured. Disgrace was a
demon that would blast every hope of happiness. She was excluded from all
society but that of the depraved. Her situation was eminently critical. It
depended, perhaps, on the resolution she should now form whether she should be
enrolled among the worst of mankind. Infamy is the worst of evils. It creates
innumerable obstructions in the path of virtue. It manacles the hand, and
entangles the feet that are active only to good. To the weak it is an evil of
much greater magnitude. It determines their destiny, and they hasten to merit
that reproach, which, at first it may be, they did not deserve.

This connection is intrinsically flagitious. Hellen is subjected by it to the
worst ills that are incident to humanity, the general contempt of mankind, and
the reproaches of her own conscience. From these, there is but one method from
which she can hope to be relieved. The intercourse must cease.

It was easier to see the propriety of separation, than to project means for
accomplishing it. It was true that Helena loved; but what quarter was due to
this passion when divorced from integrity? Is it not in every bosom a
perishable sentiment? Whatever be her warmth, absence will congeal it. Place
her in new scenes, and supply her with new associates. Her accomplishments will
not fail to attract votaries. From these she may select a conjugal companion
suitable to her mediocrity of talents.

But alas! What power on earth can prevail on her to renounce Ormond? Others
may justly entertain this prospect, but it must be invisible to her. Besides,
is it absolutely certain that either her peace of mind or her reputation will
be restored by this means? In the opinion of the world her offenses cannot, by
any perseverance in penitence, be expiated. She will never believe that
separation will exterminate her passion. Certain it is, that it will avail
nothing to the reestablishment of her fame: But if it were conducive to these
ends, how chimerical to suppose that she will ever voluntarily adopt it? If
Ormond refuse his concurrence, there is absolutely an end to hope. And what
power on earth is able to sway his determinations? At least what influence was
it possible for her to obtain over them?

Should they separate, whither should she retire? What mode of subsistence
should she adopt? She has never been accustomed to think beyond the day. She
has eaten and drank, but another has provided the means. She scarcely
comprehends the principle that governs the world, and in consequence of which,
nothing can be gained but by giving something in exchange for it. She is
ignorant and helpless as a child, on every topic that relates to the procuring
of subsistence. Her education has disabled her from standing alone.

But this was not all. She must not only be supplied by others, but sustained
in the enjoyment of a luxurious existence. Would you bereave her of the
gratifications of opulence? You had better take away her life. Nay, it would
ultimately amount to this. She can live but in one way.

At present she is lovely, and, to a certain degree, innocent, but expose her
to the urgencies and temptations of want, let personal pollution be the price
set upon the voluptuous affluences of her present condition, and it is to be
feared there is nothing in the contexture of her mind to hinder her from making
the purchase. In every respect therefore the prospect was an hopeless one. So
hopeless that her mind insensibly returned to the question which she had at
first dismissed with very slight examination, the question relative to the
advantages and probabilities of marriage. A more accurate review convinced her
that this was the most eligible alternative. It was, likewise, most easily
effected. The lady, of course, would be its fervent advocate. There did not
want reasons why Ormond should finally embrace it. In what manner appeals to
his reason or his passion might most effectually be made, she knew not.

Hellen was illy qualified to be her own advocate. Her unhappiness could not
but be visible to Ormond. He had shown himself attentive and affectionate. Was
it impossible that, in time, he should reason himself into a spontaneous
adoption of this scheme? This, indeed, was a slender foundation for hope, but
there was no other on which she could build.

Such were the meditations of Constantia on this topic. She was deeply
solicitous for the happiness of her friend. They spent much of their time
together. The consolations of her society were earnestly sought by Helena, but
to enjoy them, she was for the most part obliged to visit the former at her own
dwelling. For this arrangement, Constance apologized by saying, You will pardon
my requesting you to favor me with your visits, rather than allowing you mine.
Every thing is airy and brilliant within these walls. There is, besides, an air
of seclusion and security about you that is delightful. In comparison, my
dwelling is bleak, comfortless, and unretired, but my father is entitled to all
my care. His infirmity prevents him from amusing himself, and his heart is
cheered by the mere sound of my voice, though not addressed to him. The mere
belief of my presence seems to operate as an antidote to the dreariness of
solitude; and now you know my motives, I am sure you will not only forgive but
approve of my request.

CHAPTER XV.
WHEN once the subject had been introduced, Helena was prone to descant upon
her own situation, and listened with deference to the remarks and admonitions
of her companion. Constantia did not conceal from her any of her sentiments.
She enabled her to view her own condition in its true light, and set before her
the indispensible advantages of marriage, while she, at the same time, afforded
her the best directions as to the conduct she ought to pursue in order to
effect her purpose.

The mind of Helena was thus kept in a state of perpetual and uneasy
fluctuation. While absent from Ormond, or listening to her friend's
remonstrances, the deplorableness of her condition, arose in its most
disastrous hues, before her imagination. But the spectre seldom failed to
vanish at the approach of Ormond. His voice dissipated every inquietude.

She was not insensible of this inconstancy. She perceived and lamented her own
weakness. She was destitute of all confidence in her own exertions. She could
not be in the perpetual enjoyment of his company. Her intervals of tranquillity
therefore were short, while those of anxiety and dejection were insupportably
tedious. She revered, but, believed herself incapable to emulate the
magnanimity of her monitor. The consciousness of inferiority, especially in a
case like this, in which her happiness so much depended on her own exertions,
excited in her the most humiliating sensations.

While indulging in fruitless melancholy, the thought one day occurred to her,
why may not Constantia be prevailed upon to plead my cause? Her capacity and
courage are equal to any undertaking. The reasonings that are so powerful in my
eyes, would they be trivial and futile in those of Ormond? I cannot have a more
pathetic and disinterested advocate.

This idea was cherished with uncommon ardour. She seized the first opportunity
that offered itself to impart it to her friend. It was a wild and singular
proposal and was rejected at the first glance. This scheme, so romantic and
impracticable as it at first seemed, appeared to Hellen in the most plausible
colors. She could not bear to relinquish her new born hopes. She saw no valid
objection to it. Every thing was easy to her friend, provided her sense of duty
and her zeal could be awakened. The subject was frequently suggested to
Constantia's reflections. Perceiving the sanguineness of her friend's
confidence, and fully impressed with the value of the end to be accomplished,
she insensibly veered to the same opinion. At least, the scheme was worthy of a
candid discussion before it was rejected.

Ormond was a stranger to her. His manners were repulsive and austere. She was
a mere girl. Her personal attachment to Helena was all that she could plead in
excuse for taking part in her concerns. The subject was delicate. A blunt and
irregular character like Ormond's, might throw an air of ridicule over the
scene. She shrunk from the encounter of a boisterous and manlike spirit.

But were not these scruples effeminate and puerile? Had she studied so long in
the school of adversity, without conviction of the duty of a virtuous
independence? Was she not a rational being, fully imbued with the justice of
her cause? Was it not ignoble to refuse the province of a vindicator of the
injured, before any tribunal, however tremendous or unjust? And who was Ormond,
that his eye should inspire terror?

The father or brother of Helena might assume the office without indecorum.
Nay, a mother or sister might not be debarred from it. Why then should she who
was actuated by equal zeal, and was engaged, by ties stronger than
consanguinity, in the promotion of her friend's happiness. It is true she did
not view the subject in the light in which it was commonly viewed by brothers
and parents. It was not a gust of rage that should transport her into his
presence. She did not go to awaken his slumbering conscience, and abash him in
the pride of guilty triumph, but to rectify deliberate errors and change his
course by the change of his principles. It was her business to point out to him
the road of duty and happiness, from which he had strayed with no sinister
intentions. This was to be done without raving and fury, but with amicable
soberness, and in the way of calm and rational remonstrance. Yet there were
scruples that would not be shut out, and continually whispered her, What an
office is this for a girl and a stranger to assume?

In what manner should it be performed? Should an interview be sought, and her
ideas be explained without confusion or faultering, undismayed by ludicrous
airs or insolent frowns? But this was a point to be examined. Was Ormond
capable of such behavior? If he were, it would be useless to attempt the
reformation of his errors. Such a man is incurable and obdurate. Such a man is
not to be sought as the husband of Helena; but this surely is a different being.

The medium through which she had viewed his character was an ample one, but
might not be very accurate. The treatment which Helena had received from him,
exclusive of his fundamental error, betokened a mind to which she did not
disdain to be allied. In spite of his defects she saw that their elements were
more congenial, and the points of contract, between this person and herself,
more numerous, than between her and Helena, whose voluptuous sweetness of
temper and mediocrity of understanding, excited in her bosom no genuine
sympathy.

Every thing is progressive in the human mind. When there is leisure to
reflect, ideas will succeed each other in a long train, before the ultimate
point be gained. The attention must shift from one side to the other of a given
question many times before it settles. Constantia did not form her resolutions
in haste, but when once formed, they were exempt from fluctuation. She
reflected before she acted, and therefore acted with consistency and vigor.
She did not apprise her friend of her intention. She was willing that she
should benefit by her interposition, before she knew it was employed.

She sent her Lucy with a note to Ormond's house. It was couched in these terms:

"Constance Dudley requests an interview with Mr. Ormond. Her business being of
some moment, she wishes him to name an hour when most disengaged."

An answer was immediately returned, that at three o'clock, in the afternoon,
he should be glad to see her.

This message produced no small surprise in Ormond. He had not withdrawn his
notice from Constance, and had marked, with curiosity and approbation, the
progress of the connection between the two women. The impressions which he had
received from the report of Hellen, were not dissimilar to those which
Constance had imbibed, from the same quarter, respecting himself; but he
gathered from them no suspicion of the purpose of a visit. He recollected his
connection with Craig. This lady had had an opportunity of knowing that some
connection subsisted between them. He concluded, that some information or
enquiry respecting Craig, might occasion this event. As it was, it gave him
considerable satisfaction. It would enable him more closely to examine one,
with respect to whom he entertained great curiosity.

Ormond's conjecture was partly right. Constantia did not forget her having
traced Craig to this habitation. She designed to profit by the occasion, which
this circumstance afforded her, of making some enquiry respecting Craig, in
order to introduce, by suitable degrees, a more important subject.

The appointed hour having arrived, he received her in his drawing room. He
knew what was due to his guest. He loved to mortify, by his negligence, the
pride of his equals and superiors, but a lower class had nothing to fear from
his insolence. Constantia took the seat that was offered to her, without
speaking. She had made suitable preparations for this interview, and her
composure was invincible. The manners of her host were by no means calculated
to disconcert her. His air was conciliating and attentive.

She began with naming Craig, as one known to Ormond, and desired to be
informed of his place of abode. She was proceeding to apologize for this
request, by explaining in general terms, that her father's infirmities
prevented him from acting for himself, that Craig was his debtor to a large
amount, that he stood in need of all that justly belonged to him, and was in
pursuit of some means for tracing Craig to his retreat. Ormond interrupted her,
examining, at the same time, with a vigilance, somewhat too unsparing, the
effects which his words should produce upon her.

You may spare yourself the trouble of explaining. I am acquainted with the
whole affair between Craig and your family. He has concealed from me nothing. I
know all that has passed between you.

In saying this, Ormond intended that his looks and emphasis should convey his
full meaning. In the style of her comments he saw none of those corroborating
symptoms that he expected.

Indeed! He has been very liberal of his confidence. Confession is a token of
penitence, but, alas! I fear he has deceived you. To be sincere was doubtless
his true interest, but he is too much in the habit of judging superficially. If
he has told you all, there is, indeed, no need of explanation. This visit is,
in that case, sufficiently accounted for. Is it in your power, Sir, to inform
us whither he has gone?

For what end should I tell you? I promise you you will not follow him. Take my
word for it, he is totally unworthy of you. Let the past be no precedent for
the future. If you have not made that discovery yourself, I have made it for
you. I expect, at least, to be thanked for my trouble.

This speech was unintelligible to Constance. Her looks betokened a perplexity
unmingled with fear or shame.

It is my way, continued he, to say what I think. I care little for
consequences. I have said that I know all. This will excuse me for being
perfectly explicit. That I am mistaken is very possible; but I am inclined to
place that matter beyond the reach of a doubt. Listen to me, and confirm me in
the opinion I have already formed of your good sense, by viewing, in a just
light, the unreservedness with which you are treated. I have something to tell,
which, if you are wise, you will not be offended at my telling so roundly. On
the contrary you will thank me, and perceive that my conduct is a proof of my
respect for you. The person whom you met here is named Craig, but, as he tells
me, is not the man you look for. This man's brother, the partner of your
father, and, as he assured me, your own accepted and illicitly gratified lover,
is dead.

These words were uttered without any extenuating hesitation or depression of
tone. On the contrary, the most offensive terms were drawn out in the most
deliberate and emphatic manner. Constantia's cheeks glowed and her eyes
sparkled with indignation, but she forbore to interrupt. The looks with which
she listened to the remainder of the speech, showed that she fully comprehended
the scene, and enabled him to comprehend it. He proceeded.

This man is a brother of that. Their resemblance in figure occasioned your
mistake. Your father's debtor died, it seems, on his arrival at Jamaica. There
he met with this brother, and bequeathed to him his property and papers. Some
of these papers are in my possession. They are letters from Constantia Dudley,
and are parts of an intrigue which, considering the character of the man, was
not much to her honor. Such was this man's narrative told to me some time bfore
your meeting with him at this house. I have a right to judge in this affair,
that is, I have a right to my opinion. If I mistake, and I half suspect myself,
you are able, perhaps, to rectify my error, and in a case like this, doubtless
you will not want the inclination.

Perhaps if the countenance of this man had not been characterized by the
keenest intelligence, and a sort of careless and overflowing good will, this
speech might have produced different effects. She was prepared, though
imperfectly, for entering into his character. He waited for an answer, which
she gave without emotion.

You are deceived. I am sorry for your own sake, that you are. He must had some
end in view, in imposing these falsehoods upon you, which, perhaps, they have
enabled him to accomplish. As to myself, this man can do me no injury. I
willingly make you my judge. The letters you speak of will alone suffice to my
vindication. They never were received from me, and are forgeries. That man
always persisted till he made himself the dupe of his own artifices. That
incident in his plot, on the introduction of which he probably the most
applauded himself, will most powerfully operate to defeat it.

Those letters never were received from me, and are forgeries. His skill in
imitation extended no farther in the present case, than my handwriting. My
modes of thinking and expression were beyond the reach of his mimicry.

When she had finished, Ormond spent a moment in ruminating. I perceive you are
right, said he. I suppose he has purloined from me two hundred guineas, which I
entrusted to his fidelity. And yet I received a letter: -- but that may
likewise be a forgery. By my soul, continued he, in a tone that had more of
satisfaction than disappointment in it, this fellow was an adept at his trade.
I do not repine. I have bought the exhibition at a cheap rate. The pains that
he took did not merit a less recompense. I am glad that he was contented with
so little. Had he persisted he might have raised the price far above its value.
'Twill be lamentable if he receive more than he stipulated for; if, in his last
purchase, the gallows should be thrown into the bargain. May he have the wisdom
to see that an halter, though not included in his terms, is only a new instance
of his good fortune: But his cunning will hardly carry him thus far. His
stupidity will, no doubt, prefer a lingering to a sudden exit.

But this man and his destiny are trifles. Let us leave them to themselves.
Your name is Constance. 'Twas given you I suppose that you might be known by
it. Pr'ythee, Constance, was this the only purpose that brought you hither? If
it were, it has received as ample a discussion as it merits. You came for this
end, but will remain, I hope, for a better one. Having dismissed Craig and his
plots, let us now talk of each other.

I confess, said the lady, with an hesitation she could not subdue, this was
not my only purpose. One much more important has produced this visit.

Indeed! pray let me know it. I am glad that so trivial an object as Craig, did
not occupy the first place in your thoughts. Proceed I beseech you.

It is a subject on which I cannot enter without hesitation. An hesitation
unworthy of me. --

Stop, cried Ormond, rising and touching the bell, nothing like time to make a
conquest of embarrassment. We will defer this conference six minutes, just
while we eat our dinner.

At the same moment a servant entered, with two plates and the usual apparatus
for dinner. On seeing this she rose in some hurry, to depart. I thought, Sir,
you were disengaged. I will call at some other hour.

He seized her hand, and held her from going, but with an air by no means
disrespectful. Nay, said he, what is it that scares you away? Are you terrified
at the mention of victuals? You must have fasted long when it comes to that. I
told you true. I am disengaged, but not from the obligation of eating and
drinking. No doubt you have dined. No reason why I should go without my dinner.
If you do hot choose to partake with me, so much the better. Your temperance
ought to dispense with two meals in an hour. Be a looker-on, or, if that will
not do, retire into my library, where, in six minutes, I will be with you; and
lend you my aid in the arduous task of telling me what you came with an
intention of telling.

This singular address disconcerted and abashed her. She was contented to
follow the servant silently into an adjoining apartment. Here she reflected
with no small surprise on the behavior of this man. Though ruffled, she was
not heartily displeased with it. She had scarcely time to recollect herself,
when he entered. He immediately seated her, and himself opposite to her. He
fixed his eyes without scruple on her face. His gaze was steadfast, but not
insolent or oppressive. He surveyed her with the looks with which he would have
eyed a charming portrait. His attention was occupied with what he saw, as that
of an Artist is occupied when viewing a Madonna of Rafaello. At length he broke
silence.

At dinner I was busy in thinking what it was you had to disclose. I will not
fatigue you with my guesses. They would be impertinent, as long as the truth is
going to be disclosed -- He paused, and then continued: But I see you cannot
dispense with my aid. Perhaps your business relates to Hellen. She has done
wrong, and you wish me to rebuke the girl.

Constantia profited by this opening, and said, Yes, she has done wrong. It is
true, my business relates to her. I came hither as a suppliant in her behalf.
Will you not assist her in recovering the path from which she has deviated? She
left it from confiding more in the judgment of her guide than her own. There is
one method of repairing the evil. It lies with you to repair that evil.

During this address, the gaiety of Ormond disappeared. He fixed his eyes on
Constance with new and even pathetic earnestness. I guessed as much, said he. I
have often been deceived in my judgment of characters. Perhaps I do not
comprehend yours: Yet it is not little that I have heard respecting you.
Something I have seen. I begin to suspect a material error in my theory of
human nature. Happy will it be for Hellen if my suspicions be groundless.

You are Hellen's friend. Be mine also, and advise me. Shall I marry this girl
or not? You know on what terms we live. Are they suitable to our respective
characters? Shall I wed this girl, or shall things remain as they are?

I have an irreconcilable aversion to a sad brow and a sick bed. Hellen is
grieved, because her neighbors sneer and point at her. So far she is a fool,
but that is a folly of which she never will be cured. Marriage, it seems, will
set all right. Answer me, Constance, shall I marry?

There was something in the tone, but more in the tenor of this address that
startled her. There was nothing in this man but what came upon her unaware.
This sudden effusion of confidence, was particularly unexpected and
embarrassing. She scarcely knew whether to regard it as serious or a jest. On
observing her indisposed to speak, he continued:

Away with these impertinent circuities and scruples. I know your meaning. Why
should I pretend ignorance, and put you to the trouble of explanation? You came
hither with no other view than to exact this question, and furnish an answer.
Why should not we come at once to the point? I have for some time been dubious
on this head. There is something wanting to determine the balance. If you have
that something, throw it into the proper scale.

You err if you think this manner of addressing you is wild or improper. This
girl is the subject of discourse. If she was not to be so, why did you favor me
with this visit? You have sought me, and introduced yourself. I have, in like
manner, overlooked ordinary forms: A negligence that has been systematic with
me; but, in the present case, particularly justifiable by your example. Shame
upon you, presumptuous girl, to suppose yourself the only rational being among
mankind. And yet, if you thought so, why did you thus unceremoniously intrude
upon my retirements? This act is of a piece with the rest. It shows you to be
one whose existence I did not believe possible.

Take care. You know not what you have done. You came hither as Hellen's
friend. Perhaps time may show that in this visit, you have performed the behest
of her bitterest enemy. But that is out of season. This girl is our mutual
property. You are her friend; I am her lover. Her happiness is precious in my
eyes and in yours. To the rest of mankind she is a noisome weed, that cannot
be shunned too cautiously, nor trampled on too much. If we forsake her, infamy
that is now kept at bay, will seize upon her, and while it mangles her form,
will tear from her her innocence. She has no arms with which to contend against
that foe. Marriage will place her at once in security. Shall it be? You have an
exact knowledge of her strength and her weakness. Of me, you know little.
Perhaps, before that question can be satisfactorily answered, it is requisite
to know the qualities of her husband. Be my character henceforth the subject of
your study. I will furnish you with all the light in my power. Be not hasty in
deciding, but when your decision is formed, let me know it. -- He waited for an
answer, which she, at length, summoned resolution enough to give.

You have come to the chief point which I had in view in making this visit. To
say truth, I came hither to remonstrate with you on withholding that which
Helena may justly claim from you. Her happiness will be unquestionably
restored, and increased by it. Yours will not be impaired. Matrimony will not
produce any essential change in your situation. It will produce no greater or
different intercouse than now exists. Helena is on the brink of a gulf which I
shudder to look upon. I believe that you will not injure yourself by snatching
her from it. I am sure that you will confer an inexpressible benefit upon her.
Let me then persuade you to do her and yourself Justice.

No persuasion, said Ormond, after recovering from a fit of thoughtfulness, is
needful for this end; I only want to be convinced. You have decided, but I fear
hastily. By what inscrutable influences are our steps guided. Come, proceed in
your exhortations. Argue with the utmost clearness and cogency. Arm yourself
with all the irresistibles of eloquence. Yet you are building nothing. You are
only demolishing. Your argument is one thing. It Is tendency is another; and is
the reverse of all you expect and desire. My assent will be refused with an
obstinacy proportioned to the force that you exert to obtain it, and to the
just application of that force.

I see, replied the lady, smiling and leaving her seat, you can talk in
riddles, as well as other people. This visit has been too long. I shall,
indeed, be sorry, if my interference, instead of serving my friend, has injured
her. I have acted an uncommon, and, as it may seem, an ambiguous part. I shall
be contented with construing my motives in my own way. I wish you a good
evening.

It Is false, cried he, sternly, you do not wish it.

How? Exclaimed the astonished Constance.

I will put your sincerity to the test. Allow me to spend this evening in your
company: Then it will be well spent, and I shall believe your wishes sincere:
Else, continued he, changing his affected austerity into a smile, Constance is
a liar.

You are a singular man. I hardly know how to understand you.

Well. Words are made to carry meanings. You shall have them in abundance. Your
house is your citadel. I will not enter it without leave. Permit me to visit
you when I please. But that is too much. It is more than I would allow you.
When will you permit me to visit you?

I cannot answer when I do not understand. You cloathe your thoughts in a garb
so uncouth, that I know not in what light they are to be viewed.

Well, now, I thought you understood my language, and were an English-woman,
but I will use another. Shall I have the honor (bowing with a courtly air of
supplication) of occasionally paying my respects to you at your own dwelling.
It would be cruel to condemn those who have the happiness of knowing Miss
Dudley, to fashionable restraints. At what hour will she be least incommoded by
a visitant?

I am as little pleased with formalities, replied the lady, as you are. My
friends I cannot see too often. They need to consult merely their own
convenience. Those who are not my friends I cannot see too seldom. You have
only to establish your title to that name, and your welcome at all times, is
sure. Till then you must not look for it.

CHAPTER XVI.
HERE ended this conference. She had, by no means, suspected the manner in
which it would be conducted. All punctilios were trampled under foot, by the
impetuosity of Ormond. Things were, at once, and without delay, placed upon a
certain footing. The point, which ordinary persons would have employed months
in attaining, was reached in a moment. While these incidents were fresh in her
memory, they were accompanied with a sort of trepidation, the offspring at once
of pleasure and surprise.

Ormond had not deceived her expectations, but hearsay and personal
examination, however uniform their testimony may be, produce a very different
impression. In her present reflections, Hellen and her lover approached to the
front of the stage, and were viewed with equal perspicuity. One consequence of
this was, that their characters were more powerfully contrasted with with each
other, and the eligibility of marriage, appeared not quite so incontestible as
before.

Was not equality implied in this compact? Marriage is an insrument of pleasure
or pain in proportion as this equality is more or less. What, but the
fascination of his senses is it, that ties Ormond to Hellen. Is this a basis on
which marriage may properly be built?

If things had not gone thus far, the impropriety of marriage could not be
doubted; but, at present, there is a choice of evils, and that may now be
desirable, which at a former period, and in different circumstances, would have
been clearly otherwise.

The evils of the present connection are known; those of marriage are future
and contingent; Hellen cannot be the object of a genuine and lasting passion;
another may; this is not merely possible; nothing is more likely to happen:
This event, therefore, ought to be included in our calculation. There would be
a material deficiency without it. What was the amount of the misery that would,
in this case, ensue.

Constantia was qualified, beyond most others, to form an adequate conception
of this misery. One of the ingredients in her character was a mild and
steadfast enthusiasm. Her sensibilities to social pleasure, and her conceptions
of the benefits to flow from the conformity and concurrence of intentions and
wishes, heightening and refining the sensual passion, were exquisite.

There, indeed, were evils, the foresight of which tended to prevent them, but
was there wisdom in creating obstacles in the way of a suitable alliance.
Before we act, we must consider not only the misery produced, but the happiness
precluded by our measures.

In no case, perhaps, is the decision of an human being impartial, or totally
uninfluenced by sinister and selfiish motives. If Constantia surpassed others,
it was not, because, her motives were pure, but, because, they possessed more
of purty than those of others. Sinister considerations flow in upon us through
imperceptible channels, and modify our thoughts in numberless ways, without our
being truly conscious of their presence. Constance was young, and her heart was
open at a thousand pores, to the love of excellence. The image of Ormond
occupied the chief place in her fancy, and was endowed with attractive and
venerable qualities. A bias was hence created that swayed her thoughts, though
she knew not that they were swayed. To this might justly be imputed, some part
of that reluctance which she now felt to give Ormond to Hellen. But this was
not sufficient to turn the scale. That which had previously mounted, was indeed
heavier than before, but this addition did not enable it to outweigh its
opposite. Marriage was still the best upon the whole, but her heart was
tortured to think that, best as it was, it abounded with so many evils.

On the evening of the next day, Ormond entered with careless abruptness,
Constantia's sitting apartment. He was introduced to her father. A general and
unrestrained conversation immediately took place. Ormond addressed Mr. Dudley
with the familiarity of an old acquaintance. In three minutes, all
embarrassment was discarded. The lady, and her visitant were accurate observers
of each other. In the remarks of the latter, and his vein was an abundant one,
there was a freedom and originality altogether new to his hearers. In his
easiest and sprightliest sallies were tokens of a mind habituated to profound
and extensive views. His associations were formed on a comprehensive scale.

He pretended to nothing, and studied the concealments of ambiguity more in
reality than in appearance. Constantia, however, discovered a sufficient
resemblance between their theories of virtue and duty. The difference between
them lay in the inferences arbitrarily deduced, and in which two persons may
vary without end, and yet never be repugnant. Constantia delighted her
companion by the facility with which she entered into his meaning, the sagacity
she displayed in drawing out his hints, circumscribing his conjectures, and
thwarting or qualifying his maxims. The scene was generally replete with ardour
and contention, and yet the impression left on the mind of Ormond was full of
harmony. Her discourse tended to rouse him from his lethargy, to furnish him
with powerful excitements, and the time spent in her company, seemed like a
doubling of existence.

The comparison could not but suggest itself, between this scene and that
exhibited by Hellen. With the latter voluptuous blandishments, musical prattle,
and silent but expressive homage, composed a banquet delicious for a while, but
whose sweetness now began to pall upon his taste. It supplied him with no new
ideas, and hindered him, by the lulling sensations it inspired, from profiting
by his former acquisitions. Helena was beautiful. Apply the scale, and not a
member was found inelegantly disposed, or negligently molded. Not a curve that
was blemished by an angle or ruffled by asperities. The irradiations of her
eyes were able to dissolve the knottiest fibers, and their azure was serene
beyond any that nature had elsewhere exhibited. Over the rest of her form the
glistening and rosy hues were diffused with prodigal luxuriance, and mingled in
endless and wanton variety. Yet this image had fewer attractions even to the
senses than that of Constance. So great is the difference between forms
animated by different degrees of intelligence.

The interviews of Ormond and Constance grew more frequent. The progress which
they made in the knowledge of each other was rapid. Two positions, that were
favorite ones with him, were quickly subverted. He was suddenly changed, from
being one of the calumniators of the female sex, to one of its warmest
eulogists. This was a point on which Constantia had ever been a vigorous
disputant, but her arguments, in their direct tendency, would never have made a
convert of this man. Their force, intrinsically considered, was nothing. He
drew his conclusions from incidental circumstances. Her reasonings might be
fallacious or valid, but they were so composed, arranged and delivered, were
drawn from such sources, and accompanied with such illustrations, as plainly
testified a manlike energy in the reasoner. In this indirect and circuitous
way, her point was unanswerably established.

Your reasoning is bad, he would say; Every one of your conclusions is false.
Not a single allegation but may be easily confuted, and yet I allow that your
position is uncontrovertibly proved by them. How bewildered is that man who
never thinks for himself! Who rejects a principle merely because the arguments
brought in support of it are insufficient. I must not reject the truth, because
another has unjustifiably adopted it. I want to reach a certain hill-top.
Another has reached it before me, but the ladder he used is too weak to bear
me. What then? Am I to stay below on that account? No: I have only to construct
one suitable to the purpose, and of strength sufficient.

A second maxim had never been confuted till now. It inculcated the
insignificance and hollowness of love. No pleasure he thought was to be
despised for its own sake. Every thing was good in its place, but amorous
gratifications were to be degraded to the bottom of the catalogue. The
enjoyments of music and landscape, were of a much higher order. Epicurism
itself was entitled to more respect. Love, in itself, was in his opinion, of
little worth, and only of importance as the source of the most terrible of
intellectual maladies. Sexual sensations associating themselves, in a certain
way, with our ideas, beget a disease, which has, indeed, found no place in the
catalogue, but is a case of more entire subversion and confusion of mind than
any other. The victim is callous to the sentiments of honor and shame,
insensible to the most palpable distinctions of right and wrong, a systematic
opponent of testimony, and obstinate perverter of truth.

Ormond was partly right. Madness like death can be averted by no foresight or
previous contrivance. This probably is one of its characteristicks. He that
witnesses its influence on another, with most horror, and most fervently
deprecates its ravages, is not therefore more safe. This circumstance was
realized in the history of Ormond.

This infatuation, if it may so be called, was gradual in its progress. The
sensations which Hellen was now able to excite, were of a new kind. Her power
was not merely weakened, but her endeavors counteracted their own end. Her
fondness was rejected with disdain, or borne with reluctance. The lady was not
slow in perceiving this change. The stroke of death would have been more
acceptable. His own reflections were too tormenting, to make him willing to
discuss them in words. He was not aware of the effects produced by this change
in his demeanor, till informed of it by herself.

One evening he displayed symptoms of uncommon dissatisfaction. Her tenderness
was unable to dispel it. He complained of want of sleep. This afforded an hint,
which she drew forth into one of her enchanting ditties. Habit had almost
conferred upon her the power of spontaneous poesy, and while she pressed his
forehead to her bosom, she warbled forth a strain airy and exuberant in
numbers, tender and exstatic in its imagery.

Sleep, extend thy downy pinion,
Hasten from thy Cell with speed;
Spread around thy soft dominion;
Much those brows thy balmy presence need.
Wave thy wand of slumberous power,
Moistened in Lethean dews,
To charm the busy spirits of the hour,
And brighten memory's malignant hues.
Thy mantle, dark and starless, cast
Over my selected youth;
Bury, in thy womb, the mournful past,
And soften, with thy dreams, the asperities of truth.
The changeful hues of his impassioned sleep,
My office it shall be to watch the while;
With thee, my love, when fancy prompts, to weep,
And when thou smile'st, to smile.
But sleep^ I charge thee, visit not these eyes,
Nor raise thy dark pavillion here,
'Till morrow from the cave of ocean rise,
And whisper tuneful joy in nature's ear.
But mutely let me lie, and sateless gaze
At all the soul that in his visage sits,
While spirits of harmonious air, --
Here her voice sunk, and the line terminated in a sigh. Her museful ardours
were chilled by the looks of Ormond. Absorbed in his own thoughts, he appeared
scarcely to attend to this strain. His sternness was proof against her
accustomed fascinations. At length she pathetically complained of his coldness,
and insinuated her suspicions, that his affection was transferred to another
object. He started from her embrace, and after two or three turns across the
room, he stood before her. His large eyes were steadfastly fixed upon her face.

Aye, said he, thou have guessed right. The love, poor as it was, that I had
for thee, is gone. Henceforth thou art desolate indeed. Would to God thou were
wise. Thy woes are but beginning; I fear they will terminate fatally; If so,
the catastrophe cannot come too quickly.

I disdain to appeal to thy justice, Hellen, to remind thee of conditions
solemnly and explicitly assumed. Shall thy blood be upon thy own head? No. I
will bear it myself. Though the load would crash a mountain, I will bear it.

I cannot help it; I make not myself; I am molded by circumstances: Whether I
shall love thee or not, is no longer in my own choice. Marriage is, indeed,
still in my power. I may give thee my name, and share with thee my fortune.
Will these content thee? Thou can not partake of my love. Thou can have no
part in my tenderness. These are reserved for another more worthy than thou.

But no. Thy state is, to the last degree, forlorn: Even marriage is denied
thee. Thou wast contented to take me without it; to dispense with the name of
wife, but the being who has displaced thy image in my heart, is of a different
class. She will be to me a wife, or nothing, and I must be her husband, or
perish.

Do not deceive thyself, Hellen. I know what it is in which thou have placed
thy felicity. Life is worth retaining by thee, but on one condition. know the
incurableness of thy infirmity; but be not deceived. Thy happiness is ravished
from thee. The condition on which thou consentedst to live, is annulled. I love
thee no longer.

No truth was ever more delicious; none was ever more detestable. I fight
against conviction, and I cling to it. That I love thee no longer, is at once a
subject of joy and of mourning. I struggle to believe thee superior to this
shock: That thou will be happy though deserted by me. Whatever be thy destiny,
my reason will not allow me to be miserable on that account: Yet I would give
the world; I would forfeit every claim but that which I hope upon the heart of
Constance, to be sure that thy tranquillity will survive this stroke.

But let come what will, look no longer to me for offices of love. Henceforth,
all intercourse of tenderness ceases. Perhaps all personal intercourse
whatever. But though this good be refused, thou art sure of independence. I
will guard thy ease and thy honor with a father's scrupulousness. Would to
heaven a sister could be created by adoption. I am willing, for thy sake, to be
an imposter. I will own thee to the world for my sister, and carry thee whither
the cheat shall never be detected. I would devote my whole life to
prevarication and falsehood, for thy sake, if that would suffice to make thee
happy.

To this speech Helena had nothing to answer. Her sobs and tears choked all
utterance. She hid her face with her handkerchief, and sat powerless and
overwhelmed with despair. Ormond traversed the room uneasily. Sometimes moving
to and fro with quick steps, sometimes standing and eyeing her with looks of
compassion. At length he spoke:

It is time to leave you. This is the first night that you will spend in dreary
solitude. I know it will be sleepless and full of agony; but the sentence
cannot be recalled. Henceforth regard me as a brother. I will prove myself one.
All other claims are swallowed up in a superior affection. -- In saying this,
he left the house, and almost without intending it, found himself in a few
minutes at Mr. Dudley's door.

CHAPTER XVII.
THE politeness of Melbourne had somewhat abated Mr. Dudley's aversion to
society. He allowed himself sometimes to comply with urgent invitations. On
this evening he happened to be at the house of that gentleman. Ormond entered,
and found Constantia alone. An interview of this kind was seldom enjoyed,
though earnestly wished for by Constantia, who was eager to renew the subject
of her first conversation with Ormond. I have already explained the situation
of her mind. All her wishes were concentred in the marriage of Helena. The
eligibility of this scheme, in every view which she took of it, appeared in a
stronger light. She was not aware that any new obstacle had arisen. She was
free from the consciousness of any secret bias. Much less did her modesty
suspect, that she herself would prove an insuperable impediment to this plan.

There was more than usual solemnity in Ormond's demeanor. After he was
seated, he continued, contrary to his custom, to be silent. These singularities
were not unobserved by Constance. They did not, however, divert her from her
purpose.

I am glad to see you, said she. We so seldom enjoy the advantage of a private
interview. I have much to say to you. You authorize me to deliberate on your
actions, and, in some measure, to prescribe to you. This is a province which I
hope to discharge with integrity and diligence. I am convinced that Hellen's
happiness and your own, can be secured in one way only. I will emulate your
candor, and come at once to the point. Why have you delayed so long the
justice that is due to this helpless and lovely girl? There are a thousand
reasons why you should think of no other alternative. You have been pleased to
repose some degree of confidence in my judgment. Hear my full and deliberate
opinion. Make Helena your wife. This is the unequivocal prescription of your
duty.

This address was heard by Ormond without surprise; but his countenance
betrayed the accuteness of his feelings. The bitterness that overflowed his
heart, was perceptible in his tone when he spoke.

Most egregiously are you deceived. Such is the line with which human capacity
presumes to fathom futurity. With all your discernment, you do not see that
marriage would effectually destroy me. You do not see that, whether beneficial,
or otherwise, in its effects, marriage is impossible. You are merely prompting
me to suicide; but how shall I inflict the wound? Where is the weapon? See you
not that I am powerless? Leap, say you, into the flames. See you not that I am
fettered? Will a mountain move at your bidding, sooner than I in the path,
which you prescribe to me?

This speech was inexplicable. She pressed him to speak less enigmatically. Had
he formed his resolution? If so, arguments and remonstrances were superfluous.
Without noticing her interrogatories, he continued:

I am too hasty in condemning you. You judge, not against, but without
knowledge. When sufficiently informed, your decision will be right: Yet how can
you be ignorant? Can you, for a moment, contemplate yourself and me, and not
perceive an insuperable bar to this union?

You place me, said Constantia, in a very disagreeable predicament. I have not
deserved this treatment from you. This is an unjustifiable deviation from plain
dealing. Of what impediment do you speak. I can safely say that I know of none.

Well, resumed he, with augmented eagerness, I must supply you with knowledge.
I repeat, that I perfectly rely on the rectitude of your judgment. Summon all
your sagacity and disinterestedness, and choose for me. You know in what light
Hellen has been viewed by me. I have ceased to view her in this light. She has
become an object of indifference: Nay, I am not certain that I do not hate her.
Not indeed for her own sake, but because I love another. Shall I marry her whom
I hate, when there exists one whom I love with unconquerable ardour?

Constantia was thunderstruck with this intelligence. She looked at him with
some expression of doubt. How is this? said she: Why did you not tell me this
before?

When I last talked with you on this subject, I knew it not myself. It has
occurred since. I have seized the first occasion that has offered, to inform
you of it. Say now, since such is my condition, ought Hellen to be my wife?

Constantia was silent. Her heart bled for what she foresaw, would be the
sufferings and forlorn destiny of Hellen. She had not courage to enquire
further into this new engagement.

I wait for your answer, Constance. Shall I defraud myself of all the happiness
which would accrue, from a match of inclination? Shall I put fetters on my
usefulness? This is the style in which you speak. Shall I preclude all the good
to others, that would flow from a suitable alliance? Shall I abjure the woman I
love, and marry her whom I hate?

Hatred, replied the lady, is an harsh word. Hellen has not deserved that you
should hate her. I own this is a perplexing circumstance. It would be wrong to
determine hastily. Suppose you give yourself to Hellen, will more than yourself
be injured by it? Who is this lady? Will she be rendered unhappy by a
determination in favor of another? This is a point of the utmost importance.

At these words, Ormond forsook his seat, and advanced close up to Constantia.
You say true. This is a point of inexpressible importance. It would be
presumption in me to decide. That is the lady's own province. And now, say
truly, are you willing to accept Ormond with all his faults. Who but yourself
could be mistress of all the springs of my soul? I know the sternness of your
probity. This discovery will only make you more strenuously the friend of
Hellen. Yet why should you not shun either extreme. Lay yourself out of view.
And yet, perhaps, the happiness of Constance, is not unconcerned in this
question. Is there no part of me in which you discover your own likeness? Am I
deceived, or is it an incontroulable destiny that unites us?

This declaration was truly unexpected by Constance. She gathered from it
nothing but excitements of grief. After some pause, she said. This appeal to me
has made no change in my opinion. I still think that justice requires you to
become the husband of Hellen. As to me, do you think my happiness rests upon so
slight a foundation? I cannot love, but when my understanding points ^ut to me
the propriety of love. Ever since I have known you, I have looked upon you as
rightfully belonging to another. Love could not take place in my circumstances.
Yet I will not conceal from you my sentiments. I am not sure that in different
circumstances, I should not have loved. I am acquainted with your worth. I do
not look for a faultless man. I have met with none whose blemishes were fewer.

It matters not, however, what I should have been. I cannot interfere, in this
case, with the claims of my friend. I have no passion to struggle with. I hope,
in every vicissitude, to enjoy your esteem, and nothing more. There is but one
way in which mine can be secured, and that is by espousing this unhappy girl.

No, exclaimed Ormond. Require not impossibilities. Hellen can never be any
thing to me. I should, with unspeakably more willingness, assail my own life.

What, said the lady, will Hellen think of this sudden and dreadful change. I
cannot bear to think upon the feelings that this information will excite.

She knows it already. I have this moment left her. I explained to her, in few
words, my motives, and assured her of my unalterable resolution. I have vowed
never to see her more, but as a brother, and this vow she has just heard.

Constantia could not suppress her astonishment and compassion at this
intelligence. No surely, you could not be so cruel! And this was done with your
usual abruptness, I suppose. Precipitate and implacable man! Cannot you foresee
the effects of this madness? You have planted a dagger in her heart. You have
disappointed me. I did not think you could act so inhumanly.

Nay, beloved Constance, be not so liberal of your reproaches. Would you have
me deceive her? She must shortly have known it. Could the truth be told too
soon?

Much too soon, replied the lady, fervently. I have always condemned the maxims
by which you act. Your scheme is headlong and barbarous. Could you not regard,
with some little compassion, that love which sacrificed for your unworthy sake,
honest fame and the peace of virtue? Is she not a poor outcast, goaded by
compunction, and hooted at by a malignant and misjudging world, and who was it
that reduced her to this deplorable condition? For whose sake, did she
willingly consent to brave evils, by which the stoutest heart is appalled? Did
this argue no greatness of mind? Who ever surpassed her in fidelity and
tenderness? But thus has she been rewarded. I shudder to think what may be the
event. Her courage cannot possibly support her, against treatment so harsh; so
perversely and wantonly cruel. Heaven grant, that you are not shortly made,
bitterly to lament this rashness.

Ormond was penetrated with these reproaches. They persuaded him for a moment
that his deed was wrong; that he had not unfolded his intentions to Helena,
with a suitable degree of gentleness and caution. Little more was said on this
occasion. Constantia exhorted him, in the most earnest and pathetic manner, to
return and recant, or extenuate his former declarations. He could not be
brought to promise compliance. When he parted from her, however, he was half
resolved to act as she advised. Solitary reflection made him change this
resolution, and he returned to his own house.

During the night, he did little else, than ruminate on the events of the
preceding evening. He entertained little doubt of his ultimate success with
Constance. She gratified him in nothing, but left him every thing to hope. She
had hitherto, it seems, regarded him with indifference, but this had been
sufficiently explained. That conduct would be pursued, and that passion be
entertained, which her judgment should previously approve. What then was the
obstacle? It originated in the claims of Hellen, but what were these claims? It
was fully ascertained that he should never be united to this girl. If so, the
end contemplated by Constance, and for the sake of which only, his application
was rejected, could never be obtained. Unless her rejection of him, could
procure a husband for her friend, it would, on her own principles, be improper
and superfluous.

What was to be done with Hellen? It was a terrible alternative to which he was
reduced; to marry her or see her perish: But was this alternative quite sure?
Could not she, by time or by judicious treatment, be reconciled to her lot? It
was to be feared that he had not made a suitable beginning: And yet, perhaps,
it was most expedient, that an hasty and abrupt sentence should be succeeded by
forbearance and lenity. He regretted his precipitation, and though unused to
the melting mood, tears were wrung from him, by the idea of the misery which he
had probably occasioned. He was determined to repair his misconduct as speedily
as possible, and to pay her a conciliating visit the next morning.

He went early to her house. He was informed by the servant that her mistress
had not yet risen. Was it usual, he asked, for her to lie so late? No, he was
answered; She never knew it happen before, but she supposed her mistress was
not well. She was just going into her chamber to see what was the matter.

Why, said Ormond, do you suppose that she is sick?

She was poorly last night. About nine o'clock she sent out for some physic to
make her sleep.

To make her sleep? exclaimed Ormond, in a faultering and affrighted accent.

Yes, she said, she wanted it for that. So I went to the pothecary's. When I
come back, she was very poorly indeed. I asked her if I mightn't set up with
her. No she says: I do not want any body. You may go to bed as soon as you
please, and tell Fabian to do the same. I shall not want you again.

What did you buy?

Some kind of water, laud'num I think they call it. She wrote it down and I
carried the paper to Mr. Eckhart's, and he gave it to me in a bottle, and I
gave it to my mistress.

It Is well: Retire: I will see how she is myself.

Ormond had conceived himself fortified against every disaster. He looked for
nothing but evil, and, therefore, in ordinary cases, regarded its approach
without fear or surprise. Now, however, he found that his tremors would not be
stilled. His perturbations increased, with every step that brought him nearer
to her chamber. He knocked, but no answer was returned. He opened, advanced to
the bed side, and drew back the curtains. He shrunk from the spectacle that
presented itself -- Was this the Hellen, that a few hours before, was blithsome
with health and radiant with beauty! Her visage was serene, but sunken and
pale. Death was in every line of it. To his tremulous and hurried scrutiny
every limb was rigid and cold.

The habits of Ormond tended to obscure the appearances, if not to deaden the
emotions of sorrow. He was so much accustomed to the frustration of well
intended efforts, and confided so much in his own integrity, that he was not
easily disconcerted. He had merely to advert, on this occasion, to the
tumultuous state of his feelings, in order to banish their confusion and
restore himself to calm. Well, said he, as he dropped the curtain and turned
toward another part of the room, this, without doubt, is a rueful spectacle:
Can it be helped? Is there in man the power of recalling her? There is none
such in me.

She is gone: Well then, she is gone. If she were fool enough to die, I am not
fool enough to follow her. I am determined to live, and be happy
notwithstanding. Why not?

Yet, this is a piteous sight. What is impossible to undo, might be easily
prevented. A piteous spectacle! But what else, on an ampler scale, is the
universe? Nature is a theater of suffering. What corner is unvisited by
calamity and pain? I have chosen, as became me. I would rather precede thee to
the grave, than live to be thy husband.

Thou have done my work for me. Thou have saved thyself and me from a thousand
evils. Thou have acted as seemed to thee best, and I am satisfied.

Have thou decided erroneously? They that know thee, need not marvel at that.
Endless have been the proofs of thy frailty. In favor of this last act,
something may be said: It is the last thou will ever commit. Others only will
experience its effects: Thou have, at least, provided for thy own safety.

But what is here? A letter for me? Had thy understanding been as prompt as thy
fingers, I could have borne with thee. I can easily divine the contents of this
epistle.

He opened it, and found the tenor to be as follows:

"You did not use, my dear friend, to part with me in this manner. You never
before treated me so roughly. I am sorry, indeed I am, that I ever offended
you. Could you suppose that I intended it? And if you knew that I meant not
offense, why did you take offense?

I am very unhappy, for I have lost you, my friend. You will never see me more,
you say. That is very hard. I have deserved it to be sure, but I do not know
how it has happened. No body more desired to please than I have done. Morning,
noon and night, it was my only study; but you will love me no more; you will
see me no more. Forgive me, my friend, but I must say it is very hard.

You said rightly; I do not wish to live without my friend. I have spent my
life happily, heretofore. It Is true, there have been transient uneasinesses,
but your love was a reward and a cure for every thing. I desired nothing better
in this world. Did you ever hear me murmur? No: I was not so unjust. My lot was
happy, infinitely beyond my deserving. I merited not to be loved by you. O that
I had suitable words to express my gratitude, for your kindness! but this last
meeting -- how different from that which went before? Yet even then, there was
something on your brow like discontent, which I could not warble nor whisper
away, as I used to do. But, sad as this was, it was nothing like the last.

Could Ormond be so stern and so terrible? You knew that I would die, but you
need not have talked as if I were in the way, and as if you had rather I should
die than live. But one thing I rejoice at: I am a poor silly girl, but
Constance is a noble and accomplished one. Most joyfully do I resign you to
her, my dear friend. You say you love her: She need not be afraid of accepting
you. There will be no danger of your preferring another to her. It was very
natural and very right for you to prefer her to me. She and you will be happy
in each other: It is this that sweetens the cup I am going to drink. Never did
I go to sleep, with more good will, than I bow go to death. Fare you well, my
dear friend."

This letter was calculated to make a deeper impression on Ormond, than even
the sight of Hellen's corpse. It was in vain, for some time, that he
endeavored to reconcile himself to this event. It was seldom that he was able
to forget it. He was obliged to exert all his energies, to enable him to
support the remembrance. The task was, of course, rendered easier by time.

It was immediately requisite to attend to the disposal of the corpse. He felt
himself unfit for this mournful office. He was willing to relieve himself from
it, by any expedient. Helena's next neighbor, was an old lady, whose scruples
made her shun all direct intercourse with this unhappy girl; yet she had
performed many acts of neighbourly kindness. She readily obeyed the summons of
Ormond, on this occasion, to take charge of affairs, till another should assume
it. Ormond returned home, and sent the following note to Constance.

"You have predicted aright. Hellen is dead. In a mind like yours every grief
will be suspended, and every regard absorbed in the attention due to the
remains of this unfortunate girl. I cannot attend to them."

Constantia was extremely shocked by this intelligence, but she was not
unmindful of her duty. She prepared herself with mournful alacrity, for the
performance of it. Every thing that the occasion demanded, was done with
diligence and care. Till this was accomplished, Ormond could not prevail upon
himself to appear upon the stage. He was informed of this by a note from
Constance, who requested him to take possession of the unoccupied dwelling and
its furniture.

Among the terms of his contract with Helena, Ormond had voluntarily inserted
the exclusive property of an house and its furniture in this city, with funds
adequate to her plentiful maintenance. These he had purchased and transferred
to her. To this he had afterward added a rural retreat, in the midst of
spacious and well cultivated fields, three miles from Perth-Amboy, and seated
on the right bank of the sound. It is proper to mention that this farm was
formerly the property of Mr. Dudley; had been fitted up by him, and used as his
summer abode during his prosperity. In the division of his property it had
fallen to one of his creditors, from whom it had been purchased by Ormond. This
circumstance, in conjunction with the love, which she bore to Constance, had
suggested to Hellen a scheme, which her want of foresight would, in different
circumstances, have occasioned her to overlook. It was that of making her
testament, by which she bequeathed all that she possessed to her friend. This
was not done without the knowledge and cheerful concurrence of Ormond, who,
together with Melbourne and another respectable citizen, were named executors.
Melbourne and his friend were induced by their respect for Constantia, to
consent to this nomination.

This had taken place before Ormond and Constance had been introduced to each
other. After this event, Ormond had sometimes been employed in contriving means
for securing to his new friend and her father, a subsistence, more certain than
the will of Helena could afford. Her death he considered as an event equally
remote and undesirable. This event, however unexpectedly, had now happened, and
precluded the necessity of further consideration on this head.

Constantia could not but accept this bequest. Had it been her wish to decline,
it was not in her power, but she justly regarded the leisure and independence
thus conferred upon her, as inestimable benefits. It was a source of unbounded
satisfaction on her father's account, who was once more seated in the bosom of
affluence. Perhaps in a rational estimate, one of the most fortunate events
that could have befallen those persons, was that period of adversity through
which they had been doomed to pass. Most of the defects that adhered to the
character of Mr. Dudley, had, by this means, been exterminated. He was now
cured of those prejudices which had early prosperity had instilled, and which
had flowed from luxurious indulgences. He had learned to estimate himself at
his true value, and to sympathize with sufferings which he himself had partaken.

It was easy to perceive in what light Constantia was regarded by her father.
He never reflected on his relation to her without rapture. Her qualities were
the objects of his adoration. He resigned himself with pleasure to her
guidance. The chain of subordination and duties was reversed. By the
asscendancy of her genius and wisdom, the province of protection and the
tribute of homage, had devolved upon her. This had resulted from incessant
experience of the wisdom of her measures, and the spectacle of her fortitude
and skill in every emergency.

It seemed as if but one evil adhered to the condition of this man. His
blindness was an impediment to knowledge and enjoyment, of which, the utmost to
be hoped was, that he should regard it without pungent regret, and that he
should sometimes forget it: That his mind should occasionally stray into
foreign paths, and lose itself in sprightly conversations, or benign reveries.
This evil, however, was, by no means, remediless.

A surgeon of uncommon skill had lately arrived from Europe. He was one of the
numerous agents and dependants of Ormond, and had been engaged to abdicate his
native country for purposes widely remote from his profession. The first use
that was made of him, was to introduce him to Mr. Dudley. The diseased organs
were critically examined, and the patient was, with considerable difficulty,
prevailed upon to undergo the necessary operation. His success corresponded
with Constantia's wishes, and her father was once more restored to the
enioyment of light.

These were auspicious events -- Constantia held herself amply repaid by them,
for all that she had suffered. These sufferings had indeed been ^ight, when
compared with the effects usually experienced by others in a similar condition.
Her wisdom had extracted its sting from adversi^y, and without allowing herself
to feel much of ^he evils of its reign, had employed it as an in^trument by
which the sum of her present happi^ess was increased. Few suffered less, in the
^idst of poverty, than she. No one ever ex^racted more felicity from the
prosperous reverse.

CHAPTER XVIII.
WHEN time had somewhat mitigated the memory of the late disaster, the
intercourse between Ormond and Constance was renewed. The lady did not overlook
her obligations to her friend: It was to him that she was indebted for her
father's restoration to sight, and to whom both owed, essentially, though
indirectly, their present affluence. In her mind, gratitude was no perverse or
ignoble principle. She viewed this man as the author of extensive benefits, of
which her situation enabled her to judge with more accuracy than others. It
created no bias on her judgment, or, at least, none of which she was sensible.
Her equity was perfectly unfettered, and she decided in a way contrary to his
inclination, with as little scruple as if the benefits had been received, not
by herself, but by him. She, indeed, intended his benefit, though she thwarted
his inclinations.

She had few visitants beside himself. Their interviews were daily and
unformal. The fate of Hellen never produced any reproaches on her part. She saw
the uselessness of recrimination not only because she desired to produce
emotion different from those which invective is adapted to excite, but because
it was more just to sooth^ than to exasperate, the inquietudes which haunt^ed
him.

She now enjoyed leisure. She had always bee^ solicitous for mental
improvement. Any mean subservient to this end were valuable. The con^versation
of Ormond was an inexhaustible fund By the variety of topics and the
excitements t^ reflection it supplied, a more plenteous influx of knowledge was
produced, than could have flowed from any other source. There was no end to the
detailing of facts, and the canvassing of theories.

I have already said, that Ormond was engaged in schemes of an arduous and
elevated nature. These were the topics of epistolary discussion between him and
a certain number of coadjutors, in different parts of the world. In general
discourse, it was proper to maintain a uniform silence respecting these, not
only because they involved principles and views, remote from vulgar
apprehension, but because their success, in some measure, depended on their
secrecy. He could not give a stronger proof of his confidence in the sagacity
and steadiness of Constance than he now gave, by imparting to her his schemes,
and requesting her advice and assistance in the progress of them.

His disclosures, however, were imperfect. What knowledge was imparted, instead
of appeasing, only tended to inflame her curiosity. His answers to her
enquiries were prompt, and at first sight, sufficiently explicit, but upon
reconsideration, an obscurity seemed to gather round them, to be dispelled by
new interrogatories. These, in like manner, effected a momentary purpose, but
were sure speedily to lead into new conjectures, and re-immerse her in doubts.
The task was always new, was always in the point of being finished, and always
to be re-commenced.

Ormond aspired to nothing more ardently than to hold the reins of opinion. To
exercise absolute power over the conduct of others, not by constraining their
limbs, or by exacting obedience to his authority, but in a way of which his
subjects should be scarcely conscious. He desired that his guidance should
control their steps, but that his agency, when most effectual, should be least
suspected.

If he were solicitous to govern the thoughts of Constantia, or to regulate her
condition, the mode which he pursued had hitherto been admirably conducive to
that end. To have found her friendless and indigent, accorded, with the most
fortunate exactness, with his views. That she should have descended to this
depth, from a prosperous height, and therefore be a stranger to the torpor
which attends hereditary poverty, and be qualified rightly to estimate, and use
the competence to which, by his means, she was now restored, was all that his
providence would have prescribed.

Her thoughts were equally obsequious to his direction. The novelty and
grandeur of his schemes could not fail to transport a mind, ardent and
capacious, as that of Constance. Here his fortune had been no less propitious.
He did not fail to discover, and was not slow to seize the advantages flowing
thence. By explaining his plans, opportunity was furnished to lead and to
confine her meditations to the desirable tract. By adding fictitious
embellishments, he adapted it with more exactness to his purpose. By piecemeal
and imperfect disclosures, her curiosity was kept alive.

I have described Ormond as having contracted a passion for Constance. This
passion certainly existed in his heart, but it must not be conceived to be
immutable, or to operate independently of all those impulses and habits which
time had interwoven in his character. The person and affections of this woman,
were the objects sought by him, and which it was the dearest purpose of his
existence to gain. This, was his supreme good, though the motives to which it
was indebted for its pre-eminence in his imagination, were numerous and complex.

I have enumerated his opinions on the subject of wedlock. The question will
obviously occur, whether Constantia was sought by him, with upright or
flagitious views. His sentiments and resolutions, on this head, had for a time
fluctuated, but were now steadfast. Marriage was, in his eyes, hateful and
absurd as ever. Constance was to be obtained by any means. If other terms were
rejected, he was willing, for the sake of this good, to accept her as a wife;
but this was a choice to be made, only when every expedient was exhausted, for
reconciling her to a compact of a different kind.

For this end, he prescribed to himself, a path suited to the character of this
lady. He made no secret of his sentiments and views. He avowed his love and
described, without scruple, the scope of his wishes. He challenged her to
confute his principles, and promised a candid audience and profound
consideration to her arguments. Her present opinions he knew to be adverse to
his own, but he hoped to change them, by subtilty and perseverance. His further
hopes and designs, he concealed from her. She was unaware, that if he were
unable to effect a change in her creed, he was determined to adopt a system of
imposture. To assume the guise of a convert to her doctrines, and appear as
devout as herself in his notions of the sanctity of marriage.

Perhaps it was not difficult, to have foreseen the consequence of these
projects. Constantia's peril was imminent. This arose not only from the talents
and address of Ormond, but from the community of sentiment, which already
existed between them. She was unguarded in a point, where, if not her whole,
yet, doubtless, her principal security and strongest bulwark would have
existed. She was unacquainted with religion. She was unhabituated to conform
herself to any standard, but that connected with the present life. Matrimonial,
as well as every other human duty, was disconnected in her mind, with any awful
or divine sanction. She formed her estimate of good and evil, on nothing but
terestrial and visible consequences.

This defect in her character, she owed to her father's system of education.
Mr. Dudley was an adherent to what he conceived to be true religion. No man was
more passionate in his eulogy of his own form of devotion and belief, or in his
invectives against Atheistical dogmas; but he reflected that religion assumed
many forms, one only of which is salutary or true, and that truth in this
respect, is incompatible with infantile and premature instruction.

To this subject, it was requisite to apply the force of a mature and
unfettered understanding. For this end he labored to lead away the juvenile
reflections of Constantia, from religious topics, to detain them in the paths
of history and eloquence. To accustom her to the accuracy of geometrical
deduction, and to the view of those evils, that have flowed in all ages, from
mistaken piety.

In consequence of this scheme, her habits rather than her opinions, were
undevout. Religion was regarded by her, not with disbelief, but with absolute
indifference. Her good sense forbad her to decide before enquiry, but her modes
of study and reflection, were foreign to, and unfitted her for this species of
discussion. Her mind was seldom called to meditate on this subject, and when it
occurred, her perceptions were vague and obscure. No objects, in the sphere
which she occupied, were calculated to suggest to her the importance of
investigation and certainty.

It becomes me to confess, however reluctantly, thus much concerning my friend.
However abundantly endowed in other respects, she was a stranger to the
felicity and excellence flowing from religion. In her struggles with
misfortune, she was supported and cheered by the sense of no approbation, but
her own. A defect of this nature, will perhaps be regarded as of less moment,
when her extreme youth is remembered. All opinions in her mind were mutable,
inasmuch as the progress of her understanding was incessant.

It was otherwise with Ormond. His disbelief was at once unchangeable and
strenuous. The universe was to him, a series of events, connected by an
undesigning and inscrutable necessity, and an assemblage of forms, to which no
beginning or end can be conceived. Instead of transient views and vague ideas,
his meditations, on religious points, had been intense. Enthusiasm was added to
disbelief, and he not only dissented but abhorred.

He deemed it prudent, however, to disguise sentiments, which, if unfolded in
their full force, would wear to her the appearance of insanity: But he saw and
was eager to improve the advantage, which his anti-nuptial creed derived from
the unsettled state of her opinions. He was not unaware, likewise, of the
auspicious and indispensible cooperation of love. If this advocate were
wanting in her bosom, all his efforts would be in vain. If this pleader were
engaged in his behalf, he entertained no doubts of his ultimate success. He
conceived that her present situation, all whose comforts were the fruits of his
beneficence, and which afforded her no other subject of contemplation than
himself, was as favorable as possible to the growth of this passion.

Constance was acquainted with his wishes. She could not fail to see, that she
might speedily be called upon to determine a momentous question. Her own
sensations and the character of Ormond, were, therefore, scrutinized with
suspicious attention. Marriage could be justified in her eyes, only by
community of affections and opinions. She might love without the sanctio^ of
her judgment, but while destitute of that sanction, she would never suffer it
to sway her conduct.

Ormond was imperfectly known. What knowledge she had gained, flowed chiefly
from his own lips, and was therefore unattended with certainty. What portion of
deceit or disguise was mixed with his conversation, could be known, only by
witnessing his actions with her own eyes, and comparing his testimony with that
of others. He had embraced a multitude of opinions, which appeared to her
erroneous. Till these were rectified, and their conclusions were made to
correspond, wedlock was improper. Some of these obscurities might be dispelled,
and some of these discords be resolved into harmony by time. Meanwhile it was
proper to guard the avenues to her heart, and screen herself from self-delusion.

There was no motive to conceal her reflections, on this topic, from her
father. Mr. Dud^ley discovered, without her assistance, the view of Ormond. His
daughter's happiness wa^ blended with his own. He lived, but in the
consciousness of her tranquillity. Her image was seldom absent from his eyes,
and never from his thoughts. The emotions which it excited, sprung but in part
from the relationship of father. It was gratitude and veneration, which she
claimed from him, and which filled him with rapture.

He ruminated deeply on the character of Ormond. The political and
anti-theological tenets of this man, were regarded, not merely with
disapprobation, but antipathy. He was not ungrateful for the benefits which had
been conferred upon him. Ormond's peculiarities of sentiment, excited no
impatience, as long as he was regarded merely as a visitant. It was only as one
claiming to posses his daughter, that his presence excited in Mr. Dudley,
trepidation and loathing.

Ormond was unacquainted with what was passing in the mind of Mr. Dudley. The
latter conceived his own benefactor and his daughter's friend, to be entitled
to the most scrupulous and affable urbanity. His objections to a nearer
alliance, were urged with frequent and pathetic vehemence, only in his private
interviews with Constance. Ormond and he seldom met: Mr. Dudley, as soon as his
sight was perfectly retrieved, betook himself with eagerness to painting, an
amusemement, which his late privations had only contributed to endear to him.

Things remained nearly on their present footing for some months. At the end of
this period, some engagement obliged Ormond to leave the city. He promised to
return with as much speed as circumstances would admit. Meanwhile his letters
supplied her with topics of reflection. These were frequently received, and
were models of that energy of style, which results from simplicity of
structure, from picturesque epithets, and from the compression of much meaning
into few words. His arguments seldom imparted conviction, but delight never
failed to flow from their lucid order and cogent brevity. His narratives were
unequaled for rapidity and comprehensiveness. Every sentence was a treasury to
moralists and painters.

CHAPTER XIX.
DOMESTIC and studious occupations did not wholly engross the attention of
Constance. Social pleasures were precious to her heart, and she was not
backward to form fellowships and friendships, with those around her. Hitherto
she had met with no one, entitled to an uncommon portion of regard, or worthy
to supply the place of the friend of her infancy. Her visits were rare, and as
yet, chiefly confined to the family of Mr. Melbourne. Here she was treated with
flattering distinctions, and enjoyed opportunities of extending as far as she
pleased, her connections with the gay and opulent. To this she felt herself by
no means inclined, and her life was still eminently distinguished by love of
privacy, and habits of seclusion.

One morning, feeling an indisposition to abstraction, she determined to drop
in, for an hour, on Mrs. Melbourne. Finding Mrs. Melbourne's parlour
unoccupied, she proceeded unceremoniously, to an apartment on the second floor,
where that lady was accustomed to sit. She entered, but this room was likewise
empty. Here she cast her eyes on a collection of prints, copied from the
Farnese collection, and employed herself, for some minutes, in comparing the
forms of Titiano and the Caraechi.

Suddenly, notes of peculiar sweetness, were wafted to her ear from without.
She listened with surprise, for the tones of her father's lute were distinctly
recognized. She hied to the window, which chanced to look into a back court.
The music was perceived to come from the window of the next house. She
recollected her interview with the purchaser of her instrument, at the musical
shop, and the powerful impression which the stranger's countenance had made
upon her.

The first use she had made of her recent change of fortune, was to endeavor
the recovery of this instrument. The musical dealer, when reminded of the
purchase, and interrogated as to the practicability of regaining the lute, for
which she was willing to give treble the price, answered that he had no
knowledge of the foreign lady, beyond what was gained at the interview which
took place in Constantia's presence. Of her name, residence, and condition, he
knew nothing, and had endeavored in vain to acquire knowledge.

Now this incident seemed to have furnished her with the information she so
earnestly sought. This performer was probably the stranger herself. Her
residence so near the Melbournes, and in an house which was the property of the
Magistrate, might be means of information as to her condition, and perhaps of
introduction to a personal acquaintance.

While engaged in these reflections, Mrs. Melbourne entered the apartment.
Constantia related this incident to her friend, and stated the motives of her
present curiosity. Her friend willingly imparted what knowledge she possessed
relative to this subject. This was the sum.

This house had been hired, previously to the appearance of yellow fever, by an
English family, who left their native soil, with a view to a permanent abode in
the new world. They had scarcely taken possession of the dwelling, when they
were terrified by the progress of the epidemic. They had fled from the danger,
but this circumstance, in addition to some others, induced them to change their
scheme. An evil so unwonted as pestilence, impressed them with a belief of
perpetual danger, as long as they remained oh this side of the ocean. They
prepared for a^ immediate return to England.

For this end their house was relinquished, and their splendid furniture
destined to be sold by auction. Before this event could take place, application
was made to Mr. Melbourne, by a lady whom his wife's description, showed to be
the same with her of whom Constantia was in search* She not only rented the
house, but negociated by means of her landlord, the purchase or the furniture.

Her servants were blacks, and all but one, who officiated as steward,
unacquainted with the English language. Some accident had proved her name to be
Beauvais. She had no visitants very rarely walked abroad, and then only in the
evening with a female servant in attendance* Her hours appeared to be divided
between the lute and the pen. As to her previous history o^ her present sources
of subsistence, Mrs. Melcombe's curiosity had not been idle, but no consistent
information was obtainable. Some incident had given birth to the conjecture,
that she was wife, or daughter, or sister of Beauvais, the partizan of Brissot,
whom the faction of Marat had lately consigned to the scaffold, but this
conjecture was unsupported by suitable evidence.

This tale by no means diminished Constantia's desire of personal intercourse.
She saw no means of effecting her purpose. Mrs. Melbourne was unqualified to
introduce her, having been discouraged in all the advances she had made toward
a more friendly intercourse. Constance reflected, that her motives to
seclusion, would probably induce this lady to treat others as her friend had
been treated.

It was possible, however, to gain access to her, if not as a friend, yet as
the original proprietor of the lute. She determined to employ the agency of
Roseveldt, the musical-shopman, for the purpose of re-buying this instrument.
To enforce her application, she commissioned this person, whose obliging temper
entitled him to confidence, to state her inducements for originally offering it
for sale, and her motives for desiring the repossession on any terms which the
lady thought proper to dictate.

Roseveldt fixed an hour in which it was convenient for him to execute her
commission. This hour having passed, Constance, who was anxious respecting his
success, hastened to his house. Roseveldt delivered the instrument, which the
lady, having listened to his pleas and offers, directed to be gratuitously
restored to Constance. At first, she had expressed her resolution to part with
it on no account, and at no price. Its music was her only recreation, and this
instrument surpassed any she had ever before seen, in the costliness and
delicacy of its workmanship. But Roseveldt's representations produced an
instant change of resolution, and she not only eagerly consented to restore it,
but refused to receive any thing in payment.

Constantia was deeply affected by this unexpected generosity. It was not her
custom to be outstripped in this carrier. She now condemned herself for her
eagerness to regain this instrument. During her father's blindness, it was a
powerful, because the only solace of his melancholy. Now he had no longer the
same anxieties to encounter, and books and the pencil were means of
gratification always at hand. The lute, therefore, she imagined could be easily
dispensed with by Mr. Dudley, whereas its power of consoling might be as useful
to the unknown lady, as it had formerly been to her father. She readily
perceived in what manner it became her to act. Roseveldt was commissioned to
re-deliver the lute, and to entreat the lady's acceptance of it. The tender was
received without hesitation, and Roseveldt dismissed without any enquiry
relative to Constance.

These transactions were reflected on by Constance with considerable
earnestness. The conduct of the stranger, her affluent and lonely state, her
conjectural relationship to the actors in the great theater of Europe, were
mingled together in the fancy of Constance, and embellished with the
conceptions of her beauty, derived from their casual meeting at Roseveldt's.
She forgot not their similitude in age and sex, and delighted to prolong the
dream of future confidence and friendship to take place between them. Her heart
sighed for a companion fitted to partake in all her sympathies.

This strain, by being connected with the image of a being like herself, who
had grown up with her from childhood, who had been entwined with her earliest
affections, but from whom she had been severed from the period at which her
father's misfortunes commenced, and of whose present condition she was wholly
ignorant, was productive of the deepest melancholy. It filled her with
excruciating, and for a time irremediable sadness. It formed a kind of
paroxysm, which like some febrile affections, approach and retire without
warning, and against the most vehement struggles.

In this mood, her fancy was thronged with recollections of scenes, in which
her friend had sustained a part. Their last interview was commonly revived in
her remembrance so forcibly, as almost to produce a lunatic conception of its
reality. A ditty which they sung together on that occasion, flowed to her lips.
If ever human tones were qualified to convey the whole soul, they were those of
Constance when she sung; -- The breeze awakes, the bark prepares,
To waft me to a distant shore:
But far beyond this world of cares,
We meet again to part no more.


These fits, were accustomed to approach and to vanish by degrees. They were
transitory but not infrequent, and were pregnant with such agonizing
tenderness, such heartbreaking sighs, and a flow of such better yet delicious
tears, that it were not easily decided whether the pleasure or the pain
surmounted. When symptoms of their coming were felt, she hastened into
solitude, that the progress of her feelings might endure no restraint.

On the evening of the day, on which the lute had been sent to the foreign
lady, Constantia was alone in her chamber, immersed in desponding thoughts.
From these she was recalled by Fabian, her black servant, who announced a
guest. She was loath to break off the thread of her present meditations, and
enquired with a tone of some impatience, Who was the guest? The servant was
unable to tell; It was a young lady whom he had never before seen; She had
opened for herself, and entered the parlour without previous notice.

Constance paused at this relation. Her thought had recently been fixed upon
Sophia Westwyn^ Since their parting four years before, she had heard no tidings
of this woman. Her fears imagined no more probable cause of her friend's
silence than her death. This, however, was uncertain. The question now
occurred, and brough^ with it, sensations that left her no power to move* Was
this the guest?

Her doubts were quickly dispelled, for the stranger, taking a light from the
table, and no brooking the servant's delays, followed Fabian to the chamber of
his mistress. She entered with careless freedom, and presented, to the
astonished eyes of Constantia, the figure she had met a^ Roseveldt's, and the
purchaser of her lute.

The stranger advanced toward her with quick steps, and mingling tones of
benignity and sprightliness, said:

I have come to perform a duty. I have received from you today a lute, that I
valued almost as my best friend. To find another in America* would not,
perhaps, be possible; but, certainly* none equally superb and exquisite as this
can be found. To show how highly I esteem the gift, I have come in person to
thank you for it. -- There she stopped.

Constance could not suddenly recover from the extreme surprise into which the
unexpectedness of this meeting, had thrown her. She could scarcely sufficiently
suppress this confusion, to enable her to reply to these rapid effusions of her
visitant, who resumed, with augmented freedom:

I came, as I said, to thank you, but, to say the truth, that was not all. I
came likewise to see you. Having done my errand, I suppose I must go. I would
fain stay longer and talk to you a little: Will you give me lieve?

Constance, scarcely retrieving her composure, stammered out a polite assent.
They seated themselves, and the visitant, pressing the hand which she had
taken, proceeded in a strain so smooth, so flowing, sliding from grave to gay,
blending vivacity with tenderness, interpreting Constantia's silence with so
keen sagacity, and accounting for the singularities of her own deportment, in a
way so respectful to her companion, and so worthy of a steadfast and pure mind
in herself, that every embarrassment and scruple, were quickly banished from
their interview.

In an hour the guest took her lieve. No promise of repeating her visit, and no
request that Constantia would repay it, was made. Their parting seemed to be
the last; Whatever purpose having been contemplated, appeared to be
accomplished by this transient meeting. It was of a nature deeply to interest
the mind of Constance. This was the lady who talked with Roseveldt, and
bargained with Melbourne, and they had been induced by appearances, to suppose
her ignorant of any language but French; but, her discourse, on the present
occasion, was in English, and was distinguished by unrivalled fluency. Her
phrazes and habits of pronouncing, were untinctured with any foreign mixture,
and bespoke the perfect knowledge of a native of America.

On the next evening, while Constantia was reviewing this transaction, calling
up and weighing the sentiments which the stranger had utte^ed, and indulging
some regret at the unlikelihoo^ of their again meeting, Martinette (for I wi^
henceforth call her by her true name) entere^ the apartment as abruptly as
before. She accounted for the visit, merely by the pleasure afforded her, and
proceeded in a strain eve^ more versatile and brilliant, than before. The
interview ended like the first, without any tokens, on the part of the guest,
of resolution o^ desire to renew it, but a third interview took place on the
ensuing day.

Henceforth Martinette became a frequent bu^ hasty visitant, and Constantia
became daily more enamoured of her new acquaintance. She di^ not overlook
peculiarities in the conversation an^ deportment of this woman. These exhibited
n^ tendencies to confidence, or traces of sympathy They merely denoted large
experience, vigourous faculties and masculine seize. Hersel was never
introduced, except as an observer, bu^ her observations, on government and
manners were profound and critical.

Her education seemed not widely different, from that which Constantia had
received. It was classical and mathematical, but to this was added a knowledge
of political and military transactions, in Europe, during the present age,
which implied the possession of better means of information, than books. She
depicted scenes and characters, with the accuracy of one who had partaken and
witnessed them herself.

Constantia's attention had been chiefly occupied by personal concerns. Her
youth had passed in contention with misfortune, or in the quietudes of study.
She could not be unapprized of contemporary revolutions and wars, but her ideas
respecting them were indefinite and vague. Her views and her inferences on this
head, were general and speculative. Her acquaintance with history was exact and
circumstantial, in proportion as she retired backward from her own age. She
knew more of the siege of Mutina than of that of Lisle; more of the
machinations of Cataline and the tumults of Clodius, than of the prostration of
the Bastile, and the proscriptions of Marat.

She listened, therefore, with unspeakable eagerness to this reciter, who
detailed to her, as the occasion suggested, the progress of action and opinion,
on the theater of France and Poland. Conceived and rehearsed as this was, with
the energy and copiousness of one who sustained a part in the scene, the mind
of Constantia was always kept at the pitch of curiosity and wonder.

But while this historian described the features, personal deportment, and
domestic character of Antonette, Mirabeau and Robespierre, an impenetrable veil
was drawn over her own condition. There was a warmth and freedom in her details
which bespoke her own co-agency in these events, but was unattended by
transports of indignation or sorrow, or by pauses of abstraction, such as were
likely to occur in one whose hopes and fears had been intimately blended with
public events.

Constance could not but derive humiliation from comparing her own slender
acquirements with those of her companion. She was sensible that all the
differences between them, arose from diversities of situation. She was eager to
discover in what particulars this diversity consisted. She was for a time
withheld by scruples, not easily explained, from disclosing her wishes. An
accident however occurred, to remove these impediments.

One evening, this unceremonious visitant discovered Constance busily surveying
a chart of the Mediterranean Sea. This circumstance led the discourse to the
present state of Syria and Cyprus. Martinette was copious in her details.
Constance listened for a time, and when a pause ensued, questioned her
companion as to the means she possessed of acquiring so much knowledge. This
question was proposed with diffidence, and prefaced by apologies.

Instead of being offended by your question, replied the guest, I only wonder
that it never before occurred to you. Travelers tell us much. Volney and
Mariti would have told you nearly all that I have told. With these I have
conversed personally, as well as read their books, but my knowledge is, in
truth, a species of patrimony. I inherit it.

Will you be good enough, said Constance, to explain yourself?

My mother was a Greek of Cyprus. My father was a Sclavonian of Ragusa, and I
was born in a garden at Aleppo.

That was a singular concurrence.

How singular? That a nautical vagrant like my father, should sometimes anchor
in the bay of Naples. That a Cyprian merchant should carry his property and
daughter beyond the reach of a Turkish Sangiack, and seek an asylum so
commodious as Napoli; That my father should have dealings with this merchant,
see, love, and marry his daughter, and afterward procure, from the French
government, a consular commission to Aleppo; that the union should, in due
time, be productive of a son and daughter, are events far from being singular.
They happen daily.

And may I venture to ask if this be your history?

The history of my parents. I hope you do not consider the place of my birth as
the sole or the most important circumstance of my life.

Nothing would please me more than to he enabled to compare it with other
incidents. I am apt to think that your life is a tissue of surprising events.
That the daughter of a Ragusan and Greek, should have seen and known so much;
that she should talk English with equal fluency and more correctness than a
native; that I should now be conversing with her in a corner so remote from
Cyprus and Sicily, are events more wonderful than any which I have known.

Wonderful! Pish! Thy ignorance, thy miscalculation of probabilities is far
more so. My father talked to me in Sclavonic: My mother and her maids talked to
me in Greek. My neighbors talked to me in a medley of Arabic, Syriac and
Turkish. My father's secretary was a scholar. He was as well versed in Lysias
and Xenophon, as any of their contemporaries. He labored for ten years to
enable me to read a language, essentially the same with that I used daily to my
nurse and mother. Is it wonderful then that I should be skilful in Sclavonic,
Greek, and the jargon of Aleppo? To have refrained from learning was
impossible. Suppose a girl, prompt, diligent, inquisitive, to spend ten years
of her life partly in Spain; partly in Tuscany; partly in France, and partly in
England. With her versatile curiosity and flexible organs, would it be possible
for her to remain ignorant of each of these languages? Latin is the mother of
them all, and presents itself, of course, to her studious attention.

I cannot easily conceive motives which should lead you, before the age of
twenty, through so many scenes.

Can you not? You grew and flourished, like a frail Mimosa, in the spot where
destiny had planted you. Thank my stars, I am somewhat better than a vegetable.
Necessity, it is true, and not choice, set me in motion, but I am not sorry for
the consequences.

Is it too much, said Constance, with some hesitation, to request a detail of
your youthful adventures?

Too much to give, perhaps, at a short notice. To such as you, my tale might
abound with novelty, while to others, more acquainted with vicissitudes, it
would be tedious and flat. I must be gone in a few minutes. For that and for
better reasons, I must not be minute. A summary, at present, will enable you to
judge how far a more copious narrative is suited to instruct or to please you.

CHAPTER XX.
MY father, in proportion as he grew old and rich, became weary of Aleppo. His
natal soil, had it been the haunt of Calmucks or Bedwins, his fancy would have
transformed into Paradise. No wonder that the equitable aristocracy, and the
peaceful husbandmen of Ragusa, should be endeared to his heart by comparison
with Egyptian plagues and Turkish tyranny. Besides, he lived for his children
as well as himself. Their education and future lot required him to seek a
permanent home.

He embarked with his wife and offspring, at Scanderoon. No immediate
conveyance to Ragusa offering, the appearance of the plague in Syria, induced
him to hasten his departure. He entered a French vessel for Marseilles. After
being three days at sea, one of the crew was seized by the fatal disease, which
had depopulated all the towns upon the coast. The voyage was made with more
than usual dispatch, but before we reached our port, my mother and half the
crew perished. My father died in the Lazzaretto, more through grief than
disease.

My brother and I were children and helpless. My father's fortune was on board
this vessel, and was left by his death to the mercy of the captain. This man
was honest, and consigned us and our property to the merchant with whom he
dealt. Happily for us, our protector was childless and of scrupulous integrity.
We henceforth became his adopted children. My brother's education and my own,
were conducted on the justest principles.

At the end of four years, our protector found it expedient to make a voyage to
Cayenne. His brother was an extensive proprietor in that colony, but his sudden
death made way for the succession of our friend. To establish his claims, his
presence was necessary on the spot. He was little qualified for arduous
enterprises, and his age demanded repose, but his own acquisitions, having been
small, and being desirous of leaving us in possession of competence, he
cheerfully embarked.

Meanwhile, my brother was placed at a celebrated seminary in the Pais de Vaud,
and I was sent to a sister who resided at Verona. I was at this time fourteen
years old, one year younger than my brother, whom, since that period, I have
neither heard of nor seen.

I was now a woman, and qualified to judge and act for myself. The character of
my new friend was austere and devout, and there were so many incongenial points
between us, that but little tranquillity was enjoyed under her control. The
priest who discharged the office of her confessor, thought proper to entertain
views with regard to me, grossly inconsistent with the sanctity of his
profession. He was a man of profound dissimulation and masterly address. His
efforts, however, were repelled with disdain. My security against his attempts
lay in the uncouthness and deformity which nature had bestowed upon his person
and visage, rather than in the firmness of my own principles.

The courtship of Father Bartoli, the austerities of Madame Roselli, the
disgustful or insipid occupations to which I was condemned, made me impatiently
wish for a change, but my father, so I will call him, had decreed that I should
remain under his sister's guardianship till his return from Guiana. When this
would happen was uncertain. Events unforeseen might protract it for years, but
it could not arrive in less than a twelvemonth.

I was incessantly preyed upon by discontent. My solitude was loathsome. I
panted after liberty and friendship, and the want of these were not recompensed
by luxury and quiet, and by the instructions in useful science, which I
received from Bartoli, who, though detested as an hypocrite and lover, was
venerable as a scholar: He would fain have been an Abelard, but it was not his
fate to meet with an Heloise.

Two years passed away in this durance. My miseries were exquisite, I am almost
at a loss to account for the unhappiness of that time, for, looking back upon
it, I perceive that an equal period could not have been spent with more
benefit. For the sake of being near me, Bartoli importunately offered his
instructions. He had nothing to communicate but metaphysics and geometry. These
were little to my taste, but I could not keep him at distance. I had no other
alternative than to endure him as a lover or a teacher. His passion for science
was at least equal to that which he entertained for me, and both these passions
combined to make him a sedulous instructor. He was a disciple of the newest
doctrines respecting matter and mind. He denied the impenetrability of the
first, and the immateriality of the second. These he endeavored to inculcate
upon me, as well as to subvert my religious tenets, because he delighted, like
all men, in transfusing his opinions, and because he regarded my piety as the
only obstacle to his designs. He succeeded in dissolving the spell of
ignorance, but not in producing that kind of acquiescence he wished. He had, in
this respect, to struggle not only with my principles, but my weaknesses. He
might have overcome every obstacle, but my abhorrence of deformity and age. To
cure me of this aversion, was beyond his power. My servitude grew daily more
painful. I grew tired of chasing a comet to its aphelion, and of untying the
knot of an infinite series. A change in my condition became indispensable to my
very existence. Langour and sadness, and unwillingness to eat or to move, were
at last my perpetual attendants.

Madame Roselli was alarmed at my condition. The sources of my inquietude were
incomprehensible to her. The truth was, that I scarcely understood them myself,
and my endeavors to explain them to my friend, merely instilled into her an
opinion, that I was either lunatic or deceitful. She complained and admonished,
but my disinclination to my usual employments would not be conquered, and my
health rapidly declined. A physician, who was called, confessed that my case
was beyond his power to understand, but recommended, as a sort of desperate
expedient, a change of scene. A succession and variety of objects, might
possibly contribute to my cure.

At this time there arrived at Verona, Lady D'Arcy, an English-woman of fortune
and rank, and a strenuous Catholic. Her husband had lately died, and in order
to divert her grief, as well as to gratify her curiosity in viewing the great
seat of her religion, she had come to Italy. Intercourse took place between her
and Madame Roselli. By this means she gained a knowledge of my person and
condition, and kindly offered to take me under her protection. She meant to
traverse every part of Italy, and was willing that I should accompany her in
all her wanderings.

This offer was gratefully accepted, in spite of the artifices and
remonstrances of Bartoli. My companion speedily contracted for me the affection
of a mother. She was without kindred of her own religion, having acquired her
faith, not by inheritance, but conversion. She desired to abjure her native
country, and to bind herself by every social tie, to a people who adhered to
the same faith. Me, she promised to adopt as her daughter, provided her first
impressions in my favor, were not belied by my future deportment.

My principles were opposite to here is, but habit, an aversion to displease my
friend, my passion for knowledge, which my new condition enabled me to gratify,
all combined to make me a deceiver, but my imposture was merely of a negative
kind; I deceived her rather by forbearance to contradict, and by acting as she
acted, than by open assent and zealous concurrence. My new state was, on this
account, not devoid of inconvenience. The general deportment and sentiments of
Lady D'Arcy, testified a vigorous and pure mind. New avenues to knowledge, by
converse with mankind and with books, and by the survey of new scenes, were
open for my use. Gratitude and veneration attached me to my friend, and made
the task of pleasing her, by a seeming conformity of sentiments, less irksome.

During this interval, no tidings were received by his sister, at Verona,
respecting the fate of Sebastian Roselli. The supposition of his death, was too
plausible, not to be adapted. What influence this disaster possessed over my
brother's destiny, I know not. The generosity of Lady D'Arcy, hindered me from
experiencing any disadvantage from this circumstance. Fortune seemed to have
decreed, that I should not be reduced to the condition of an orphan.

At an age and in a situation like mine, I could not remain long unacquainted
with love. My abode at Rome, introduced me to the knowledge of a youth from
England, who had every property which I regarded as worthy of esteem. He was a
kinsman of Lady D'Arcy, and as such admitted at her house on the most familiar
footing. His patrimony was extremely slender, but was in his own possession. He
had no intention of increasing it by any professional pursuit, but was
contented with the frugal provision it afforded. He proposed no other end of
his existence, than the acquisition of virtue and knowledge.

The property of Lady D'Arcy was subject to her own disposal, but, on the
failure of a testament, this youth was, in legal succession, the next heir. He
was well acquainted with her temper and views, but in the midst of urbanity and
gentleness, studied none of those concealments of opinion, which would have
secured him her favor. That he was not of her own faith, was an insuperable,
but the only obstacle, to the admission of his claims.

If conformity of age and opinions, and the mutual fascination of love, be a
suitable basis for marriage Wentworth and I were destined for each other.
Mutual disclosure added sanctity to our affection, but the happiness of Lady
D'Arcy, being made to depend upon the dissolution of our compact, the heroism
of Wentworth made him hasten to dissolve it. As soon as she discovered our
attachment, she displayed symptoms of the deepest anguish. In addition to
religious motives, her fondness for me forbad her to exist but in my society,
and in the belief of the purity of my faith. The contention, on my part, was
vehement, between the regards due to her felicity and to my own. Had Wentworth
left me the power to decide, my decision would doubtless have evinced the
frailty of my fortitude, and the strength of my passion, but having informed me
fully of the reasons of his conduct, he precipitately retired from Rome. He
left me no means of tracing his footsteps and of assailing his weakness, by
expostulation and entreaty.

Lady D'Arcy was no less eager to abandon a spot, where her happiness had been
so iminently endangered. Our next residence was Palermo. I will not dwell upon
the sensations, produced by this disappointment, in me. I review them with
astonishment and self-compassion. If I thought it possible for me to sink again
into imbecility so ignominious, I should be disposed to kill myself.

There was no end to vows of fondness and tokens of gratitude in Lady D'Arcy.
Her future life should be devoted to compensate me for this sacrifice. Nothing
could console her in that single state in which she intended to live, but the
consolations of my fellowship. Her conduct coincided for some time with these
professions, and my anguish was allayed by the contemplation of the happiness
conferred upon one whom I re^ered.

My friend could not be charged with dissimulation and artifice. Her character
had been mistaken by herself as well as by me. Devout affections seemed to have
filled her heart, to the exclusion of any object besides myself. She cherished
with romantic tenderness, the memory of her husband, and imagined that a single
state was indispensibly enjoined upon her, by religious duty. This persuasion,
however, was subverted by the arts of a Spanish Cavalier, young, opulent, and
romantic as herself in devotion. An event like this might, indeed, have been
easi^y predicted, by those who reflected that the lady was still in the bloom
of life, ardent in her temper and bewitching in her manners.

The fondness she had lavished upon me, was now, in some degree, transferred to
a new object, but I still received the treatment due to a beloved daughter. She
was solicitous as ever to promote my gratification, and a diminution of
kindness would not have been suspected, by those who had not witnessed the
excesses of her former passion. Her marriage with the Spaniard removed the
obstacle to union with Wentworth. This man, however, had set himself beyond the
reach of my enquiries. Had there been the shadow of a clue afforded me, I
should certainly hate, sought him to the ends of the world.

I continued to reside with my friend, and accompanied her and her husband to
Spain. Antonio de Leyva was a man of probity. His mind was enlightened by
knowledge and his action^ dictated by humanity. Though but little olde^ than
myself, and young enough to be the son of his spouse, his deportment to me was
a model of rectitude and delicacy. I spent a year in Spain* partly in the
mountains of Castile and partly a^ Segovia. New manners and a new language
occupied my attention for a time, but these, losing their novelty, lost their
power to please. I betook myself to books, to beguile the tediousness and
diversify the tenor of my life.

This would not have long availed, but I was relieved from new repinings, by
the appointment of Antonio de Leyva to a diplomatic office at Vienna. Thither
we accordingly repaired. A coincidence of circumstances had led me wide from
the path of ambition and study, usually allotted to my sex and age. From the
computation of eclipses, I now betook myself to the study of man. My
proficiency, when I allowed it to be seen, attracted great attention. Instead
of adulation and gallantry, I was engaged in watching the conduct of states,
and revolving the theories of politicians.

Superficial observers were either incredulous with regard to my character, or
connected a stupid wonder with their belief. My seize and habits, they
did not see to be perfectly consonant with the principles of human nature. They
unavoidably flowed from the illicit attachment of Bartoli, and the erring
magnanimity of Wentworth. Aversion to the priest was the grand inciter of my
former studies; the love of Wentworth whom I hoped once more to meet, made me
labor to exclude the importunities of others, and to qualify myself for
securing his affections.

Since our parting in Italy, Wentworth had traversed Syria and Egypt, and
arrived some months after me at Vienna. He was on the point of leaving the
city, when accident informed me of his being there. An interview was effected,
and our former sentiments respecting each other, having undergone no change, we
were united. Madame de Leyva reluctantly concurred with our wishes, and, at
parting, forced upon me a considerable sum of money.

Wentworth's was a character not frequently met with in the world. He was a
political enthusiast, who esteemed nothing more graceful or glorious than to
die for the liberties of mankind. He had traversed Greece with an imagination
full of the exploits of ancient times, and derived from contemplating
Thermopyloe and Marathon, an enthusiasm that bordered upon phrenzy.

It was now the third year of the revolutionary war in America, and previous to
our meeting at Vienna, he had formed the resolution of repairing thither, and
tendering his service to the Congress as a volunteer. Our marriage made no
change in his plans. My soul was engrossed by two passions, a wild spirit of
adventure, and a boundless devotion to him. I vowed to accompany him in every
danger, to vie with him in military ardour; to combat and to die by his side.

I delighted to assume the male dress, to acquire skill at the sword, and
dexterity in every boisterous exercise. The timidity that commonly attends
women, gradually vanished. I felt as if embued by a soul that was a stranger to
the sexual distinction. We embarked at Breast, in a frigate destined for St.
Domingo. A desperate conflict with an English ship in the bay of Biscay, was my
first introduction to a scene of tumult and danger, of whose true nature I had
formed no previous conception. At first I was spiritless and full of dismay.
Experience however gradually reconciled me to the life that I had chosen.

A fortunate shot by dismasting the enemy, allowed us to prosecute our voyage
unmolested. At Cape Francois we found a ship which transported us, after
various perils, to Richmond in Virginia. I will not carry you through the
adventures of four years. You, sitting all your life in peaceful corners, can
scarcely imagine that variety, of hardship and turmoil, which attends the
female who lives in a camp.

Few would sustain these hardships with better grace than I did. I could seldom
be prevailed on to remain at a distance and inactive, when my husband was in
battle, and more than once rescued him from death by the seasonable destruction
of his adversary.

At the repulse of the Americans at German-Town, Wentworth was wounded and
taken prisoner. I attained permission to attend his sick bed and supply that
care, without which he would assuredly have died. Being imperfectly recovered,
he was sent to England, and subjected to a rigorous imprisonment. Milder
treatment might have permitted his complete restoration to health, but, as it
was, he died.

His kindred were noble, and rich and powerful, but it was difficult to make
them acquainted with Wentworth's situation. Their assistance when demanded was
readily afforded, but it came too late to prevent his death. Me they snatched
from my voluntary prison, and employed every friendly art to efface from my
mind the images of recent calamity.

Wentworth's singularities of conduct and opinion, had estranged him at an
early age from his family. They felt little regret at his fate, but every
motive concurred to secure their affection and succor to me. My character was
known to many officers, returned from America, whose report, joined with the
influence of my conversation, rendered me an object to be gazed at by
thousands. Strange vicissitude! Now immersed in the infection of a military
hospital, the sport of a wayward fortune, struggling with cold and hunger, with
negligence and contumely: A month after passing into scenes of gaiety and
luxury, exhibited at operas and masquerades, made the theme of enquiry and
encomium at every place of resort, and caressed by the most illustrious among
the votaries of science, and the advocates of the American cause.

Here I again met Madame de Leyva. This woman was perpetually assuming new
forms. She was a sincere convert to the Catholic religion, but she was open to
every new impression. She was the dupe of every powerful reasoner, and assumed
with equal facility the most opposite shapes. She had again reverted to the
Protestant religion, and governed by an headlong zeal in whatever cause she
engaged, she had sacrificed her husband and child to a new conviction.

The instrument of this change, was a man who passed, at that time, for a
Frenchman. He was young, accomplished and addressful, but was not suspected of
having been prompted by illicit views, or of having seduced the lady from
allegiance to her husband as well as to her God. De Leyva, however, who was
sincere in his religion as well as his love, was hasty to avenge this injury,
and in a contest with the Frenchman, was killed. His wife adopted at once, her
ancient religion and country, and was once more an English-woman.

At our meeting, her affection for me seemed to be revived, and the most
passionate entreaties were used to detain me in England. My previous
arrangements would not suffer it. I foresaw restraints and inconveniences from
the violence and caprice of her passions, and intended henceforth to keep my
liberty inviolate by any species of engagement, either of friendship or
marriage. My habits were French, and I proposed henceforward to take up my
abode at Paris. Since his voyage to Guiana, I had heard no tidings of Sebastian
Roselli. This man's image was cherished with filial emotions, and I conceived
that the sight of him would amply reward a longer journey than from London to
Marseilles.

Beyond my hopes, I found him in his ancient abode. The voyage and a residence
of three years at Cayenne, had been beneficial to his appearance and health. He
greeted me with paternal tenderness, and admitted me to a full participation of
his fortune, which the sale of his American property had greatly inhanced. He
was a stranger to the fate of my brother. On his return home, he had gone to
Swisserland with a view of ascertaining his destiny. The youth, a few months
after his arrival at Lausanne, had eloped with a companion, and had hitherto
eluded all Roselli's searches and enquiries. My father was easily prevailed
upon to transfer his residence from Provence to Paris.

Here Martinette paused, and marking the clock, It is time, resumed she, to be
gone. Are you not weary of my tale? On the day I entered France, I entered the
twenty-third year of my age, so that my promise of detaililing my youthful
adventures is fulfilled. I must away: Till we meet again, farewell.

CHAPTER XXI.
SUCH was the wild series of Martinette's adventures. Each incident fastened on
the memory of Constance, and gave birth to numberless reflections. Her prospect
of mankind seemed to be enlarged, on a sudden, to double its ancient
dimensions. Ormond's narratives had carried her beyond the Missisippi, and into
the deserts of Siberia. He had recounted the perils of a Russian war, and
painted the manners of Mongals and Naudowessies. Her new friend had led her
back to the civilized world, and pourtrayed the other half of the species. Men,
in their two forms, of savage and refined, had been scrutinized by these
observers, and what was wanting in the delineations of the one, was liberally
supplied by the other.

Eleven years, in the life of Martinette, was unrelated. Her conversation
suggested the opition that this interval had been spent in France. It was
obvious to suppose, that a woman, thus fearless and sagacious, had not been
inactive at a period like the present, which called forth talents and courage,
without distinction of sex, and had been particularly distinguished by female
enterprise and heroism. Her name easily led to the suspicion of concurrence
with the subverters of monarchy, and of participation in their fall. Her flight
from the merciless tribunals of the faction that now reigned, would explain
present appearances.

Martinette brought to their next interview, an air of uncommon exultation. On
this being remarked, she communicated the tidings of the fall of the sanguinary
tyranny of Robespierre. Her eyes sparkled, and every feature was pregnant with
delight, while she unfolded, with her accustomed energy, the particulars of
this tremendous revolution. The blood, which it occasioned to flow, was
mentioned without any symptoms of disgust or horror.

Constance ventured to ask, if this incident was likely to influence her own
condition.

Yes. It will open the way for my return.

Then you think of returning to a scene of so much danger?

Danger, my girl? It is my element. I am an adorer of liberty, and liberty
without peril can never exist.

But so much blood shed, and injustice! Does not your heart shrink from the
view of a scene of massacre and tumult, such as Paris has lately exhibited and
will probably continue to exhibit?

Thou talkest, Constance, in a way scarcely worthy of thy good sense. Have I
not been three years in a camp? What are bleeding wounds and mangled corpses,
when accustomed to the daily sight of them for years? Am I not a lover of
liberty, and must I not exult in the fall of tyrants, and regret only that my
hand had no share in their destruction?

But a woman -- how can the heart of women be inured to the shedding of blood?

Have women, I beseech thee, no capacity to reason and infer? Are they less
open than men to the influence of habit? My hand never faultered when liberty
demanded the victim. If thou were with me at Paris, I could show thee a fusil
of two barrels, which is precious beyond any other relic, merely because it
enabled me to kill thirteen officers at Jemappe. Two of these were emigrant
nobles, whom I knew and loved before the revolution, but the cause they had
since espoused, cancelled their claims to mercy.

What, said the startled Constance, have you fought in the ranks?

Certainly. Hundreds of my sex have done the same. Some were impelled by the
enthusiasm of love, and some by a mere passion for war; some by the contagion
of example; and some, with whom I myself must be ranked, by a generous devotion
to liberty. Brunswick and Saxe Coburg, had to contend with whole regiments of
women: Regiments they would have formed, if they had been collected into
separate bodies.

I will tell thee a secret. Thou would never I have seen Martinette de
Beauvais, if Brunswick had deferred one day longer, his orders for retreating
into Germany.

How so?

She would have died by her own hand.

What could lead to such an outrage?

The love of liberty.

I cannot comprehend how that love should prompt you to suicide.

I will tell thee. The plan was formed and could not miscarry. A woman was to
play the part of a banished Royalist, was to repair to the Prussian camp, and
to gain admission to the general. This would have easily been granted to a
female and an ex-noble. There she was to assassinate the enemy of her country,
and to attest her magnanimity by slaughtering herself. I was weak enough to
regret the ignominous retreat of the Prussians, because it precluded the
necessity of such a sacrifice.

This was related with accents and looks that sufficiently attested its truth.
Constantia shuddered and drew back, to contemplate more deliberately the
features of her guest. Hitherto she had read in them nothing that bespoke the
desperate courage of a martyr, and the deep designing of an assassin. The image
which her mind had reflected, from the deportment of this woman, was changed.
The likeness which she had feigned to herself, was no longer seen. She felt
that antipathy was preparing to displace love. These sentiments, however, she
concealed, and suffered the conversation to proceed.

Their discourse now turned upon the exploits of several women, who mingled in
the tumults of the capital and and in the armies on the frontiers. Instances
were mentioned of ferocity in some, and magnanimity in others, which almost
surpassed belief. Constance listened greedily, though not with approbation, and
acquired, at every sentence, new desire to be acquainted with the personal
history of Matinette. On mentioning this wish, her friend said, that she
endeavored to amuse her exile, by composing her own memoirs, and that, on her
next visit, she would bring with her the volume, which she would suffer
Constance to read.

A separation of a week elapsed. She felt some impatience for the renewal of
their intercourse, and for the perusal of the volume that had been mentioned.
One evening Sarah Baxter, whom Constance had placed in her own occasional
service, entered the room with marks of great joy and surprise, and informed
her that she at length had discovered Miss Monrose. From her abrupt and prolix
account, it appeared, that Sarah had overtaken Miss Monrose in the street, and
guided by her owa curiosity, as well as by the wish to gratify her mistress,
she had followed the stranger. To her utter astonishment the lady had paused at
Mr. Dudley's door, with a seeming resolution to enter it, but, presently,
resumed her way. Instead of pursuing her steps further, Sarah had stopped to
communicate this intelligence to Constance. Having delivered her news, she
hastened away, but returning, in a moment, with a countenance of new surprise,
she informed her mistress, that on leaving the house she had met Miss Monrose
at the door, on the point of entering. She added that the stranger had enquired
for Constance, and was now waiting below.

Constantia took no time to reflect upon an incident so unexpected and so
strange, but proceeded forthwith to the parlour. Martinette only was there. It
did not instantly occur to her that this lady and Mademoiselle Monrose, might
possibly be the same. The enquiries she made speedily removed her doubts, and
it now appeared that the woman, about whose destiny she had formed so many
conjectures, and fostered so much anxiety, was no other than the daughter of
Roselli.

Having readily answered her questions, Martinette enquired in her turn, into
the motives of her friend's curiosity. These were explained by a succinct
account of the transactions, to which the deceased Baxter had been a witness.
Constance concluded, with mentioning her own reflections on the tale, and
intimating her wish to he informed, how Martinette had extricated herfelf from
a situation so calamitous.

Is there any room for wonder on that head? replied the guest. It was absurd to
stay longer in the house. Having finished the interment of Roselli
(soldier-fashion) for he was the man who suffered his foolish regrets to
destroy him, I forsook the house. Roselli was by no means poor, but he could
not consent to live at ease, or to live at all, while his country endured such
horrible oppressions, and when so many of his friends had perished. I complied
with his humor, because it could not be changed, and I revered him too much to
desert him.

But whither, said Constance, could you seek shelter at a time like that? The
city was desolate, and a wandering female could scarcely be received under any
roof. All inhabited houses were closed at that hour, and the fear of infection
would have shut them against you, if they had not been already so.

Have thou forgotten that there were at that time, at least ten thousand French
in this city, fugitives from Marat and from St. Domingo? That they lived in
utter fearlessness of the reigning disease: sung and loitered in the public
walks, and prattled at their doors, with all their customary unconcern?
Supposest thou that there were none among these, who would receive a
countrywoman, even if her name had not been Martinette de Beauvais? Thy fancy
has depicted strange things, but believe me, that, without a farthing and
without a name, I should not have incurred the slightest inconvenience. The
death of Roselli I foresaw, because it was gradual in its approach, and was
sought by him as a good. My grief, therefore, was exhausted before it came, and
I rejoiced at his death, because it was the close of all his sorrows. The
rueful pictures of my distress and weakness, which were given by Baxter,
existed only in his own fancy.

Martinette pleaded an engagement, and took her leave, professing to have come
merely to leave with her the promised manuscript. This interview, though short,
was productive of many reflections, on the deceitfulness of appearances, and on
the variety of maxims by which the conduct of human beings is regulated. She
was accustomed to impart all her thoughts and relate every new incident to her
father. With this view she now hied to his apartment. This hour it was her
custom, when disengaged, always to spend with him.

She found Mr. Dudley busy in revolving a scheme, which various circumstances
had suggested and gradually conducted to maturity. No period of his life had
been equally delightful, with that portion of his youth which he had spent in
Italy. The climate, the language, the manners of the people, and the sources of
intellectual gratification, in painting and music, were congenial to his taste.
He had reluctantly forsaken these enchanting seats, at the summons of his
father, but, on his return to his native country, had encountered nothing but
ignominy and pain. Poverty and blindness had beset his path, and it seemed as
if it were impossible to fly too far from the scene of his disasters. His
misfortunes could not be concealed from others, and every thing around him
seemed to renew the memory of all that he had suffered. All the events of his
youth served to entice him to Italy, while all the incidents of his subsequent
life, concurred to render disgutsful his present abode.

His daughter's happiness was not to be forgotten. This he imagined would be
eminently promoted by the scheme. It would open to her new avenues to
knowledge. It would snatch her from the odious pursuit of Ormond, and by a
variety of objects and adventures, efface from her mind any impression which
his dangerous artifices might have made upon it.

This project was now communicated to Constantia. Every argument adapted to
influence her choice, was employed. He justly conceived that the only obstacle
to her adoption of it, related to Ormond. He exspatiated on the dubious
character of this man, the wildness of his schemes, and the magnitude of his
errors. What could be expected from a man, half of whose life had been spent at
the head of a band of Cassacks, spreading devastation in the regions of the
Danube, and supporting by flagitious intrigues, the tyranny of Catharine, and
the other half in traversing inhospitable countries, and extinguishing what
remained of clemency and justice, by intercourse with savages?

It was admitted that his energies were great, but misdirected, and that to
restore them to the guidance of truth, was not in itself impossible, but it was
so with relation to any power that she possessed. Conformity would flow from
their marriage, but this conformity was not to be expected from him. It was not
his custom to abjure any of his doctrines or recede from any of his claims. She
knew likewise the conditions of their union. She must go with him to some
corner of the world, where his boasted system was established. What was the
road to it, he had carefully concealed, but it was evident that it lay beyond
the precincts of civilized existence.

Whatever were her ultimate decision, it was at least proper to delay it. Six
years were yet wanting of that period, at which only she formerly considered
marriage as proper. To all the general motives for deferring her choice, the
conduct of Ormond superadded the weightiest. Their correspondence might
continue, but her residence in Europe and converse with mankind, might
enlighten her judgment and qualify her for a more rational decision.

Constantia was not uninfluenced by these reasonings. Instead of reluctantly
admitting them, she somewhat wondered that they had not been suggested by her
own reflections. Her imagination anticipated her entrance on that mighty scene
with emotions little less than rapturous. Her studies had conferred a thousand
ideal charms on a theater, where Scipio and Caesar had performed their parts.
Her wishes were no less importunate to gaze upon the Alps and Pyrenees, and to
vivify and chasten the images collected from books, by comparing them with
their real prototypes.

No social ties existed to hold her to America. Her only kinsman and friend
would be the companion of her journies. This project was likewise recommended
by advantages of which she only was qualified to judge. Sophia Westwyn had
embarked, four years previous to this date, for England, in company with an
English lady and her husband. The arrangements that were made forbad either of
the friends to hope for a future meeting: Yet now, by virtue of this project,
this meeting seemed no longer to be hopeless.

This burst of new ideas and new hopes on the mind of Constance took place in
the course of a single hour. No change in her external situation had been
wrought, and yet her mind had undergone the most signal revolution. The novelty
as well as greatness of the prospect kept her in a state of elevation and awe,
more ravishing than any she had ever experienced. Anticipations o^ intercourse
with nature in her most august forms with men in diversified states of society,
with the posterity of Greeks and Romans, and with the actors that were now upon
the stage, and above all with the being whom absence and the want of other
attachments, had, in some sort, contributed to deify, made this night pass away
upon the wings of transport.

The hesitation which existed on parting with her father, speedily gave place
to an ardour impatient of the least delay. She saw no impediments to the
immediate commencement of the voyage. To delay it a month or even a week,
seemed to be unprofitable tardiness. In this ferment of her thoughts, she was
neither able nor willing to sleep. In arranging the means of departure and
anticipating the events that would successively arise, there was abundant food
for contemplation.

She marked the first dawnings of the day and rose. She felt reluctance to
break upon her father's morning slumbers, but considered that her motives were
extremely urgent, and that the pleasure afforded him by her zealous approbation
of his scheme, would amply compensate him for this unseasonable intrusion on
his rest. She hastened therefore to his chamber. She entered with blithsome
steps, and softly drew aside the curtain.

CHAPTER XXII.
UNHAPPY Constance! At the moment when thy dearest hopes had budded a fresh,
when the clouds of insecurity and disquiet had retired from thy vision, wast
thou assailed by the great subverter of human schemes. Thou saw nothing in
futurity but an eternal variation and succession of delights. Thou wast
hastening to forget dangers and sorrows which thou fondly imaginedst were never
to return. This day was to be the outset of a new career; existence was
henceforth to be embellished with enjoyments, hitherto scarcely within the
reach of hope.

Alas! Thy predictions of calamity seldom failed to be verified. Not so thy
prognostics of pleasure. These, though fortified by every calculation of
contingencies, were edifices grounded upon nothing. Thy life was a struggle
with malignant destiny; a contest for happiness in which thou wast fated to be
overcome.

She stooped to kiss the venerable cheek of her father, and, by whispering, to
break his slumber. Her eye was no sooner fixed upon his countenance, than she
started back and shrieked. She had no power to forbear. Her outcries were
piercing and vehement. They ceased only with the cessation of breath. She sunk
upon a chair in a state partaking more of death than of life, mechanically
prompted to give vent to her agonies in shrieks, but incapable of uttering a
sound.

The alarm called her servants to the spot. They beheld her dumb, wildly
gazing, and gesticulating in a way that indicated frenzy. She made no
resistance to their efforts, but permitted them to carry her back to her own
chamber. Sarah called upon her to speak and to explain the cause of these
appearances, but the shock which she had endured, seemed to have irretrievably
destroyed her powers of utterance.

The terrors of the affectionate Sarah were increased. She kneeled by the
bedside of he^ mistress, and with streaming eyes, besought the unhappy lady to
compose herself. Perhaps the sight of weeping in another possessed a
sympathetic influence, or nature had made provision for this salutary change:
However that be, a torrent of tears now came to her succor, and rescued her
from a paroxysm of insanity, which its longer continuance might have set beyond
the reach of cure.

Meanwnile, a glance at his master's countenance made Fabian fully acquainted
with the nature of the scene. The ghastly visage of Mr. Dudley showed that he
was dead, and that he had died in some terrific and mysterious manner. As soon
as this faithful servant recovered from surprise, the first expedient which his
ingenuity suggested, was to fly with tidings of this event to Mr. Melbourne.
That gentleman instantly obeyed the summons. With the power of weeping,
Constantia recovered the power of reflection. This, for a time, served her only
as a medium of anguish. Melbourne mingled his tears with hers, and endeavored,
by suitable remonstrances, to revive her fortitude.

The filial passion is perhaps instinctive to man; but its energy is modified
by various circumstances. Every event in the life of Constance contributed to
heighten this passion beyond customary bounds. In the habit of perpetual
attendance on her father, of deriving from him her knowledge, and sharing with
him the hourly fruits of observation and reflection, his existence seemed
blended with her own. There was no other whose concurrence and council she
could claim, with whom a domestic and uninterrupted alliance could be
maintained. The only bond of consanguinity was loosened, the only prop of
friendship was taken away.

Others, perhaps, would have observed, that her father's existence had been
merely a source of obstruction and perplexity; that she had hitherto acted by
her own wisdom, and would find, hereafter, less difficulty in her choice of
schemes, and fewer impediments to the execution. -- These reflections occurred
not to her. This disaster had increased, to an insupportable degree, the
vacancy and dreariness of her existence The face she was habituated to behold,
had disappeared forever; the voice, whose mild and affecting tones, had so long
been familiar to her ears, was hushed into eternal silence. The felicity to
which she clung was ravished away: Nothing remained to hinder her from sinking
into utter despair.

The first transports of grief having subsided, a source of consolation seemed
to be opened in the belief that her father had only changed one form of being
for another: That he still lived to be the guardian of her peace and honor; to
enter the recesses of her thought: To forewarn her of evil and invite her to
good. She grasped at these images with eagerness, and fostered them as the only
solaces of her calamity. They were not adapted to inspire her with
cheerfulness, but they sublimed her sensations, and added an inexplicable
fascination to sorrow.

It was unavoidable sometimes to reflect upon the nature of that death which
had occurred. Tokens were sufficiently apparent that outward violence had been
the cause. Who could be the performer of so black a deed, by what motives he
was guided were topics of fruitless conjecture. She mused upon this subject,
not from the thirst of vengeance, but from a mournful curiosity. Had the
perpetrator stood before her, and challenged retribution, she would not have
lifted a finger to accuse or to punish. The evil already endured, left her no
power to concert and execute projects for extending that evil to others. Her
mind was unnerved, and recoiled with loathing from considerations of abstract
justice, or political utility, when they prompted to the prosecution of the
murderer.

Melbourne was actuated by different views, but, on this subject, he was
painfully bewildered. Mr. Dudley's deportment to his servants and neighbors,
was gentle and humane. He had no dealings with the trafficking or laboring
part of mankind. The fund which supplied his cravings of necessity or habit,
was his daughter's. His recreations and employments were harmless and lonely.
The evil purpose was limited to his death, for his chamber was exactly in the
same state in which negligent security had left it. No midnight footstep or
voice, no unbarred door or lifted window afforded tokens of the presence, or
traces of the entrance or flight, of the assassin.

The meditations of Constantia, however, could not fail, in some of their
circuities, to encounter the image of Craig. His agency in the impoverishment
of her father, and in the scheme by which she had like to have been loaded with
the penalties of forgery, was of an impervious and unprecedented kind. Motives
were unveiled by time, in some degree, accounting for his treacherous
proceeding, but there was room to suppose an inborn propensity to mischief. Was
he not the author of this new evil? His motives and his means were equally
inscrutable, but their inscrutability might flow from her own defects in
discernment and knowledge, and time might supply her defects in this as in
former instances.

These images were casual. The causes of the evil were seldom contemplated. Her
mind was rarely at liberty to wander from reflection on her irremidiable loss.
Frequently, when confused by distressful recollections, she would detect
herself going to her father's chamber. Often his well known accents would ring
in her ears, and the momentary impulse would be to answer his calls. Her
reluctance to sit down to her meals, without her usual companion, could
scarcely be surmounted.

In this state of mind the image of the only friend who survived, or whose
destiny, at least, was doubtful, occurred to her. She sunk into fits of deeper
abstraction and dissolved away in tears of more agonizing tenderness. A week
after her father's interment, she shut herself up in her chamber, to torment
herself with fruitless remembrances. The name of Sophia Westwyn was pronounced,
and the ditty that solemnized their parting was sung. Now, more than formerly,
she became sensible of the loss of that portrait, which had been deposited in
the hands of M'Crea, as a pledge. As soon as her change of fortune had supplied
her with the means of redeeming it, she hastened to M'Crea for that end. To her
unspeakable disappointment he was absent from the city: He had taken a long
journey, and the exact period of his return could not be ascertained. His
clerks refused to deliver the picture, or even, by searching, to discover
whether it was still in their master's possession. This application had
frequently and lately been repeated, but without success; M'Crea had not yet
returned and his family were equally in the dark, as to the day on which his
return might be expected.

She determined on this occasion, to renew her visit. Her incessant
disappointments had almost extinguished hope, and she made enquiries at his
door, with a faultering accent and sinking heart. These emotions were changed
into surprise and delight, when answer was made that he had just arrived. She
was instantly conducted into his presence.

The countenance of M'Crea easily denoted, that his visitant was by no means
acceptable. There was a mixture of embarrassment and sullenness in his air,
which was far from being diminished when the purpose of this visit was
explained. Constance reminded him of the offer and acceptance of this pledge,
and of the conditions with which the transaction was accompanied.

He acknowledged, with some hesitation, that a promise had been given to retain
the pledge until it were in her power to redeem it, but the long delay, the
urgency of his own wants, and particularly the ill treatment which he conceived
himself to have suffered, in the transaction respecting the forged note, had,
in his own opinion, absolved him from this promise. He had therefore sold the
picture to a goldsmith, for as much as the gold about it was worth.

This information produced, in the heart of Constantia, a contest between
indignation and sorrow, that, for a time, debarred her from speech. She stifled
the anger that was, at length, rising to her lips, and calmly inquired to whom
the picture had been sold.

M'Crea answered that for his part he had little dealings in gold and silver,
but every thing of that kind, which fell to his share, he transacted with Mr. D
--. This person was one of the most eminent of his profession. His character
and place of abode were universally known. The only expedient that remained was
to apply to him, and to ascertain, forthwith, the destiny of the picture. It
was too probable, that when separated from its case, the portrait was thrown
away or destroyed, as a mere encumbrance, but the truth was too momentous to be
made the sport of mere probability. She left the house of M'Crea, and hastened
to that of the goldsmith.

The circumstance was easily recalled to his remembrance. It was true that such
a picture had been offered for sale, and that he had purchased it. The
workmanship was curious, and he felt unwilling to destroy it. He therefore hung
it up in his shop and indulged the hope that a purchaser would, sometime, be
attracted by the mere beauty of the toy.

Constantia's hopes were revived by these tidings, and she earnestly inquired
if it were still in his possession.

No. A young gentleman had entered his shop some months before; the picture had
caught his fancy, and he had given a price which the artist owned he should not
have demanded, had he not been encouraged by the eagerness which the gentleman
betrayed to possess it.

Who was this gentleman? Had there been any previous acquaintance between them?
What was his name, his profession, and where was he to be found?

Really, the goldsmith answered, he was ignorant respecting all those
particulars. Previously to this purchase, the gentleman had sometimes visited
his shop, but he did not recollect to have since seen him. He was unacquainted
with his name and his residence.

What appeared to be his motives for purchasing this picture?

The customer appeared highly pleased with it. Pleasure, rather than surprise,
seemed to be produced by the sight of it. If I were permitted to judge,
continued the artist, I should imagine that the young man was acquainted with
the original. To say the truth, I hinted as much at the time, and I did not see
that he discouraged the supposition. Indeed, I cannot conceive how the picture
could otherwise have gained any value in his eyes.

This only heightened the eagerness of Constance to trace the footsteps of the
youth. It was obvious to suppose some communication or connection between her
friend and this purchaser. She repeated her enquiries, and the goldsmith, after
some consideration, said: -- Why, on second thoughts, I seem to have some
notion of having seen a figure like that of my customer, go into a lodging
house, in Front-Street, some time before I met with him at my shop.

The situation of this house being satisfactorily described, and the artist
being able to afford her no further information, except as to stature and
guise, she took her leave. There were two motives impelling her to prosecute
her search after this person; the desire of regaining this portrait and of
procuring tidings of her friend. Involved as she was in ignorance, it was
impossible to conjecture, how far this incident would be subservient to these
inestimable purposes. To procure an interview with this stranger, was the first
measure which prudence suggested.

She knew not his name or his person. He was once seen entering a lodging
house. Thither she must immediately repair, but how to introduce herself, how
to describe the person of whom she was in search, she knew not. She was beset
with embarrassments and difficulties. While her attention was entangled by
these, she proceeded unconsciously on her way, and stopped not until she
reached the mansion that had been described. Here she paused to collect her
thoughts.

She found no relief in deliberation. Every moment added to her perplexity and
indecision. Irresistibly impelled by her wishes, she at length, in a mood that
partook of desperate, advanced to the door and knocked. The summons was
immediately obeyed by a woman of decent appearance. A pause ensued, which
Constantia at length terminated, by a request to see the mistress of the house.

The lady courteously answered that she was the person, and immediately ushered
herrisitant into an apartment. Constance being seated, the lady waited for the
disclosure of her message. To prolong the silence was only to multiply
embarrassments. She reverted to the state of her feelings, and saw that they
flowed from inconsistency and folly. One vigorous effort was sufficient to
restore her to composure and self-command.

She began with apologizing for a visit, unpreceeded by an introduction. The
object of her enquiries was a person, with whom it was of the utmost moment
that she should procure a meeting, but whom, by an unfortunate concurrence of
circumstances, she was unable to describe by the usual incidents of name and
profession. Her knowledge was confined to his external appearance, and to the
probability of his being an inmate of this house, at the beginning of the year.
She then proceeded to describe his person and dress.

It is true, said the lady, such an one as you describe has boarded in this
house. His name was Martynne. I have good reason to remember him, for he lived
with me three months, and then left the country without paying for his board.

He has gone then? said Constance, greatly discouraged by these tidings.

Yes: He was a man of specious manners and loud pretensions. He came from
England, bringing with him forged recommendatory letters, and after passing
from one end of the country to the other, contracting debts which he never
paid, and making bargains which he never fulfilled, he suddenly disappeared. It
is likely that he has returned to Europe.

Had he no kindred, no friends, no companions?

He found none here. He made pretenses to alliances in England, which better
information has, I believe, since shown to be false.

This was the sum of the information procurable from this source. Constance was
unable to conceal her chagrin. These symptoms were observed by the lady, whose
curiosity was awakened in turn. Questions were obliquely started, inviting
Constance to a disclosure of her thoughts. No advantage would arise from
confidence, and the guest, after a few minutes of abstraction and Silence, rose
to take her leave.

During this conference, some one appeared to be negligently sporting with the
keys of an harpsichord, in the next apartment. The notes were too irregular and
faint to make a forcible impression on the ear. In the present state of her
mind, Constance was merely conscious of the sound, in the intervals of
conversation. Having arisen from her seat, her anxiety to obtain some
information that might lead to the point she wished, made her again pause. She
endeavored to invent some new interrogatory better suited to her purpose, than
those which had, already, been employed. A silence on both sides ensued.

During this interval, the unseen musician suddenly refrained from rambling,
and glided into notes of some refinement and complexity. The cadence was
aerial, but a thunderbolt, falling at her feet, would not have communicated a
more visible shock to the senses of Constance. A glance that denoted a tumult
of soul bordering on distraction, was now fixed upon the door, that led into
the room whence the harmony proceeded. Instantly the cadence was revived, and
some accompanying voice, was heard to warble Ah! far beyond this world of woes,
We meet to part -- to part no more.


Joy and grief in their sudden onset, and their violent extremes, approach so
nearly, in their influence on human beings, as scarce to be distinguished.
Constantia's frame was still enfeebled by her recent distresses. The torrent of
emotion was too abrupt and too vehement. Her faculties were overwhelmed, and
she sunk upon the floor motionless and without sense, but not till she had
faintly articulated;

My God! My God! This is a joy unmerited and too great.

CHAPTER XXIII.
I MUST be forgiven if I now introduce myself on the stage. Sophia Westwyn is
the friend of Constance, and the writer of this narrative. So far as my fate
was connected with that of my friend, it is worthy to be known. That connection
has constituted the joy and misery of my existence, and has prompted me to
undertake this task.

I assume no merit from the desire of knowledge, and superiority to temptation.
There is little of which I can boast, but that little I derived,
instrumentally, from Constance. Poor as my seize are, it is to her that I
am indebted for them all. Life itself was the gift of her father, but my virtue
and felicity are her gifts. That I am neither indigent nor profligate, flows
from her bounty.

I am not unaware of the divine superintendence, of the claims upon my
gratitude and service, which pertain to my God. I know that all physical and
moral agents, are merely instrumental to the purpose that he wills, but though
the great author of being and felicity must not be forgotten, it is neither
possible nor just to overlook the claims upon our love, with which our
fellow-beings are invested.

The supreme love does not absorb, but chasten and enforce all subordinate
affections. In proportion to the rectitude of my perceptions and the ardour of
my piety, must I clearly discern and fervently love, the excellence discovered
in my fellow-beings, and industriously promote their improvement and felicity.

From my infancy to my seventeenth year, I lived in the house of Mr. Dudley. On
the day of my birth, I was deserted by my mother. Her temper was more akin to
that of tygress than woman: Yet that is unjust, for beasts cherish their
offspring. No natures but human, are capable of that depravity, which makes
insensible to the claims of innocence and helplessness.

But let me not recall her to memory. Have I not enough of sorrow? Yet to omit
my causes of disquiet, the unprecedented forlornness of my condition, and the
persecutions of an unnatural parent, would be to leave my character a problem,
and the sources of my love of Miss Dudley unexplored. Yet I must not dwell upon
that complication of iniquities, that savage ferocity and unextinguishable
hatred of me, which characterized my unhappy mother!

I was not safe under the protection of Mr. Dudley, nor happy in the caresses
of his daughter. My mother asserted the privilege of that relation; she
labored for years to obtain the control of my person and actions; to snatch
me from a peaceful and chaste assylum, and detain me in her own house, where,
indeed, I should not have been in want of raiment and food, but where --

O my mother! Let me not dishonor thy name! Yet it is not in my power to
enhance thy infamy. Thy crimes, unequalled as they were, were, perhaps,
expiated by thy penitence. Thy offenses are too well known, but perhaps they
who witnessed thy freaks of intoxication, thy defiance of public shame, the
enormity of thy pollutions, the infatuation that made thee glory in the pursuit
of a loathesome and detestable trade, may be strangers to the remorse and the
abstinence which accompanied the close of thy ignominious life.

For ten years was my peace incessantly molested, by the menaces or
machinations of my mother. The longer she meditated my destruction, the more
tenacious of her purpose, and indefatigable in her efforts, she became. That my
mind was harrassed with perpetual alarms, was not enough. The fame and
tranquillity of Mr. Dudley and his daughter, were hourly assailed. My mother
resigned herself to the impulses of malignity and rage. Headlong passions and a
vigorous, though perverted understanding, were here is. Hence her stratagems to
undermine the reputation of my protector, and to bereave him of domestic
comfort, were subtle and profound. Had she not herself been careless of that
good, which she endeavored to wrest from others, her artifices could scarcely
have been frustrated.

In proportion to the hazard which accrued to my protector and friend, the more
ardent their zeal in my defense, and their affection for my person became. They
watched over me with ineffable solicitude. At all hours and in every
occupation, I was the companion of Constance. All my wants were supplied, in
the same proportion as here is. The tenderness of Mr. Dudley seemed equally
divided between us. I partook of his instructions, and the means of every
intellectual and personal gratification, were lavished upon me.

The speed of my mother's career in infamy, was at length slackened. She left
New York, which had long been the theater of her vices. Actuated by a new
caprice, she determined to travel through the Southern States. Early indulgence
was the cause of her ruin, but her parents had given her the embellishments of
a fashionable education. She delighted to assume all parts, and personate the
most opposite characters. She now resolved to carry a new name and the mask of
virtue, into scenes hitherto unvisited.

She journeyed as far as Charleston. Here she met an inexperienced youth,
lately arrived from England, and in possession of an ample fortune. Her
speciousness and artifices seduced him into a precipitate marriage. Her true
character, however, could hot be long concealed by herself, and her vices had
been too conspicuous, for her long to escape recognition. Her husband was
infatuated by her blandishments. To abandon her, or to contemplate her depavity
with unconcern, were equally beyond his power. Romantic in his sentiments, his
fortitude was unequal to his disappointments, and he speedily sunk into the
grave. By a similar refinement in generosity, he bequeathed to her his property.

With this accession of wealth, she returned to her ancient abode. The mask,
lately worn, seemed preparing to be thrown aside, and her profligate habits to
be resumed with more eagerness than ever, but an unexpected and total
revolution was effected, by the exhortations of a Methodist divine. Her heart
seemed, on a sudden, to be remoulded, her vices and the abettors of them were
abjured, she shut out the intrusions of society, and prepared to expiate, by
the rigours of abstinence and the bitterness of tears, the offenses of her past
life.

In this, as in her former career, she was unacquainted with restraint and
moderation. Her remorses gained strength, in proportion as she cherished them.
She brooded over the images of her guilt, till the possibility of forgiveness
and remission disappeared. Her treatment of her daughter and her hasband
constituted the chief source of her torment. Her awakened conscience refused
her a momentary respite from its persecutions. Her thought became, by rapid
degrees, tempestuous and gloomy, and it was at length evident, that her
condition was maniacal.

In this state, she was to me an object, no longer of terror, but compassion.
She was surrounded by hirelings, devoid of personal attachment, and anxious
only to convert her misfortunes, to their own advantage. This evil it was my
duty to obviate. My presence for a time, only enhanced the vehemence of her
malady, but at length it was only by my attendance and soothing, that she was
diverted from the fellest purposes. Shocking execrations and outrages,
resolutions and efforts to destroy herself and those around her, were sure to
take place in my absence. The moment I appeared before her, her fury abated;
her gesticulations were becalmed, and her voice exerted only in incoherent and
pathetic lamentations.

These scenes, though so different from those which I had formerly been
condemned to witness, were scarcely less excruciating. The friendship of
Constantia Dudley was my only consolation. She took up her abode with me, and
shared with me every disgustful and perilous office, which my mother's insanity
prescribed.

Of this consolation, however, it was my fate to be bereaved. My mother's state
was deplorable, and no remedy hitherto employed, was efficacious. A voyage to
England, was conceived likely to benefit, by change of temperature and scenes,
and by the opportunity it would afford of trying the superior skill of English
phyicians. This scheme, after various struggles, on my part, was adopted. It
was detestable to my imagination, because it severed me from that friend, in
whose existence mine was involved, and without whose participation, knowledge
lost its attractions, and society became a torment.

The prescriptions of my duty could not be disguised or disobeyed, and we
parted. A mutual engagement was formed, to record every sentiment and relate
every event that happened, in the life of either, and no opportunity of
communicating information, was to be omitted. This engagement was punctually
performed on my part. I sought out every method of conveyance to my friend, and
took infinite pains to procure tidings from her, but all were ineffectual.

My mother's malady declined, but was succeeded by a pulmonary disease, which
threatened her speedy destruction. By the restoration of her understanding, the
purpose of her voyage was obtained, and my impatience to return, which the
inexplicable and ominous silence of my friend daily increased, prompted me to
exert all my powers of persuasion, to induce her to re-visit America.

My mother's frenzy was a salutary crisis in her moral history. She looked back
upon her past conduct with unspeakable loathing, but this retrospect only
invigorated her devotion and her virtue: but the thought of returning to the
scene of her unhappiness and infamy, could not be endured. Besides, life in her
eyes, possessed considerable attractions, and her physicians flattered her with
recovery from her present disease, if she would change the atmosphere of
England for that of Languedoc and Naples.

I followed her with murmurs and reluctance. To desert her in her present
critical state would have been inhuman. My mother's aversions and attachments,
habits and views were dissonant with my own. Conformity of sentiments and
impressions of maternal tenderness, did not exist to bind us to each other. My
attendance was assiduous, but it was the sense of duty that rendered my
attendance a supportable task.

Her decay was eminently gradual. No time seemed to diminish her appetite for
novelty and change. During three years we traversed every part of France,
Switzerland and Italy. I could not but attend to surrounding scenes, and mark
the progress of the mighty revolution, whose effects, like agitation in a
fluid, gradually spread from Paris, the center, over the face of the
neighboring kingdoms; but there passed not a day or an hour in which the image
of Constance was not recalled, in which the most pungent regrets were not felt
at the inexplicable silence which had been observed by her, and the most
vehement longings indulged to return to my native country. My exertions to
ascertain her condition by indirect means, by interrogating natives of America,
with whom I chanced to meet, were unwearied, but, for a long period,
ineffectual.

During this pilgrimage, Rome was thrice visited. My mother's indisposition was
hastening to a crisis, and she formed the resolution of closing her life at the
bottom of Vesuvius. We stopped, for the sake of a few day's repose, at Rome. On
the morning after our arrival, I accompanied some friends to view the public
edifices. Casting my eyes over the vast and ruinous interior of the Coliseo, my
attention was fixed by the figure of a young man, whom, after a moment's pause,
I recollected to have seen in the streets of New York. At a distance from home,
mere community of country is no inconsiderable bond of affection. The social
spirit prompts us to cling even to inanimate objects, when they remind us of
ancient fellowships and juvenile attachments.

A servant was dispatched to summon this stranger, who recognized a
country-woman with a pleasure equal to that which I had received. On nearer
view, this person, whose name was Courtland, did not belie my favorable
prepossessions. Our intercourse was soon established on a footing of confidence
and intimacy.

The destiny of Constance was always uppermost in my thoughts. This person's
acquaintance was originally sought, chiefly in the hope of obtaining from him
some information respecting my friend. On inquiry I discovered that he had left
his native city, seven months after me. Having tasked his recollection and
compared a number of facts, the name of Dudley at length re-occurred to him. He
had casually heard the history of Craig's imposture and its consequences. These
were now related as circumstantially as a memory, occupied by subsequent
incidents, enabled him. The tale had been told to him, in a domestic circle
which he was accustomed to frequent, by the person who purchased Mr. Dudley's
lute, and restored it to its previous owner, on the conditions formerly
mentioned.

This tale filled me with anguish and doubt. My impatience to search out this
unfortunate girl, and share with her her sorrows or relieve them, was anew
excited by this mournful intelligence. That Constantia Dudley was reduced to
beggary, was too abhorrent to my feelings to recieve credit, yet the sale of
her father's property, comprising even his furniture and clothing, seemed to
prove that she had fallen even to this depth. This enabled me in some degree to
account for her silence. Her generous spirit would induce her to conceal
misfortunes from her friend, which no communication would alleviate. It was
possible that she had selected some new abode, and that in consequence, the
letters I had written, and which amounted to volumes, had never reached her
hands.

My mother's state would not suffer me to obey the impulse of my heart. Her
frame was verging toward dissolution. Courtland's engagements allowed him to
accompany us to Naples, and here the long series of my mother's pilgrimages,
closed in death. Her obsequies were no sooner performed, than I determined to
set out on my long projected voyage. My mother's property, which, in
consequence of her decease, devolved upon me, was not inconsiderable. There is
scarcely any good so dear, to a rational being, as competence. I was not
unacquainted with its benefits, but this acquisition was valuable to me chiefly
as it enabled me to reunite my fate to that of Constance.

Courtland was my countryman and friend. He was destiiute of fortune, and had
been led to Europe partly by the spirit of adventure, and partly on a
mercantile project. He had made sale of his property, on advantageous terms, in
the ports of France, and resolved to consume the produce in examining this
scene of heroic exploits and memorable revolutions. His slender stock, though
frugally and even parsimoniously administered, was nearly exhausted, and at the
time of our meeting at Rome, he was making reluctant preparations to return.

Sufficient opportunity was afforded us, in an unrestrained and domestic
intercourse of three months, which succeeded our Roman interview, to gain a
knowledge of each other. There was that conformity of tastes and views between
us, which could scarcely fail, at an age, and in a situation like ours, to give
birth to tenderness. My resolution to hasten to America, was peculiarly
unwelcome to my friend. He had offered to be my companion, but this offer, my
regard to his interest obliged me to decline; but I was willing to compensate
him for this denial, as well as to gratify my own heart, by an immediate
marriage.

So long a residence in England and Italy, had given birth to friendships and
connections of the dearest kind. I had no view but to spend my life with
Courtland, in the midst of my maternal kindred who were English. A voyage to
America, and reunion with Constance were previously indispensable, but I hoped
that my friend might be prevailed upon, and that her disconnected situation
would permit her, to return with me to Europe. If this end could not be
accomplished, it was my inflexible purpose to live and to die with her.
Suitably to this arrangement, Courtland was to repair to London, and wait
patiently till I should be able to rejoin him there, or to summon him to meet
me in America.

A week after my mother's death, I became a wife, and embarked, the next day,
at Naples, in a Ragusan ship, destined for New York. The voyage was tempestuous
and tedious. The vessel was necessitated to make a short stay at Toulon. The
state of that city, however, then in possession of the English, and besieged by
the revolutionary forces, was adverse to commercial views. Happily, we resumed
our voyage, on the day previous to that on which the place was evacuated by the
British. Our seasonable departure rescued us from witnessing a scene of
horrors, of which the history of former wars, furnish us with few examples.

A cold and boisterous navigation awaited us. My palpitations and inquietudes
augmented as we approached the American coast. I shall not forget the
sensations which I experienced on the sight of the Beacon at Sandy-Hook. It was
first seen at midnight, in a stormy and beclouded atmosphere, emerging from the
waves, whose fluctuation allowed it, for some time, to be visible only by fits.
This token of approaching land, affected me as much as if I had reached the
threshhold of my friend's dwelling.

At length we entered the port, and I viewed, with high-raised, but
inexplicable feelings, objects with which I had been from infancy familiar. The
flag-staff erected on the battery, recalled to my imagination the pleasures of
the evening and morning walks, which I had taken on that spot, with the lost
Constantia. The dream was fondly cherished, that the figure which I saw,
loitering along the terrace, was here is.

On disembarking, I gazed at every female passenger, in hope that it was she
whom I sought. An absence of three years, had obliterated from my memory none
of the images which attended me on my departure.

CHAPTER XXIV.
AFTER a night of repose rather than of sleep, I began the search after my
friend. I went to the house which the Dudleys formerly inhabited, and which had
been the asylum of my infancy. It was now occupied by strangers, by whom no
account could be given of its former tenants. I obtained directions to the
owner of the house. He was equally unable to satisfy my curiosity. The purchase
had been made at a public sale, and terms had been settled not with Dudley, but
with the Sheriff.

It is needless to say, that the history of Craig's imposture and its
consequences, were confirmed by every one who resided at that period in
New York. The Dudleys were well remembered, and their disappearance,
immediately after their fall, had been generally noticed, but whither they had
retired, was a problem which no one was able to solve.

This evasion was strange. By what motives the Dudleys were induced to change
their ancient abode, could be vaguely guessed. My friend's grandfather was a
native of the West Indies. Descendants of the same stock still resided in
Tobago. They might be affluent, and to them, it was possible, that Mr. Dudley,
in this change of fortune, had betaken himself for relief. This was a mournful
expedient, since it would raise a barrier between my friend and myself scarcely
to be surmounted.

Constantia's mother was stolen by Mr. Dudley from a Convent at Amiens. There
were no affinities, therefore, to draw them to France. Her grandmother was a
native of Baltimore, of a family of some note, by name Ridgeley. This family
might still exist, and have either afforded an asylum to the Dudleys, or, at
least, be apprised of their destiny. It was obvious to conclude that they no
longer existed within the precincts of New York. A journey to Baltimore was the
next expedient.

This journey was made in the depth of winter, and by the speediest conveyance.
I made no more than a day's sojourn in Philadelphia. The epidemic by which that
city had been lately ravaged, I had not heard of till my arrival in America.
Its devastations were then painted to my fancy in the most formidable colors.
A few months only had elapsed since its extinction, and I expected to see
numerous marks of misery and dispopulation.

To my no small surprise, however, no vestiges of this calamity were to be
discerned. All houses were open, all streets thronged, and all faces
thoughtless or busy. The arts and the amusements of life seemed as sedulously
cultivated as ever. Little did I then think what had been, and what, at that
moment, was the condition of my friend. I stopped for the sake of respite from
fatigue, and did not, therefore, pass much time in the streets. Perhaps, had I
walked seasonably abroad, we might have encountered each other, and thus have
saved ourselves from a thousand anxieties.

At Baltimore I made myself known, without the formality of introduction, to
the Ridgeleys. They acknowledged their relationship to Mr. Dudley, but
professed absolute ignorance of his fate. Indirect intercourse only had been
maintained, formerly, by Dudley with his mother's kindred. They had heard of
his misfortune, a twelvemonth after it happened, but what measures had been
subsequently pursued, their kinsman had not thought proper to inform them.

The failure of this expedient almost bereft me of hope. Neither my own
imagination nor the Ridgeleys, could suggest any new mode by which my purpose
was likely to be accomplished. To leave America, without obtaining the end of
my visit, could not be thought of without agony, and yet the continuance of my
stay promised me no relief from my uncertainties.

On this theme, I ruminated without ceasing. I recalled every conversation and
incident of former times, and sought in them a clue, by which my present
conjectures might be guided. One night, immersed alone in my chamber, my
thoughts were thus employed. My train of meditation was, on this occasion, new.
From the review of particulars from which no satisfaction had hitherto been
gained, I passed to a vague and comprehensive retrospect

Mr. Dudley's early life, his profession of a painter, his zeal in this
pursuit, and his reluctance to quit it, were remembered. Would he not revert to
this profession, when other means of subsistence were gone. It is true, similar
obstacles with those which had formerly occasioned his resort to a different
path, existed at present, and no painter of his name was to be found in
Philadelphia, Baltimore, or New York. But would it not occur to him, that the
patronage denied to his skill, by the frugal and unpolished habits of his
countrymen, might with more probability of success, be sought from the opulence
and luxury of London? Nay, had he not once affirmed in my hearing, that if he
ever were reduced to poverty, this was the method he would pursue?

This conjecture was too bewitching to be easily dismissed. Every new
reflection augmented its force. I was suddenly raised by it from the deepest
melancholy to the region of lofty and gay hopes. Happiness, of which I had
began to imagine myself irretrievably bereft, seemed once more to approach
within my reach. Constance would not only be found, but be met in the midst of
those comforts which her father's skill could not fail to procure, and on that
very stage where I most desired to encounter her. Mr. Dudley had many friends
and associates of his youth in London. Filial duty had repelled their
importunities to fix his abode in Europe, when summoned home by his father. On
his father's death these solicitations had been renewed, but were disregarded
for reasons, which he, afterward, himself confessed, were fallacious. That
they would, a third time be preferred, and would regulate his conduct, seemed
to me incontestable.

I regarded with wonder and deep regret, the infatuation that had hitherto
excluded these images from my understanding and my memory. How many dangers and
toils had I endured since my embarkation at Naples, to the present moment? How
many lingering minutes had I told since my first interview with Courtland? All
were owing to my own stupidity. Had my present thoughts been seasonably
suggested, I might long since have been restored to the embraces of my friend,
without the necessity of an hour's separation from my husband.

These were evils to be repaired as far as it was possible. Nothing now
remained but to procure a passage to Europe. For this end diligent inquiries
were immediately set in foot. A vessel was found, which, in a few weeks, would
set out upon the voyage. Having bespoken a conveyance, it was incumbent on me
to sustain with patience the unwelcome delay.

Meanwhile, my mind, delivered from the dejection and perplexities that lately
haunted it, was capable of some attention to surrounding objects. I marked the
peculiarities of manners and language in my new abode, and studied the effects
which a political and religious system, so opposite to that with which I had
conversed, in Italy and Switzerland, had produced. I found that the difference
between Europe and America, lay chiefly in this; that, in the former, all
things tended to extremes, whereas, in the latter, all things tended to the
same level. Genius and virtue, and happiness, on these shores, were
distinguished by a sort of mediocrity. Conditions were less unequal, and men
were strangers to the heights of enjoyment and the depths of misery, to which
the inhabitants of Europe are accustomed.

I received friendly notice and hospitable treatment from the Ridgeleys. These
people were mercantile and plodding in their habits. I found in their social
circle, little exercises for the sympathies of my heart, and willingly accepted
their aid to enlarge the sphere of my observation.

About a week before my intended embarkation, and when suitable preparation had
been made for that event, a lady arrived in town, who was cousin to my
Constantia. She had frequently been mentioned in favorable terms, in my
hearing. She had passed her life, in a rural abode with her father, who
cultivated his own domain, lying forty miles from Baltimore.

On an offer being made to introduce us to each other, I consented to know one
whose chief recommendation, in my eyes, consisted in her affinity to Constance
Dudley. I found an artless and attractive female, unpolished and undepraved by
much intercourse with mankind. At first sight, I was powerfully struck by the
resemblances of her features to those of my friend, which sufficiently denoted
their connection with a common stock.

The first interview afforded mutual satisfaction. On our second meeting,
discourse insensibly led to the mention of Miss Dudley, and of the design which
had brought me to America. She was deeply affected by the earnestness with
which I expatiated on her cousin's merits, and by the proofs which my conduct
had given of unlimited attachment.

I dwelt immediately on the measures which I had hitherto ineffectually pursued
to trace her footsteps, and detailed the grounds of my present belief, that we
should meet in London. During this recital, my companion sighed and wept. When
I finished my tale, her tears, instead of ceasing, flowed with new vehemence.
This appearance excited some surprise, and I ventured to ask the cause of her
grief.

Alas! She replied, I am personally a stranger to my Cousin, but her character
has been amply displayed to me by one who knew her well. I weep to think how
much she has suffered. How much excellence we have lost!

Nay, said I, all her sufferings will, I hope, be compensated, and I by no
means consider her as lost. If my search in London be unsuccessful, then shall
I indeed despair.

Despair then, already, said my sobbing companion, for your search will be
unsuccessful, How I feel for your disappointment! but it cannot be known too
soon. My Cousin is dead!

These tidings were communicated with tokens of sincerity and sorrow, that left
me no room to doubt that they were believed by the relater. My own emotions
were suspended till interrogations had obtained a knowledge of her reasons for
crediting this fatal event, and till she had explained the time and manner of
her death. A friend of Miss Ridgeley's father had witnessed the devastations of
the yellow fever in Philadelphia. He was apprized of the relationship that
subsisted between his friend and the Dudleys. He gave a minute and
circumstantial account of the arts of Craig. He mentioned the removal of my
friends to Philadelphia, their obscure and indigent life, and finally, their
falling victims to the pestilence.

He related the means by which he became apprized of their fate, and drew a
picture of their death, surpassing all that imagination can conceive of
shocking and deplorable. The quarter where they lived was nearly desolate.
Their house was shut up, and, for a time, imagined to to be uninhabited. Some
suspicions being awakened, in those who superintended the burial of the dead,
the house was entered, and the father and child discovored to be dead. The
former was stretched upon his wretched pallet, while the daughter was found on
the floor of the lower room, in a state that denoted the sufferance, not only
of disease, but of famine.

This tale was false. Subsequent discoveries proved this to be a detestable
artifice of Craig, who stimulated by incurable habits, had invented these
disasters, for the purpose of enhancing the opinion of his humanity, and of
furthering his views on the fortune and daughter of Mr. Ridgeley.

Its falsehood, however, I had as yet no means of ascertaining. I received it
as true, and at once dismissed all my claims upon futurity. All hopes of
happiness, in this mutable and sublunary scene, was fled. Nothing remained, but
to join my friend in a world, where woes are at an end and virtue finds its
recompense. Surely, said I, there will sometime be a close to calamity and
discord. To those whose lives have been blameless, but harassed by inquietudes,
to which not their own, but the errors of others have given birth, a fortress
will hereafter be assigned, unassailable by change, impregnable to sorrow.

O! my ill-fated Constance! I will live to cherish thy remembrance, and to
emulate thy virtue. I will endure the privation of thy friendship and the
vicissitudes that shall befall me, and draw my consolation and courage, from
the foresight of no distant close to this terrestrial scene, and of ultimate
and everlasting union with thee.

This consideration, though it kept me from confusion and despair, could not,
but with the healing aid of time, render me tranquil or strenuous. My strength
was unequal to the struggle of my passions. The ship in which I engaged to
embark, could not wait for my restoration to health, and I was left behind.

Mary Ridgeley was artless and affectionate. She saw that her society was
dearer to me than that of any other, and was therefore seldom willing to leave
my chamber. Her presence, less on her own account, than by reason of her
personal resemblance and her affinity by birth to Constance, was a powerful
solace.

I had nothing to detain me longer in America. I was anxious to change my
present lonely state, for the communion of those friends, in England, and the
performance of those duties, which were left to me. I was informed that a
British Packet, would shortly sail from New York. My frame was sunk into
greater weakness, than I had felt at any former period; and I conceived, that
to return to New York, by water, was more commodious than to perform the
journey by land.

This arrangement was likewise destined to be disappointed. One morning I
visited, according to my custom, Mary Ridgeley. I found her in a temper
somewhat inclined to gaiety. She rallied me, with great archness, on the care
with which I had concealed from her a tender engagement, into which I had
lately entered.

I supposed myself to comprehend her allusion, and, therefore, answered that
accident rather than design, had made me silent on the subject of marriage. She
had hitherto known me by no appellation, but Sophia Courtland. I had thought it
needless to inform her, that I was indebted for my name to my husband,
Courtland being his name.

All that, said my friend, I know already, and, So you sagely think that my
knowledge goes no farther than that? We are not bound to love our husbands
longer than their lives. There is no crime, I believe, in preferring the living
to the dead, and most heartily do I congratulate you on your present choice.

What mean you? I confess your discourse surpasses my comprehension.

At that moment, the bell at the door, rung a loud peal. Miss Ridgeley hastened
down at this signal, saying, with much significance --

I am a poor hand at solving a riddle. Here comes one who, if I mistake not,
will find no difficulty in clearing up your doubts.

Presently, she came up, and said, with a smile of still greater archness: --
Here is a young gentleman, a friend of mine, to whom I must have the pleasure
of introducing you. He has come for the special purpose of solving my riddle --
I attended her to the parlour without hesitation.

She presented me, with great formality, to a youth, whose appearance did not
greatly prepossess me in favor of his judgment. He approached me with an air,
supercilious and ceremonious, but the moment he caught a glance at my face, he
shrunk back, visibly confounded and embarrassed. A pause ensued, in which Miss
Ridgeley had opportunity to detect the error into which she had been led, by
the vanity of this young man.

How now, Mr. Martynne, said my friend, in a tone of ridicule, is it possible
you do not know the lady who is the queen of your affections, the tender and
indulgent fair one, whose portrait you carry in your bosom; and whose image you
daily and nightly bedew with your tears and kisses?

Mr. Martynne's confusion instead of being subdued by his struggle, only grew
more conspicuous, and after a few incoherent speeches and apologies, during
which he carefully avoided encountering my eyes, be hastily departed.

I applied to my friend, with great earnestness, for an explanation of this
scene. It seems that, in the course of conversation with him, on the preceding
day, he had suffered a portrait which hung at his breast, to catch Miss
Ridgeley's eye. Oh her betraying a desire to inspect it more nearly, he readily
produced it. My image had been too well copied by the artist, not to be
instantly recognized.

She concealed her knowledge of the original, and by questions, well adapted to
the purpose, easily drew from him confessions that this was the portrait of his
mistress. He let fall sundry innuendoes and surmizes, tending to impress her
with a notion of the rank, fortune and intellectual accomplishments of the
nymph, and particularly of the doting fondness and measureless confidence,
with which she regarded him.

Her imperfect knowledge of my situation, left her in some doubt as to the
truth of these pretensions, and she was willing to ascertain the truth, by
bringing about an interview. To guard against evasions and artifice in the
lover, she carefully concealed from him her knowledge of the original, and
merely pretended that a friend of here is, was far more beautiful than her whom
this picture represented. She added, that she expected a visit from her friend
the next morning, and was willing, by showing her to Mr. Martynne, to convince
him how much he was mistaken, in supposing the perfections of his mistress
unrivalled.

CHAPTER XXV.
MARTYNNE, while he expressed his confidence, that the experiment would only
confirm his triumph, readily assented to the proposal, and the interview above
described, took place accordingly, the next morning. Had he not been taken by
surprise, it is likely the address of a man, who possessed no contemptible
powers, would have extricated him from some of his embarrassment.

That my portrait should be in the possession of one, whom I had never before
seen, and whose character and manners entitled him to no respect, was a source
of some surprise. This mode of multiplying faces is extremely prevalent in this
age, and was eminently characteristic of those with whom I had associated in
different parts of Europe. The nature of my thoughts had modified my features
into an expression, which my friends were pleased to consider as a model for
those who desired to personify the genius of suffering and resignation.

Hence among those whose religion permitted their devotion to a picture of a
female, the symbols of their chosen, deity, were added to features and shape
that resembled mine. My own caprice, as well as that of others, always dictated
a symbolical, and in every new instance, a different accompaniment of this
kind. Hence was offered the means of tracing the history of that picture which
Martynne possessed.

It had been accurately examined by Miss Ridgeley, and her description of the
frame in which it was placed, instantly informed me that it was the same which,
at our parting, I left in the possession of Constance. My friend and myself
were desirous of employing the skill of a Saxon painter, by name Eckstein. Each
of us were drawn by him, she with the cincture of Venus, and I with the
crescent of Dian. This symbol was still conspicuous on the brow of that image,
which Miss Thornville had examined, and served to indentify the original
proprietor.

This circumstance tended to confirm my fears that Constance was dead, since
that she would part with this picture during her life, was not to be believed.
It was of little moment to discover how it came into the hands of the present
possessor. Those who carried her remains to the grave, had probably torn it
from her neck and afterward disposed of it for money.

By whatever means, honest or illicit, it had been acquired by Martynne, it was
proper that it should be restored to me. It was valuable to me because, it had
been the property of one whom I loved, and it might prove highly injurious to
my fame and my happiness, as the tool of this man's vanity and the attester of
his falsehood. I, therefore, wrote him a letter, acquainting him with my
reasons for desiring the repossession of this picture, and offering a price for
it, at least double its value, as a mere article of traffic. Martynne accepted
the terms. He transmitted the picture, and with it a note, apologizing for the
artifice of which he had been guilty, and mentioning, in order to justify his
acceptance of the price which I had offered, that he had lately purchased it
for an equal sum of a Goldsmith in Philadelphia.

This information suggested a new reflection. Constantia had engaged to
preserve, for the use of her friend, copious and accurate memorials of her
life. Copies of these were, on suitable occasions, to be transmitted to me,
during my residence abroad. These I had never received, but it was highly
probable that her punctuality, in the performance of the first-part of her
engagement, had been equal to my own.

What, I asked, had become of these precious memorials? In the wreck of her
property were these irretrievably ingulfed? It was not probable that they had
been wantonly destroyed. They had fallen, perhaps, into hands careless or
unconscious of their value, or still lay, unknown and neglected, at the bottom
of some closet or chest. Their recovery might be effected by vehement
exertions, or by some miraculous accident. Suitable enquiries, carried on among
those who were active in those scenes of calamity, might afford some clue by
which the fate of the Dudleys, and the disposition of their property, might
come into fuller light. These inquiries could be made only in Philadelphia, and
thither, for that purpose, I now resolved to repair. There was still an
interval of some weeks, before the departure of the packet in which I proposed
to embark.

Having returned to the capital, I devoted all my zeal to my darling project.
My efforts, however, were without success. Those who administered charity and
succor during that memorable season, and who survived, could remove none of my
doubts, nor answer any of my inquiries. Innumerable tales, equally disastrous
with those which Miss Ridgeley had heard, were related; but, for a considerable
period, none of their circumstances were sufficiently accordant with the
history of the Dudleys.

It is worthy of remark, in how many ways, and by what complexity of motives,
human curiosity is awakened and knowledge obtained. By its connection with my
darling purpose, every event in the history of this memorable pest, was
earnestly sought and deeply pondered. The powerful considerations which
governed me, made me slight those punctilious impediments, which, in other
circumstances, would have debarred me from intercourse with the immediate
actors and observers. I found none who were unwilling to expatiate on this
topic, or to communicate the knowledge they possessed. Their details were
copious in particulars, and vivid in minuteness. They exhibited the state of
manners, the diversified effects of evil or heroic passions, and the endless
forms which sickness and poverty assume in the obscure recesses of a commercial
and populous city.

Some of these details are too precious to be lost. It is above all things
necessary that we should be thoroughly acquainted with the condition of our
fellow-beings. Justice and compassion are the fruit of knowledge. The misery
that overspreads so large a part of mankind, exists chiefly because those who
are able to relieve it do not know that it exists. Forcibly to paint the evil,
seldom fails to excite the virtue of the spectator, and seduce him into wishes,
at least, if not into exertions of beneficence.

The circumstances in which I was placed, were, perhaps, wholly singular. Hence
the knowledge I obtained, was more comprehensive and authentic than was
possessed by any one, even of the immediate actors or sufferers. This knowledge
will not be useless to myself or to the world. The motives which dictated the
present narrative, will hinder me from relinquishing the pen, till my fund of
observation and experience be exhausted. Meanwhile, let me resume the thread of
my tale.

The period allowed me before my departure was nearly expired, and my purpose
seemed to be as far from its accomplishment as ever. One evening I visited a
lady, who was the widow of a physician, whose disinterested exertions had cost
him his life. She dwelt with pathetic earnestness on the particulars of her own
distress, and listened with deep attention to the inquiries and doubts which I
laid before her.

After a pause of consideration, she said, that an incident like that related
by me, she had previously heard from one of her friends, whose name she
mentioned. This person was one of those whose office consisted in searching out
the sufferers, and affording them unsought and unsolicited relief. She was
offering to introduce me to this person, when he entered the apartment.

After the usual compliments, my friend led the conversation as I wished.
Between Mr. Thomson's tale and that related to Miss Ridgeley, there was an
obvious resemblance. The sufferers resided in an obscure alley. They had shut
themselves up from all intercourse with their neighbors, and had died,
neglected and unknown. Mr. Thomson was vested with the superintendence of this
district, and had passed the house frequently without suspicion of its being
tenanted.

He was at length informed by one of those who conducted an hearse, that he had
seen the window in the upper story of this house lifted, and a female show
herself. It was night, and the hearseman chanced to be passing the door. He
immediately supposed that the person stood in need of his services, and stopped.

This procedure was comprehended by the person at the window, who, leaning out,
addressed him in a broken and feeble voice. She asked him why he had not taken
a different route, and upbraided him for inhumanity in leading his noisy
vehicle past her door. She wanted repose, but the ceaseless rumbling of his
wheels would not allow her the sweet respite of a moment.

This invective was singular, and uttered in a voice which united the utmost
degree of earnestness, with a feebleness that rendered it almost inarticulate.
The man was at a loss for a suitable answer. His pause only increased the
impatience of the person at the window, who called upon him, in a still more
anxious tone, to proceed, and entreated him to avoid this alley for the future.

He answered that he must come whenever the occasion called him. That three
persons now lay dead in this alley, and that he must be expeditious in their
removal, but that he would return as seldom and make as little noise as
possible.

He was interrupted by new exclamations and upbraidings. These terminated in a
burst of tears, and assertions, that God and man were her enemies. That they
were determined to destroy her, but she trusted that the time would come when
their own experience would avenge her wrongs, and teach them some compassion
for the misery of others. -- Saying this, she shut the window with violence,
and retired from it sobbing with a vehemence, that could be distinctly
overheard by him in the street.

He paused for some time, listening when this passion should cease. The
habitation was slight, and he imagined that he heard her traversing the floor.
While he staid, she continued to vent her anguish in exclamations and sighs,
and passionate weeping. It did not appear that any other person was within.

Mr. Thomson being next day informed of these incidents, endeavored to enter
the house, but his signals, though loud and frequently repeated, being
unnoticed, he was obliged to gain admission by violence. An old man, and a
female, lovely in the midst of emaciation and decay, were discovered without
signs of life. The death of the latter appeared to have been very recent.

In examining the house, no traces of other inhabitants were to be found.
Nothing, serviceable as food, was discovered, but the remnants of moldy bread
scattered on a table. No information could be gathered from neighbors
respecting the condition and name of these unfortunate people. They had taken
possession of this house, during the rage of this malady, and refrained from
all communication with their neighbors.

There was too much resemblance between this and the story formerly heard, not
to produce the belief that they related to the same persons. All that remained
was to obtain directions to the proprietor of this dwelling, and exact from him
all that he knew respecting his tenants.

I found in him a man of worth and affability. He readily related, that a man
applied to him for the use of this house, and that the application was
received. At the beginning of the pestilence, a numerous family inhabited this
tenement, but had died in rapid succession. This new applicant was the first to
apprize him of this circumstance, and appeared extremely anxious to enter on
immediate possession.

It was intimated to him that danger would arise from the pestilential
condition of the house. Unless cleansed arid purified, disease would be
unavoidably contracted. The inconvenience and hazard, this applicant was
willing to encounter, and, at length, hinted that no alternative was allowed
him, by his present landlord, but to lie in the street or to procure some other
abode.

What was the external appearance of this person?

He was infirm, past the middle age, of melancholy aspect, and indigent garb. A
year had since elapsed, and more characteristic particulars had not been
remarked or were forgotten. The name had been mentioned, but in the midst of
more recent and momentous transactions, had vanished from remembrance. Dudley,
or Dolby, or Hadley, seemed to approach more nearly than any other sounds.

Permission to inspect the house was readily granted. It had remained, since
that period, unoccupied. The furniture and goods were scanty and wretched, and
he did not care to endanger his safety, by meddling with them. He believed that
they had not been removed or touched.

I was insensible of any hazard which attended my visit, and, with the guidance
of a servant, who felt as little apprehension as myself, hastened to the spot.
I found nothing but tables and chairs. Clothing was no where to be seen. An
earthen pot, without handle and broken, stood upon the kitchen hearth. No other
implement or vessel for the preparation of food, appeared.

These forlorn appearances were accounted for by the servant, by supposing the
house to have been long since rifled of every thing worth the trouble of
removal, by the villains who occupied the neighboring houses; this alley, it
seems, being noted for the profligacy of its inhabitants.

When I reflected that a wretched hovel like this, had been, probably, the last
retreat of the Dudleys, when I painted their sufferings, of which the
numberless tales of distress, of which I had lately been an auditor, enabled me
to form an adequate conception, I felt as if to lie down and expire on the very
spot where Constance had fallen, was the only sacrifice to friendship, which
time had left to me.

From this house I wandered to the field, where the dead had been,
promiscuously and by hundreds, interred. I counted the long series of graves,
which were closely ranged, and, being recently levelled, exhibited the
appearance of an harrowed field. Methought I could have given thousands, to
know in what spot the body of my friend lay, that I might moisten the sacred
earth with my tears. Boards hastily nailed together, formed the best
receptacle, which the exigences of the time could grant to the dead. Many
corpses were thrown into a single excavation, and all distinctions founded on
merit and rank, were obliterated. The father and child had been placed in the
same cart, and thrown into the same hole.

Despairing, by any longer stay in this city, to effect my purpose, and the
period of my embarkation being near, I prepared to resume my journey. I should
have set out the next day, but a family, with whom I had made acquaintance,
expecting to proceed to New York within a week, I consented to be their
companion, and, for that end, to delay my departure.

Meanwhile, I shut myself up in my apartment, and pursued avocations, that were
adapted to the melancholy tenor of my thoughts. The day, preceding that
appointed for my journey, arrived. It was necessary to complete my arrangements
with the family, with whom I was to travel, and to settle with the lady, whose
apartments I occupied.

On how slender threads does our destiny hang! Had not a momentary impulse
tempted me to sing my favorite ditty to the harpsichord, to beguile the short
interval, during which my hostess was conversing with her visitor in the next
apartment, I should have speeded to New York, have embarked for Europe, and
been eternally severed from my friend, whom I believed to have died in phrenzy
and beggary, but who was alive and affluent, and who sought me with a
diligence, scarcely inferior to my own. We imagined ourselves severed from each
other, by death or by impassable seas, but, at the moment when our hopes had
sunk to the lowest ebb, a mysterious destiny conducted our footsteps to the
same spot.

I heard a murmuring exclamation; I heard my hostess call, in a voice of
terror, for help; I rushed into the room; I saw one stretched on the floor, in
the attitude of death; I sprung forward and fixed my eyes upon her countenance;
I clasped my hands and articulated -- Constance! --

She speedily recovered from her swoon. Her eyes opened, she moved, she spoke:
Still methought it was an illusion of the senses, that created the phantom. I
could not bear to withdraw my eyes from her countenance. If they wandered for a
moment, I fell into doubt and perplexity, and again fixed them upon her, to
assure myself of her existence.

The succeeding three days, were spent in a state of dizziness and
intoxication. The ordinary functions of nature were disturbed. The appetite for
sleep and for food were confounded and lost, amidst the impetuosities of a
master-passion. To look and to talk, to each other, afforded enchanting
occupation for every moment. I would not part from her side, but eat and slept,
walked and mused and read, with my arm locked in here is, and with her breath
fanning my cheek.

I have indeed much to learn. Sophia Courtland has never been wise. Her
affections disdain the cold dictates of discretion, and spurn at every limit,
that contending duties and mixed obligations prescribe.

And yet, O! precious inebriation of the heart! 0! pre-eminent love! What
pleasure of reason or of sense, can stand in competition with those, attendant
upon thee? -- Whether thou hiest to the fanes of a benevolent deity, or layest
all thy homage at the feet of one, who most visibly resembles the perfections
of our Maker, surely thy sanction is divine; thy boon is happiness! --

CHAPTER XXVI.
THE tumults of curiosity and pleasure did not speedily subside. The story of
each other's wanderings, was told with endless amplification and minuteness.
Henceforth, the stream of our existence was to mix; we were to act and to think
in common: Casual witnesses and written testimony should become superfluous:
Eyes and ear were to be eternally employed upon the conduct of each other:
Death, when it should come, was not to be deplored, because it was an
unavoidable and brief privation to her that should survive. Being, under any
modification, is dear, but that state to which death is a passage, is
all-desirable to virtue and all-compensating to grief.

Meanwhile, precedent events were made the themes of endless conversation.
Every incident and passion, in the course of four years, was revived and
exhibited. The name of Ormond, was, of course, frequently repeated by my
friend: His features and deportment were described: Her meditations and
resolutions, with regard to him, fully disclosed. My counsel was asked, in what
manner it became her to act.

I could not but harbor aversion to a scheme, which should tend to sever me
from Constance, or to give me a competitor in her affections. Besides this, the
properties of Ormond were of too mysterious a nature, to make him worthy of
acceptance. Little more was known, concerning him, than what he himself had
disclosed to the Dudleys, but this knowledge would suffice to invalidate his
claims.

He had dwelt, in his conversations with Constantia, sparingly on his own
concerns. Yet he did not hide from her, that he had been left in early youth,
to his own guidance: That he had embraced, when almost a child, the trade of
arms: That he had found service and promotion in the armies of Potemkin and
Romanzow: That he had executed secret and diplomatic functions, at
Constantinople and Berlin: That, in the latter city, he had met with schemers
and reasoners, who aimed at the new-modelling of the world, and the subversion
of all that has hitherto been conceived elementary and fundamental, in the
constitution of man and of government: That some of those reformers had
secretly united, to break down the military and monarchical fabric of German
policy: That others, more wisely, had devoted their secret efforts, not to
overturn, but to build: That, for this end, they embraced an exploring and
colonizing project: That he had allied himself to these, and, for the promotion
of their projects, had spent six years of his life, in journeys by sea and
land, in tracts unfrequented, till then, by any European.

What were the moral or political maxims, which this adventurous and visionary
sect had adopted, and what was the seat of their newborn empire, whether on
the shore of an Austral continent, or in the, heart of desert America, he
carefully concealed. These were exhibited or hidden, or shifted, according to
his purpose. Not to reveal too much, and not to tire curiosity or over-task
belief, was his daily labor. He talked of alliance with the family whose name
he bore, and who had lost their honors and estates, by the Hanoverian
succession to the crown of England.

I had seen too much of innovation and imposture, in France and Italy, not to
regard a man like this, with aversion and fear. The mind of my friend was
wavering and unsuspicious. She had lived at a distance from scenes, where
principles are hourly put to the test of experiment; where all extremes of
fortitude and pusillanimity are accustomed to meet; where recluse virtue and
speculative heroism give place as if by magic, to the last excesses of
debauchery and wickedness; where pillage and murder are engrafted, on systems
of all-embracing and self-oblivious benevolence; and the good of mankind is
professed to be pursued, with bonds of association and covenants of secrecy.
Hence my friend had decided without the sanction of experience, had allowed
herself to wander into untried paths, and had hearkened to positions, pregnant
with destruction and ignominy.

It was not difficult to exhibit, in their true light, the enormous errors of
this man, and the danger of prolonging their intercourse. Her assent to
accompany me to England, was readily obtained. Too much dispatch could not be
used, but the disposal of her property must first take place. This was
necessarily productive of some delay.

I had been made, contrary to inclination, expert in the management of all
affairs, relative to property. My mother's lunacy, subsequent disease and
death, had imposed upon me obligations and cares, little suitable to my sex and
age. They could not be eluded or transferred to others, and, by degrees,
experience enlarged my knowledge and familiarized my tasks.

It was agreed that I should visit and inspect my friend's estate, in Jersey,
while she remained in her present abode, to put an end to the views and
expectations of Ormond, and to make preparation for her voyage. We were
reconciled to a temporary separation, by the necessity that prescribed it.

During our residence together, the mind of Constance was kept in perpetual
ferment. The second day after my departure, the turbulence of her feelings
began to subside, and she found herself at leisure to pursue those measures
which her present situation prescribed.

The time prefixed by Ormond for the termination of his absence, had nearly
arrived. Her resolutions respecting this man, lately formed, now occurred to
her. Her heart drooped as she revolved the necessity of disuniting their fates;
but that this disunion was proper, could not admit of doubt. How information of
her present views might be most satisfactorily imparted to him, was a question
not instantly decided. She reflected on the impetuosity of his character, and
conceived that her intentions might be most conveniently unfolded in a letter.
This letter she immediately sat down to write. Just then the door opened, and
Ormond entered the apartment.

She was somewhat, and for a moment, startled by this abrupt and unlooked for
entrance. Yet she greeted him with pleasure. Her greeting was received with
coldness. A second glance at his countenance informed her that his mind was
somewhat discomposed.

Folding his hands on his breast, he stalked to the window, and looked up at
the moon. Presently he withdrew his gaze from this object, and fixed them upon
Constance. He spoke, but his words were produced by a kind of effort:

Fit emblem, he exclaimed, of human versatility! One impediment is gone. I
hoped it was the only one, but no: The removal of that merely made room for
another. Let this be removed. Well: Fate will interplace a third. All our toils
will thus be frustrated, and the ruin will finally redound upon our heads. --
There he stopped.

This strain could not be interpreted by Constance. She smiled, and without
noticing his incoherences, proceeded to inquire into his adventures during
their separation. He listened to her, but his eyes, fixed upon here is, and his
solemnity of aspect were immovable. When she paused, he seated himself close
to her, and grasped her hand with a vehemence that almost pained her, said:

Look at me; steadfastly. Can you read my thoughts? Can your discernment reach
the bounds of my knowledge and the bottom of my purposes? Catch you not a view
of the monsters that are starting into birth here (and he put his left hand to
his foreheads) But you cannot. Should I paint them to you verbally, you would
call me jester or deceiver. What pity that you have not instruments for
piercing into thoughts! --

I presume, said Constance, affecting cheerfulness which she did not feel, such
instruments would be useless to me. You never scruple to say what you think.
Your designs are no sooner conceived than they are expressed. All you know, all
you wish, and all you purpose, are known to others as soon as to yourself. No
scruples of decorum; no foresight of consequences, are obstacles in your way.

True, replied he, all obstacles are trampled under foot, but one.

What is the insuperable one?

Incredulity in him that hears. I must not say what will not be credited. I
must not relate feats and avow schemes, when my hearer will say, Those feats
were never performed: These schemes are not yours. I care not if the truth of
my tenets and the practicability of my purposes, be denied. Still I will openly
maintain them: But when my assertions will, themselves, be disbelieved; when it
is denied, that I adopt the creed and project the plans, which I affirm to be
adopted and projected by me, it is needless to affirm.

Tomorrow, I mean to ascertain the height of the lunar mountains, by traveling
to the top of them. Then I will station myself in the tract of the last comet,
and wait till its circumvolution suffers me to leap upon it; Then, by walking
on its surface, I will ascertain whether it be hot enough to burn my soles. Do
you believe that this can be done?

No.

Do you believe, in consequence of my assertion, that I design to do this, and
that, in my apprehension, it is easy to be done?

Not; Unless I previously believe you to be lunatic.

Then why should I assert my purposes? Why speak, when the hearer will infer
nothing from my speech, but that I am either lunatic or liar?

In that predicament, silence is best.

In that predicament, I now stand. I am not going to unfold myself. Just now, I
pitied thee for want of eyes: 'Twas a foolish compassion. Thou art happy,
because thou see not an inch before thee or behind. -- Here he was for a
moment buried in thought; then breaking from his reverie, he said: So; your
father is dead?

True, said Constance, endeavoring to suppress her rising emotions, he is no
more. It is so recent an event, that I imagined you a stranger to it.

False imagination! Think thou, I would refrain from knowing what so nearly
concerns us both? Perhaps your opinion of my ignorance extends beyond this:
Perhaps, I know not your fruitless search for a picture: Perhaps, I neither
followed you, nor led you to a being called Sophia Courtland. I was not present
at the meeting. I am unapprized of the effects of your romantic passion for
each other. I did not witness the rapturous effusions and inexorable counsels
of the new comer. I know not the contents of the letter which you are preparing
to write. --

As he spoke this, the accents of Ormond gradually augmented in vehemence. His
countenance bespoke a deepening inquietude and growing passion. He stopped at
the mention of the letter, because his voice was overpowered by emotion. This
pause afforded room for the astonishment of Constance. Her interviews and
conversations with me, took place at seasons of general repose, when all doors
were fast and avenues shut, in the midst of silence, and in the bosom of
retirement. The theme of our discourse was, commonly, too sacred for any ears
but our own: Disclosures were of too intimate and delicate a nature, for any
but a female audience: they were too injurious to the fame and peace of Ormond,
for him to be admitted to partake of them: Yet his words implied a full
acquaintance with recent events, and with purposes and deliberations, shrouded,
as we imagined, in impenetrable secrecy.

As soon as Constantia recovered from the confusion of these thoughts, she
eagerly questioned him: What do you know? How do you know what has happened, or
what is intended?

Poor Constance! he exclaimed, in a tone bitter and sarcastic. How hopeless is
thy ignorance! To enlighten thee is past my power. What do I know? Every thing.
Not a tittle has escaped me. Thy letter is superfluous: I know its contents
before they are written. I was to be told that a soldier and a traveller, a man
who refused his faith to dreams, and his homage to shadows, merited only scorn
and forgetfulness. That thy affections and person were due to another; that
intercourse between us was henceforth to cease; that preparation was making for
a voyage to Britain, and that Ormond was to walk to his grave alone!

In spite of harsh tones and inflexible features, these words were accompanied
with somewhat that betrayed a mind full of discord and agony. Constantia's
astonishment was mingled with dejection. The discovery of a passion, deeper and
less curable than she suspected; the perception of embarrassments and
difficulties in the path which she had chosen, that had not previously occurred
to her, threw her mind into anxious suspense.

The measures she had previously concerted, were still approved. To part from
Ormond was enjoined by every dictate of discretion and duty. An explanation of
her motives and views, could not take place more seasonably than at present.
Every consideration of justice to herself and humanity to Ormond, made it
desirable that this interview should be the last. By inexplicable means, he had
gained a knowledge of her intentions. It was expedient, therefore, to state
them with clearness and force. In what words this was to be done, was the
subject of momentary deliberation.

Her thoughts were discerned, and her speech anticipated by her companion. --
Why droopest thou, and why thus silent, Constance? The secret of thy fate will
never be detected. Till thy destiny be finished, it will not be the topic of a
single fear. But not for thyself, but me, art thou concerned. Thou dreadest,
yet determinest to confirm my predictions of thy voyage to Europe, and thy
severance from me.

Dismiss thy inquietudes on that score. What misery thy scorn and thy rejection
are able to inflict, is inflicted already. Thy decision was known to me as soon
as it was formed. Thy motives were known. Not an argument or plea of thy
counselor, not a syllable of her invective, not a sound of her persuasive
rhetoric escaped my hearing. I know thy decree to be immutable. As my doubts,
so my wishes have taken their flight. Perhaps, in the depth of thy ignorance,
it was supposed, that I should struggle to reverse thy purpose, by menaces or
supplications. That I should boast of the cruelty with which I should avenge an
imaginary wrong upon myself. No. All is very well: Go. Not a whisper of
objection or reluctance, shall thou hear from me.

If I could think, said Constantia, with tremulous hesitation, that you part
from me without anger; that you see the rectitude of my proceeding --

Anger! Rectitude. I pr'ythee peace. I know thou art going. I know that all
objection to thy purpose would be vain. Think thou that thy stay, undictated
by love, the mere fruit of compassion, would afford me pleasure or crown my
wishes? No. I am not so dastardly a wretch. There was something in thy power to
bestow, but thy will accords not with thy power. I merit not the boon, and thou
refusest it. I am content.

Here Ormond fixed more significant eyes upon her. Poor Constance! he
continued. Shall I warn thee of the danger that awaits thee? For what end! To
elude it, is impossible. It will come, and thou, perhaps, wilt be unhappy.
Foresight, that enables not to shun, only pre-creates the evil.

Come, it will. Though future, it knows not the empire of contingency. An
inexorable and immutable decree enjoins it. Perhaps, it is thy nature to meet
with calmness what cannot be shunned. Perhaps, when it is passed, thy reason
will perceive its irrevocable nature, and restore thee to peace. Such is the
conduct of the wise, but such, I fear, the education of Constantia Dudley, will
debar her from pursuing.

Faign would I regard it as the test of thy wisdom. I look upon thy past life.
All the forms of genuine adversity have beset thy youth. Poverty, disease,
servile labor, a criminal and hapless parent, have been evils which thou have
not ungracefully sustained. An absent friend and murdered father, were added to
thy list of woes, and here thy courage was deficient. Thy soul was proof
against substantial misery, but sunk into helpless cowardice, at the sight of
phantoms.

One more disaster remains. To call it by its true name would be useless or
pernicious. Useless, because thou would pronouce its occurrence impossible:
Pernicious, because, if its possibility were granted, the omen would distract
thee with fear. How shall I describe it? Is it loss of fame? No. The deed will
be unwitnessed by an human creature. Thy reputation will be spotless, for
nothing will be done by thee, unsuitable to the tenor of thy past life. Calumny
will not be heard to whisper. All that know thee, will be lavish of their
eulogies as ever. Their eulogies will be as justly merited. Of this merit thou will entertain as just and as adequate conceptions as now.

It is no repetition of the evils thou have already endured: It is neither
drudgery nor sickness, nor privation of friends. Strange perverseness of human
reason! It is an evil: It will be thought upon with agony: It will close up all
the sources of pleasurable recollection: It will exterminate hope: It will
endear oblivion, and push thee into an untimely grave. Yet to grasp it is
impossible. The moment we inspect it nearly, it vanishes. Thy claims to human
approbation and divine applause, will be undiminished and unaltered by it. The
testimony of approving conscience, will have lost none of its explicitness and
energy. Yet thou will feed upon sighs: Thy tears will flow without remission:
Thou will grow enamoured of death, and perhaps wilt anticipate the stroke of
disease.

Yet, perhaps, my prediction is groundless as my knowledge. Perhaps, thy
discernment will avail, to make thee wise and happy. Perhaps, thou will
perceive thy privilege of sympathetic and intellectual activity, to be
untouched. Heaven grant the non-fulfilment of my prophecy, thy disenthrallment
from error, and the perpetuation of thy happiness.

Saying this, Ormond withdrew. His words were always accompanied with gestures
and looks, and tones, that fastened the attention of the hearer, but the terms
of his present discourse, afforded, independently of gesticulation and
utterance, sufficient motives to attention and remembrance. He was gone, but
his image was contemplated by Constance: His words still rung in her ears.

The letter she designed to compose, was rendered, by this interview,
unnecessary. Meanings, of which she and her friend alone were conscious, were
discovered by Ormond, through some other medium than words: Yet that was
impossible: A being, unendowed with preternatural attributes, could gain the
information which this man possessed, only by the exertion of his senses.

All human precautions had been used, to baffle the attempts of any secret
witness. She recalled to mind, the circumstances, in which conversations with
her friend had taken place. All had been retirement, secrecy and silence. The
hours usually dedicated to sleep, had been devoted to this better purpose. Much
had been said, in a voice, low and scarcely louder than a whisper. To have
overheard it at the distance of a few feet, was apparently impossible.

Their conversations had not been recorded by her. It could not be believed,
that this had been done by Sophia Courtland. Had Ormond and her friend met,
during the interval that had elapsed, between her separation from the latter,
and her meeting with the former? Human events are conjoined by links,
imperceptible to keenest eyes. Of Ormond's means of information, she was wholly
unapprized. Perhaps, accident would, sometime, unfold them. One thing was
incontestable. That her schemes and her reasons for adopting them, were known
to him.

What unforeseen effects had that knowledge produced! In what ambiguous terms
had he couched his prognostics, of some mighty evil that awaited her! He had
given a terrible, but contradictory description, of her destiny. An event was
to happen, akin to no calamity which she had already endured, disconnected with
all which the imagination of man is accustomed to deprecate, capable of urging
her to suicide, and yet of a kind, which left it undecided, whether she would
regard it with indifference.

What reliance should she place upon prophetic incoherencies, thus wild? What
precautions should she take, against a danger thus inscrutable and imminent?

CHAPTER XXVII.
THESE incidents and reflections were speedily transmitted to me. I had always
believed the character and machinations of Ormond, to be worthy of caution and
fear. His means of information I did not pretend, and thought it useless to
investigate. We cannot hide our actions and thoughts, from one of powerful
sagacity, whom the detection sufficiently interests, to make him use all the
methods of detection in his power. The study of concealment, is, in all cases,
fruitless or hurtful. All that duty enjoins, is to design and to execute
nothing, which may not be approved by a divine and omniscient observer. Human
scrutiny is neither to be solicited, nor shunned. Human approbation or censure,
can never be exempt from injustice, because our limited perceptions debar us
from a thorough knowledge of any actions and motives but our own.

On reviewing what had passed, between Constantia and me, I recollected nothing
incompatible with purity and rectitude. That Ormond was apprized of all that
had passed, I by no means inferred from the tenor of his conversation with
Constantia, nor, if this had been incontestably proved, should I have
experienced any trepidation or anxiety on that account.

His obscure and indirect menaces of evil, were of more importance. His
discourse on this topic, seemed susceptible only of two constructions. Either
he intended some fatal mischief, and was willing to torment her by fears, while
he concealed from her the nature of her danger, that he might hinder her from
guarding her safety, by suitable precautions; or, being hopeless of rendering
her propitious to his wishes, his malice was satisfied with leaving her a
legacy of apprehension and doubt.

Constantia's unacquaintance with the doctrines of that school, in which Ormond
was probably instructed, led her to regard the conduct of this man, with more
curiosity and wonder, than fear. She saw nothing but a disposition to sport
with her ignorance and bewilder her with doubts.

I do not believe myself destitute of courage. Rightly to estimate the danger
and encounter it with firmness, are worthy of a rational being; but to place
our security in thoughtlessness and blindness, is only less ignoble than
cowardice. I could not forget the proofs of violence, which accompanied the
death of Mr. Dudley. I could not overlook, in the recent conversation with
Constance, Ormond's allusion to her murdered father. It was possible that the
nature of this death, had been accidentally imparted to him; but it was
likewise possible, that his was the knowledge of one who performed the act.

The enormity of this deed, appeared by no means incongruous with the
sentiments of Ormond. Human life is momentous or trivial in our eyes, according
to the course which our habits and opinions have taken. Passion greedily
accepts, and habit readily offers, the sacrifice of another's life, and reason
obeys the impulse of education and desire.

A youth of eighteen, a volunteer in a Russian army, encamped in Bessarabia,
made prey of a Tartar girl, found in the field of a recent battle: Conducting
her to his quarters, he met a friend, who, on some pretense, claimed the
victim: From angry words they betook themselves to swords. A combat ensued, in
which the first claimant ran his antagonist through the body. He then bore his
prize unmolested away, and having exercised brutality of one kind, upon the
helpless victim, stabbed her to the heart, as an offering to the manes of
Sarsefield, the friend whom he had slain. Next morning, willing more signally
to expiate his guilt, he rushed alone upon a troop of Turkish foragers, and
brought away five heads, suspended, by their gory locks, to his horse's mane.
These he cast upon the grave of Sarsefield, and conceived himself fully to have
expiated yesterday's offense. In reward for his prowess, the General gave him a
commission in the Cossack troops. This youth was Ormond; and such is a specimen
of his exploits, during a military career of eight years, in a warfare the most
savage and implacable, and, at the same time, the most iniquitous and wanton
which history records.

With passions and habits like these, the life of another was a trifling
sacrifice to vengeance or impatience. How Mr. Dudley had excited the resentment
of Ormond, by what means the assassin had accomplished his intention, without
awakening alarm or incurring suspicion, it was not for me to discover. The
inextricability of human events, the imperviousness of cunning, and the
obduracy of malice, I had frequent occasions to remark.

I did not labor to vanquish the security of my friend. As to precautions they
were useless. There was no fortress, guarded by barriers of stone and iron, and
watched by sentinels that never slept, to which she might retire from his
stratagems. If there were such a retreat, it would scarcely avail her against a
foe, circumspect and subtle as Ormond.

I pondered on the condition of my friend. I reviewed the incidents of her
life. I compared her lot with that of others. I could not but discover a sort
of incurable malignity in her fate. I felt as if it were denied to her to enjoy
a long life or permanent tranquillity. I asked myself, what she had done,
entitling her to this incessant persecution? Impatience and murmuring took
place of sorrow and fear in my heart. When I reflected, that all human agency
was merely subservient to a divine purpose, I fell into fits of accusation and
impiety.

This injustice was transient, and soberer views convinced me that every
scheme, comprizing the whole, must be productive of partial and temporary evil.
The sufferings of Constance were limited to a moment; they were the unavoidable
appendages of terrestrial existence; they formed the only avenue to wisdom, and
the only claim to uninterrupted fruition, and eternal repose in an after-scene.

The course of my reflections, and the issue to which they led, were unforeseen
by myself. Fondly as I doated upon this woman, methought I could resign her to
the grave without a murmur or a tear. While my thoughts were calmed by
resignation, and my fancy occupied with nothing but the briefness of that
space, and evanescence of that time which severs the living from the dead, I
contemplated, almost with complacency, a violent or untimely close to her
existence.

This loftiness of mind could not always be accomplished or constantly
maintained. One effect of my fears, was to hasten my departure to Europe. There
existed no impediment but the want of a suitable conveyance. In the first
packet that should leave America, it was determined to secure a passage. Mr.
Melbourne consented to take charge of Constantia's property, and, after the
sale of it, to transmit to her the money that should thence arise.

Meanwhile, I was anxious that Constance should leave her present abode and
join me in New York. She willingly adopted this arrangement, but conceived it
necessary to spend a few days at her house in Jersey. She could reach the
latter place without much deviation from the straight road, and she was
desirous of re-surveying a spot where many of her infantile days had been spent.

This house and domain I have already mentioned to have once belonged to Mr.
Dudley. It was selected with the judgment and adorned with the taste of a
disciple of the schools of Florence and Vincenza. In his view, cultivation was
subservient to the picturesque, and a mansion was erected, eminent for nothing
but chastity of ornaments, and simplicity of structure. The massive parts were
of stone; the outer surfaces were smooth, snow-white, and diversified by
apertures and cornices, in which a cement uncommonly tenacious was wrought into
proportions the most correct and forms the most graceful. The floors, walls and
cielings, consisted of a still more exquisitely tempered substance, and were
painted by Mr. Dudley's own hand. All appendages of this building, as seats,
tables and cabinets, were modelled by the owner's particular direction, and in
a manner scrupulously classical.

He had scarcely entered on the enjoyment of this splendid possession, when it
was ravished away. No privation was endured with more impatience than this;
but, happily, it was purchased by one who left Mr. Dudley's arrangements
unmolested, and who shortly after conveyed it entire to Ormond. By him it was
finally appropriated to the use of Helena Cleves, and now, by a singular
contexture of events, it had reverted to those hands, in which the death of the
original proprietor, if no other change had been made in his condition, would
have left it. The farm still remained in the tenure of a German emigrant, who
held it partly on condition of preserving the garden and mansion in safety and
in perfect order.

This retreat was now re-visited by Constance, after an interval of four years.
Autumn had made some progress, but the aspect of nature was, so to speak, more
significant than at any other season. She was agreeably accommodated under the
tenant's roof, and found a nameless pleasure in traversing spaces, in which
every object prompted an endless train of recollections.

Her sensations were not foreseen. They led to a state of mind, inconsistent,
in some degree, with the projects adopted in obedience to the suggestions of
her friend. Every thing in this scene had been created and modelled by the
genius of her father. It was a kind of fane, sanctified by his imaginary
presence.

To consign the fruits of his industry and invention to foreign and unsparing
hands, seemed a kind of sacrilege, for which she almost feared that the dead
would rise to upbraid her. Those images which bind us to our natal soil, to the
abode of our innocent and careless youth, were recalled to her fancy by the
scenes which she now beheld. These were enforced by considerations of the
dangers which attended her voyage, from storms and from enemies, and from the
tendency to revolution and war, which seemed to actuate all the nations of
Europe. Her native country was by no means exempt from similar tendencies, but
these evils were less imminent, and its manners and government, in their
present modifications, were unspeakably more favorable to the dignity and
improvement of the human race, than those which prevailed in any part of the
ancient world.

My solicitations and my obligation to repair to England, overweighed her
objections, but her new reflections led her to form new determinations with
regard to this part of her property. She concluded to retain possession, and
hoped that some future event would allow her to return to this favorite spot,
without forfeiture of my society. An abode of some years in Europe, would more
eminently qualify her for the enjoyment of retirement and safety in her native
country. The time that should elapse before her embarkation, she was desirous
of passing among the shades of this romantic retreat.

I was, by no means, reconciled to this proceeding. I loved my friend too well
to endure any needless separation without repining. In addition to this, the
image of Ormond haunted my thoughts, and gave birth to incessant but
indefinable fears. I believed that her safety would very little depend upon the
nature of her abode, or the number or watchfulness of her companions. My
nearness to her person would frustrate no stratagem, nor promote any other end
than my own entanglement in the same fold. Still, that I was not apprized, each
hour, of her condition, that her state was lonely and sequestered, were sources
of disquiet, the obvious remedy to which was her coming to New York.
Preparations for departure were assigned to me, and these required my
continuance in the city.

Once a week, Laffert, her tenant, visited, for purposes of traffic, the city.
He was the medium of our correspondence. To him I entrusted a letter, in which
my dissatisfaction at her absence and the causes which gave it birth, were
freely confessed.

The confidence of safety seldom deserted my friend. Since her mysterious
conversation with Ormond, he had utterly vanished. Previously to that
interview, his visits or his letters were incessant and punctual; but since, no
token was given that he existed. Two months had elapsed. He gave her no reason
to expect a cessation of intercourse. He had parted from her with his usual
abruptness and informality. She did not conceive it incumbent on her to search
him out, but she would not have been displeased with an opportunity to discuss
with him more fully the motives of her conduct. This opportunity had been
hitherto denied.

Her occupations, in her present retreat, were, for the most part, dictated by
caprice or by chance. The mildness of Autumn permitted her to ramble, during
the day, from one rock and one grove to another. There was a luxury in musing,
and in the sensations which the scenery and silence produced, which, in
consequence of her long estrangement from them, were accompanied with all the
attractions of novelty, and from which she not consent to withdraw.

In the evening, she usually retired to the mansion, and shut herself up in
that apartment, which, in the original structure of the house, had been
designed for study, and no part of whose furniture had been removed or
displaced. It was a kind of closet on the second floor, illuminated by a
spacious window, through which a landscape of uncommon amplitude and beauty was
presented to the view. Here the pleasures of the day were revived, by recalling
and enumerating them in letters to her friend: She always quitted this recess
with reluctance, and, seldom, till the night was half-spent.

One evening she retired hither when the sun had just dipped beneath the
horizon. Her implements of writing were prepared, but before the pen was
assumed, her eyes rested for a moment on the variegated hues, which were poured
out upon the western sky, and upon the scene of intermingled waters, copses and
fields. The view comprised a part of the road which led to this dwelling. It
was partially and distantly seen, and the passage of horses or men, was
betokened chiefly by the dust which was raised by their footsteps.

A token of this kind now caught her attention. It fixed her eye, chiefly by
the picturesque effect produced by interposing its obscurity between her and
the splendours which the sun had left. Presently, she gained a faint view of a
man and horse. This circumstance laid no claim to attention, and she was
withdrawing her eye, when the traveller's stopping and dismounting at the gate,
made her renew her scrutiny. This was reinforced by something in the figure and
movements of the horseman, which reminded her of Ormond.

She started from her seat with some degree of palpitation. Whence this arose,
whether from fear or from joy, or from intermixed emotions, it would not be
easy to ascertain. Having entered the gate, the visitant, remounting his horse,
set the animal on full speed. Every moment brought him nearer, and added to her
first belief. He stopped not till he reached the mansion. The person of Ormond
was distinctly recognized.

An interview, at this dusky and lonely hour, in circumstances so abrupt and
unexpected, could not fail to surpize, and, in some degree, to alarm. The
substance of his last conversation was recalled. The evils which were darkly
and ambiguously predicted, thronged to her memory. It seemed as if the present
moment was to be, in some way, decisive of her fate. This visit, she did not
hesitate to suppose, designed for her, but somewhat uncommonly momentous, must
have prompted him to take so long a journey.

The rooms on the lower floor were dark, the windows and doors being fastened.
She had entered the house by the principal door, and this was the only one, at
present, unlocked. The room in which she sat, was over the hall, and the
massive door beneath could not be opened, without noisy signals. The question
that occurred to her, by what means Ormond would gain admittance to her
presence, she supposed would be instantly decided. She listened to hear his
footsteps on the pavement, or the creaking of hinges. The silence, however,
continued profound as before.

After a minute's pause, she approached the window more nearly, and endeavored
to gain a view of the space before the house. She saw nothing but the horse,
whose bridle was thrown over his neck, and who was left at liberty to pick up
what scanty herbage the lawn afforded to his hunger. The rider had disappeared.

It now occurred to her, that this visit had a purpose different from that
which she at first conjectured. It was easily conceived, that Ormond was
unacquainted with her residence at this spot. The knowledge could only be
imparted to him, by indirect or illicit means. That these means had been
employed by him, she was by no means authorized to infer from the silence and
distance he had lately maintained. But if an interview with her, were not the
purpose of his coming, how should she interpret it?

CHAPTER XXVIII.
WHILE oocupied with these reflections, the light hastily disappeared, and
darkness, rendered, by a cloudy atmosphere, uncommonly intense, succeeded. She
had the means of lighting a lamp, that hung against the wall, but had been too
much immersed in thought, to notice the deepening of the gloom. Recovering from
her reverie, she looked around her with some degree of trepidation, and
prepared to strike a spark, that would enable her to light her lamp.

She had hitherto indulged an habitual indifference to danger. Now the presence
of Ormond, the unknown purpose that led him hither, and the defencelessness of
her condition, inspired her with apprehensions, to which she had hitherto been
a stranger. She had been accustomed to pass many nocturnal hours in this
closet. Till now, nothing had occurred, that made her enter it with
circumspection, or continue in it with reluctance.

Her sensations were no longer tranquil. Each minute that she spent in this
recess, appeared to multiply her hazards. To linger here, appeared to her the
height of culpable temerity. She hastily resolved to return to the farmer's
dwelling, and, on the morrow, to repair to New York. For this end, she was
desirous to produce a light. The materials were at hand.

She lifted her hand to strike the flint, when her ear caught a sound, which
betokened the opening of the door, that led into the next apartment. Her motion
was suspended, and she listened as well as a throbbing heart would permit. That
Ormond's was the hand that opened, was the first suggestion of her fears. The
motives of this unseasonable entrance, could not be reconciled with her safety.
He had given no warning of his approach, and the door was opened with tardiness
and seeming caution.

Sounds continued, of which no distinct conception could be obtained, or the
cause that produced them assigned. The floors of every apartment being
composed, like the walls and ceiling, of cement, footsteps were rendered almost
undistinguishable. It was plain, however, that some one approached her own door.

The panic and confusion that now invaded her, was owing to surprise, and to
the singularity of her situation. The mansion was desolate and lonely. It was
night. She was immersed in darkness. She had not the means, and was
unaccustomed to the office, of repelling personal injuries. What injuries she
had reason to dread, who was the agent, and what were his motives, were
subjects of vague and incoherent meditation.

Meanwhile, low and imperfect sounds, that had in them more of inanimate than
human, assailed her ear. Presently they ceased. An inexplicable fear deterred
her from calling. Light would have exercised a friendly influence. This, it was
in her power to produce, but not without motion and noise, and these, by
occasioning the discovery of her being in the closet, might possibly enhance
her danger.

Conceptions like these, were unworthy of the mind of Constance. An interval of
silence succeeded, interrupted only by the whistling of the blast without. It
was sufficient for the restoration of her courage. She blushed at the cowardice
which had trembled at a sound. She considered that Ormond might, indeed, be
near, but that he was probably unconscious of her situation. His coming was not
with the circumspection of an enemy. He might be acquainted with the place of
her retreat, and had come to obtain an interview, with no clandestine or
myterious purposes. The noises she had heard, had, doubtless, proceeded from
the next apartment, but might be produced by some harmless or vagrant creature.

These considerations restored her tranquillity. They enabled her,
deliberately, to create a light, but they did not disuade her from leaving the
house. Omens of evil seemed to be connected with this solitary and darksome
abode: Besides, Ormond had unquestionably entered upon this scene. It could not
be doubted that she was the object of his visit. The farm-house was a place of
meeting, more suitable and safe than any other. Thither, therefore, she
determined immediately to return.

The closet had but one door, and this led into the chamber where the sounds
had arisen. Through this chamber, therefore, she was obliged to pass, in order
to reach the staircase, which terminated in the hall below.

Bearing the light in her left hand, she withdrew the bolt of the door, and
opened. In spite of courageous efforts, she opened with unwillingness, and
shuddered to throw a glance forward or advance a step into the room. This was
not needed, to reveal to her the cause of her late disturbance. Her eye
instantly lighted on the body of a man, supine, motionless, stretched on the
floor, close to the door through which she was about to pass.

A spectacle like this, was qualified to startle her. She shrunk back and fixed
a more steadfast eye, upon the prostrate person. There was no mark of blood or
of wounds, but there was something in the attitude, more significant of death
than of sleep. His face rested on the floor, and his ragged locks concealed
what part of his visage was not hidden by his posture. His garb was
characterized by fashionable elegance, but was polluted with dust.

The image that first occurred to her, was that of Ormond. This instantly gave
place to another, which was familiar to her apprehension. It was at first too
indistinctly seen to suggest a name. She continued to gaze and to be lost in
fearful astonishment. Was this the person whose entrance had been overheard,
and who had dragged himself hither to die at her door? Yet, in that case, would
not groans and expiring efforts have testified his condition, and invoked her
succor? Was he not brought hither in the arms of his assassin? She mused upon
the possible motives that induced some one thus to act, and upon the connection
that might subsist, between her destiny and that of the dead.

Her meditations, however fruitless, in other respects, could not fail to show
her the propriety of hastening from this spot. To scrutinize the form or face
of the dead, was a task, to which her courage was unequal. Suitably accompanied
and guarded, she would not scruple to return and ascertain, by the most
sedulous examination, the causes of this ominous event.

She stepped over the breathless corpse, and hurried to the staircase. It became
her to maintain the command of her muscles and joints, and to proceed without
faultering or hesitation. Scarcely had she reached the entrance of the hall,
when, casting anxious looks forward, she beheld an human figure. No scrutiny
was requisite to inform her, that this was Ormond.

She stopped. He approached her with looks and gestures, placid but solemn.
There was nothing in his countenance rugged or malignant. On the contrary,
there were tokens of compassion.

So, said he, I expected to meet you. A light, gleaming from the window, marked
you out. This, and Laffert's directions, have guided me.

What, said Constance, with discomposure in her accent, was your motive for
seeking me?

Have you forgotten, said Ormond, what past at our last interview? The evil
that I then predicted is at hand. Perhaps, you were incredulous: You accounted
me a madman or deciever: Now I am come to witness the fulfillment of my words,
and the completion of your destiny. To rescue you, I have not come: That is not
within the compass of human powers.

Poor Constantia! he continued, in tones that manifseted genuine sympathy, look
upon thyself as lost. The toils that beset thee are inextricable. Summon up thy
patience to endure the evil. Now will the last and heaviest trial betide thy
fortitude. I could weep for thee, if my manly nature would permit. This is the
scene of thy calamity, and this the hour.

These words were adapted to excite curiosity mingled with terror. Ormond's
deportment was of an unexampled tenor, as well as that evil which he had so
ambiguously predicted. He offered not protection from danger, and yet gave no
proof of being himself an agent or auxiliary. After a minute's pause,
Constantia recovering a firm tone, said:

Mr. Ormond! Your recent deportment but ill accords with your professions of
sincerity and plain dealing. What your purpose is, or whether you have any
purpose, I am at a loss to conjecture. Whether you most deserve censure or
ridicule, is a point which you afford me not the means of deciding, and to
which, unless on your own account, I am indifferent. If you are willing to be
more explicit, or if there be any topic on which you wish further to converse,
I will not refuse your company to Laffert's dwelling. Longer to remain here,
would be indiscrete and absurd.

So saying, she motioned toward the door. Ormond was passive, and seemed
indisposed to prevent her departure, till she laid her hand upon the lock. He
then, without moving from his place, exclaimed:

Stay. Must this meeting, which fate ordains to be the last, be so short? Must
a time and place so suitable, for what remains to be said and done, be
neglected or misused? No. You charge me with duplicity, and deem my conduct
either ridiculous or criminal. I have stated my reasons for concealment, but
these have failed to convince you. Well. Here is now an end to doubt. All
ambiguities are preparing to vanish.

When Ormond began to speak, Constance paused to hearken to him. His vehemence
was not of that nature, which threatened to obstruct her passage. It was by
entreaty that he apparently endeavored to detain her steps, and not by
violence. Hence arose her patience to listen. He continued:

Constance! thy father is dead. Art thou not desirous of detecting the author
of his fate? Will it afford thee no consolation to know that the deed is
punished? Will thou suffer me to drag the murderer to thy feet? Thy justice
will be gratified by this sacrifice. Somewhat will be due to him who avenged
thy wrong in the blood of the perpetrator? What say thou? Grant me thy
permission, and, in a moment, I will drag him hither.

These words called up the image of the person, whose corpse she had lately
seen. It was readily conceived that to him Ormond alluded, but this was the
assassin of her father, and his crime had been detected and punished by Ormond!
These images had no other effect than to urge her departure: She again applied
her hand to the lock, and said:

This scene must not be prolonged. My father's death I desire not to hear
explained or to see revenged, but whatever information you are willing or able
to communicate, must be deferred.

Nay, interrupted Ormond, with augmented vehemence, art thou equally devoid of
curiosity and justice? Think thou, that the enmity which bereft thy father
of life, will not seek thy own? There are evils which I cannot prevent thee
from enduring, but there are, likewise, ills which my counsel will enable thee
and thy friend to shun. Save me from witnessing thy death. Thy father's destiny
is sealed; all that remained was to punish his assassin: But thou and thy
Sophia still live. Why should ye perish by a like stroke?

This intimation was sufficient to arrest the steps of Constance. She withdrew
her hand from the door, and fixed eyes of the deepest anxiety on Ormond; --
What mean you? How am I to understand --

Ah! said Ormond, I see thou will consent to stay. Thy detention shall not be
long. Remain where thou art during one moment; merely while I drag hither thy
enemy, and show thee a visage which thou will not be slow to recognize. Saying
this, he hastily ascended the staircase, and quickly passed beyond her sight.

Deportment thus mysterious, could not fail of bewildering her thoughts. There
was somewhat in the looks and accents of Ormond, different from former
appearances: tokens of an hidden purpose and a smothered meaning, were
perceptible: A mixture of the inoffensive and the lawless which added to the
loneliness and silence that encompassed her, produced a faultering emotion. Her
curiosity was overpowered by her fear, and the resolution was suddenly
conceived, of seizing this opportunity to escape.

A third time she put her hand to the lock and attempted to open. The effort
was ineffectual. The door that was accustomed to obey the gentlest touch, was
now immovable. She had lately unlocked and past through it. Her eager
inspection convinced her that the principal bolt was still withdrawn, but a
smaller one was now perceived, of whose existence she had not been apprized,
and over which her key had no power.

Now did she first harbor a fear that was intelligible in its dictates. Now
did she first perceive herself sinking in the toils of some lurking enemy. Hope
whispered that this foe was not Ormond. His conduct had bespoken no willingness
to put constraint upon her steps. He talked not as if he were aware of this
obstruction, and yet his seeming acquiescence might have flowed from a
knowledge that she had no power to remove beyond his reach.

He warned her of danger to her life, of which he was her self-appointed
rescuer. His counsel was to arm her with sufficient caution; the peril that
awaited her was imminent; this was the time and place of its occurrence, and
here she was compelled to remain, till the power that fastened, would
condescend to loose the door. There were other avenues to the hall. These were
accustomed to be locked, but Ormond had found access, and if all continued
fast, it was incontestable that he was the author of this new impediment.

The other avenues were hastily examined. All were bolted and locked. The first
impulse led her to call for help from without, but the mansion was distant from
Laffert's habitation. This spot was wholly unfrequented. No passenger was
likely to be stationed where her call could be heard. Besides, this forcible
detention might operate for a short time, and be attended with no mischievous
consequences. Whatever was to come, it was her duty to collect her courage and
encounter it.

The steps of Ormond above now gave tokens of his approach. Vigilant observance
of this man was all that her situation permitted. A vehement effort restored
her to some degree of composure. Her stifled palpitations allowed her
steadfastly to notice him, as he now descended the stair, bearing a lifeless
body in his arms. There, said he, as he cast it at her feet, Whose countenance
is that? Who would imagine that features like those, belonged to an assassin
and imposter?

Closed eyelids and fallen muscles, could not hide from her lineaments so often
seen. She shrunk back and exclaimed -- Thomas Craig!

A pause succeeded, in which she alternately gazed at the countenance of this
unfortunate wretch and at Ormond. At length, the latter exclaimed:

Well, my girl; have thou examined him? Do thou recognize a friend or an
enemy?

I know him well; but how came this? What purpose brought him hither? Who was
the author of his fate?

Have I not already told thee that Ormond was his own avenger and thine? To
thee and to me he has been a robber. To him thy father is indebted for the loss
not only of property but life. Did crimes like these merit a less punishment?
And what recompense is due to him whose vigilance pursued him hither, and made
him pay for his offenses with his blood? What benefit have I recieved at thy
hand to authorize me, for thy sake, to take away his life?

No benefit recieved from me, said Constance, would justify such an act. I
should have abhored myself for annexing to my benefits, so bloody a condition.
It calls for no gratitude or recompense. Its suitable attendant is remorse.
That he is a thief, I know but too well: that my father died by his hands is
incredible. -- No motives or means --

Why so? interrupted Ormond. Does not sleep seal up the senses? Cannot closets
be unlocked at midnight? Cannot adjoining houses communicate by doors? Cannot
these doors be hidden from suspicion by a sheet of canvass? --

These words were of startling and abundant import. They reminded her of
circumstances in her father's chamber, which sufficiently explained the means
by which his life was assailed. The closet, and its canvass-covered wall; the
adjoining house untenanted and shut up -- but this house, though unoccupied,
belonged to Ormond! From the inferences which flowed hence, her attention was
withdrawn by her companion, who continued:

Do these means imply the interposal of a miracle? His motives? What scruples
can be expected from a man innured, from infancy, to cunning and pillage? Will
he abstain from murder when urged by excruciating poverty, by menaces of
persecution: by terror of expiring on the gallows?

Tumultuous suspicions were now awakened in the mind of Constance. Her
faultering voice scarcely allowed her to ask: How know you that Craig was thus
guilty; that these were his incitements and means? --

Ormond's solemnity now gave place to a tone of sarcasm and looks of
exultation: Poor Constance! Thou art still pestered with incredulity and
doubts! My veracity is still in question! My knowledge, girl, is infallible.
That these were his means of access I cannot be ignorant, for I pointed them
out. He was urged by these motives, for they were stated and enforced by me.
His was the deed, for I stood beside him when it was done.

These, indeed, were terms that stood in no need of further explanation. The
veil that shrouded this formidable being, was lifted high enough to make him be
regarded with inexplicable horror. What his future acts should be, how his
omens of ill were to be solved, were still involved in uncertainty.

In the midst of the fears for her own safety, by which Constantia was now
assailed, the image of her father was revived; keen regret and vehement
upbraiding were conjured up:

Craig then was the instrument, and yours the instigation that destroyed my
father! In what had he offended you? What cause had he given for resentment?

Cause! replied he, with impetuous accents, Resentment! None. My motive was
benevolent: My deed conferred a benefit. I gave him sight and took away his
life, from motives equally wise. Know you not that Ormond was fool enough to
set value on the affections of a woman? These were sought with preposterous
anxiety and endless labor. Among other facilitators of his purpose, he
summoned gratitude to his aid. To snatch you from poverty, to restore his sight
to your father, were expected to operate as incentives to love.

But here I was the dupe of error. A thousand prejudices stood in my way.
These, provided our intercourse were not obstructed, I hoped to subdue. The
rage of innovation seized your father: this, blended with a mortal antipathy to
me, made him labor to seduce you from the bosom of your peaceful country: to
make you enter on a boisterous sea; to visit lands where all is havoc and
hostility. To snatch you from the influence of my arguments.

This new obstacle I was bound to remove. While revolving the means, chance and
his evil destiny threw Craig in my way. I soon convinced him that his
reputation and his life were in my hands. His retention of these depended upon
my will; on the performance of conditions which I prescribed.

My happiness and yours, depended on your concurrence with my wishes. Your
father's life was an obstacle to your concurrence. For killing him, therefore,
I may claim your gratitude. His death was a due and disinterested offering, at
the altar of your felicity and mine.

My deed was not injurious to him. At his age, death, whose coming, at some
period, is inevitable, could not be distant. To make it unforeseen and brief,
and void of pain; to preclude the torments of a lingering malady; a slow and
visible descent to the grave; was the dictates of beneficence. But of what
value was a continuance of his life? Either you would have gone with him to
Europe, or have staid at home with me. In the first case, his life would have
been rapidly consumed by perils and cares. In the second, separation from you,
and union with me, a being so detestable, would equally have poisoned his
existence.

Craig's cowardice and crimes, made him a pliant and commodious tool. I pointed
out the way. The unsuspected door, which led into the closet of your father's
chamber, was made by my direction, during the life of Hellen. By this avenue I
was wont to post myself, where all your conversations could be overheard. By
this avenue, an entrance and retreat were afforded to the agent of my newest
purpose.

Fool that I was! I solaced myself with the belief that all impediments were
now smoothed, when a new enemy appeared: My folly lasted as long as my hope. I
saw that to gain your affections, fortified by antiquated scruples, and
obsequious to the guidance of this new monitor, was impossible. It is not my
way to toil after that which is beyond my reach. If the greater good be
inaccessible, I learn to be contented with the less.

I have served you with successless sedulity. I have set an engine in act to
obliterate an obstacle to your felicity, and lay your father at rest. Under my
guidance, this engine was productive only of good. Governed by itself or by
another, it will only work you harm. I have, therefore, hastened to destroy it.
Lo! it is now before you motionless and impotent.

For this complexity of benefit I look for no reward. I am not tired of
well-doing. Having ceased to labor for an unattainable good, I have come
hither to possess myself of all that I now crave, and by the same deed to
afford you an illustrious opportunity to signalize your wisdom and your
fortitude.

During this speech, the mind of Constance became more deeply pervaded with
dread of some over-hanging but incomprehensible evil. The strongest impulse
was, to gain a safe asylum, at a distance from this spot, and from the presence
of this extraordinary being. This impulse was followed by the recollection,
that her liberty was taken away: That egress from the hall was denied her, and
that this restriction might be part of some conspiracy of Ormond, against her
life.

Security from danger like this, would be, in the first place, sought, by one
of Constantia's sex and opinions, in flight. This had been rendered, by some
fatal chance, or by the precautions of her foe, impracticable. Stratagem or
force was all that remained, to elude or disarm her adversary. For the
contrivance and execution of frauds, all the habits of her life and all the
maxims of her education, had conspired to unfit her. Her force of muscles would
avail her nothing, against the superior energy of Ormond.

She remembered that to inflict death, was no iniquitous exertson of
self-defence, and that the penknife which she held in her hand, was capable of
this service. She had used it to remove any lurking obstruction in the wards of
her key, supposing, for a time, this to be the cause of her failing to withdraw
the bolt of the door. This resource, was, indeed, scarcely less disastrous and
deplorable, than any fate from which it could rescue her. Some uncertainty
still involved the intentions of Ormond. As soon as he paused, she spoke:

How am I to understand this prelude? Let me know the full extent of my danger;
why it is that I am hindered from leaving this house, and why this interview
was sought.

Ah! Constance! This, indeed, is merely prelude to a scene that is to terminate
my influence over thy fate. When this is past, I have sworn to part with thee
forever. Art thou still dubious of my purpose? Art thou not a woman? And have I
not entreated for thy love, and been rejected?

Can thou imagine that I aim at thy life? My avowals of love were sincere; my
passion was vehement and undisguised. It gave dignity and value to a gift in
thy power, as a woman, to bestow. This has been denied. That gift has lost none
of its value in my eyes. What thou refusedst to bestow, it is in my power to
extort. I came for that end. When this end is accomplished, I will restore thee
to liberty.

These words were accompanied by looks, that rendered all explanation of their
meaning useless. The evil reserved for her, hitherto obscured by half-disclosed
and contradictory attributes, was now sufficiently apparent. The truth in this
respect unveiled itself with the rapidity and brightness of an electrical flash.

She was silent. She cast her eyes at the windows and doors. Escape through
them was hopeless. She looked at those lineaments of Ormond which evinced his
disdain of supplication and inexorable passions. She felt that entreaty and
argument would be vain. That all appeals to his compassion and benevolence
would counteract her purpose, since, in the unexampled conformation of this
man's mind, these principles were made subservient to his most flagitious
designs. Considerations of justice and pity were made, by a fatal perverseness
of reasoning, champions and bulwarks of his most atrocious mistakes.

The last extremes of opposition, the most violent expedients for defense,
would be justified by being indispensable. To find safety for her honor, even
in the blood of an assailant, was the prescription of duty. The equity of this
species of defense, was not, in the present confusion of her mind, a subject of
momentary doubt.

To forewarn him of her desperate purpose, would be to furnish him with means
of counteraction. Her weapon would easily be wrested from her feeble hand.
Ineffectual opposition would only precipitate her evil destiny. A rage,
contented with nothing less than her life, might be awakened in his bosom. But
was not this to be desired? Death, untimely and violent, was better than the
loss of honor.

This thought led to a new series of reflections. She involuntarily shrunk from
the act of killing, but would her efforts to destroy her adversary, be
effectual? Would not his strength and dexterity, easily repel or elude them?
Her power, in this respect, was questionable, but her power was undeniably
sufficient to a different end. The instrument, which could not rescue her from
this injury, by the destruction of another, might save her from it by her own
destruction.

These thoughts rapidly occurred, but the resolution to which they led, was
scarcely formed, when Ormond advanced toward her. She recoiled a few steps,
and, showing the knife which she held, said:

Ormond! Beware! Know that my unalterable resolution is, to die uninjured. I
have the means in my power. Stop where you are; one step more, and I plunge
this knife into my heart. I know that to contend with your strength or your
reason, would be vain. To turn this weapon against you, I should not fear, if I
were sure of success; but to that I will not trust. To save a greater good by
the sacrifice of life, is in my power, and that sacrifice shall be made.

Poor Constance! replied Ormond, in a tone of contempt: So! thou preferrest thy
imaginary honor to life! To escape this injury without a name or substance:
Without connection with the past or future; without contamination of thy purity
or thraldom of thy will; thou will kill thyself: Put an end to thy activity in
virtue's cause: Rob thy friend of her solace: The world of thy beneficence:
Thyself of being and pleasure?

I shall be grieved for the fatal issue of my experiment: I shall mourn over
thy martyrdom to the most opprobrious and contemptible of all errors, but that
thou should undergo the trial is decreed. There is still an interval of hope,
that thy cowardice is counterfeited, or that it will give place to wisdom and
courage.

Whatever thou intendest, by way of prevention or cure, it behooves thee to
employ with steadfastness. Die with the guilt of suicide and the brand of
cowardice upon thy memory, or live with thy claims to felicity and approbation
undiminished. Choose which thou will. Thy decision is of moment to thyself, but
of none to me. Living or dead, the prize that I have in view shall be mine. --

CHAPTER XXIX.
IT will be requisite to withdraw your attention from this scene for a moment,
and fix it on myself. My impatience of my friend's delay, for some days
preceding this disastrous interview, became continually more painful. As the
time of our departure approached, my dread of some misfortune or impediment
increased. Ormond's disappearance from the scene, contributed but little to my
consolation. To wrap his purposes in mystery, to place himself at seeming
distance, was the usual artifice of such as he; was necessary to the maturing
of his project, and the hopeless entanglement of his victim. I saw no means of
placing the safety of my friend beyond his reach. Between different methods of
procedure, there was, however, room for choice* Her present abode was more
hazardous than abode in the city. To be alone, argued a state more defenseless
and perilous, than to be attended by me.

I wrote her an urgent admonition to return. My remonstrances were couched in
such terms, as, in my own opinion, laid her under the necessity of immediate
compliance. The letter was dispatched, by the usual messenger, and for some
hours I solaced myself with the prospect of a speedy meeting.

These thoughts gave place to doubt and apprehension. I began to distrust the
efficacy of my arguments, and to invent a thousand reasons, inducing her, in
defiance of my rhetoric, at least to protract her absence. These reasons, I
had not previously conceived, and had not, therefore, attempted, in my letter,
to invalidate their force. This omission was possible to be supplied in a
second epistle, but, meanwhile, time would be lost, and my new arguments,
might, like the old, fail to convince her. At least, the tongue was a much more
versatile and powerful advocate than the pen, and by hastening to her
habitation, I might either compel her to return with me, or ward off danger by
my presence, or share it with her. I finally resolved to join her, by the
speediest conveyance.

This resolution was suggested, by the meditations of a sleepless night. I rose
with the dawn and sought out the means of transporting myself, with most
celerity, to the abode of my friend. A stage-boat, accustomed, twice a day, to
cross New York bay to Staten-Island, was prevailed upon, by liberal offers, to
set out upon the voyage at the dawn of day. The sky was gloomy, and the air
boisterous and unsettled. The wind, suddenly becoming tempestuous and adverse,
rendered the voyage at once tedious and full of peril. A voyage of nine miles
was not effected in less that eight hours, and without imminent and
hair-breadth danger of being drowned.

Fifteen miles of the journey remained to be performed by land. A carriage,
with the utmost difficulty, was procured, but lank horses and a crazy vehicle
were but little in unison with my impatience. We reached not Amboy-ferry till
some hours after nightfall. I was rowed across the sound, and proceeded to
accomplish the remainder of my journey, about three miles, on foot.

I was actuated to this speed; by indefinite, but powerful motives. The belief
that my speedy arrival was essential to the rescue of my friend from some
inexpiable injury, haunted me with ceaseless importunity. On no account would I
have consented to postpone this precipitate expedition till the morrow.

I, at length, arrived at Dudley's farm-house. The inhabitants were struck with
wonder at the sight of me. My clothes were stained by the water, by which
every passenger was copiously sprinkled, during our boisterous navigation, and
soiled by dust: My frame was almost overpowered by fatigue and abstinence.

To my anxious enquiries respecting my friend, they told me that her evenings
were usually spent at the mansion, where, it was probable, she was now to be
found. They were not apprized of any inconvenience or danger, that betided her.
It was her custom sometimes to prolong her absence till midnight.

I could not applaud the discretion nor censure the temerity of this
proceeding. My mind was harrassed by unintelligible omens and self-confuted
fears. To obviate the danger and to banish my inquietudes, was my first duty.
For this end I hastened to the mansion. Having passed the intervening hillocks
and copses, I gained a view of the front of the building. My heart suddenly
sunk, on observing that no apartment, not even that in which I knew it was her
custom to sit at these unseasonable hours, was illuminated. A gleam from the
window of the study, I should have regarded as an argument, at once, of her
presence and her safety.

I approached the house with misgiving and faultering steps. The gate leading
into a spacious court was open. A sound on one side attracted my attention. In
the present state of my thoughts, any near or unexplained sound, sufficed to
startle me. Looking toward the quarter, whence my panic was excited, I espied,
through the dusk, an horse grazing, with his bridle thrown over his neck.

This appearance was a new source of perplexity and alarm. The inference was
unavoidable, that a visitant was here. Who that visitant was, and how he was
now employed, was a subject of eager but fruitless curiosity. Within and around
the mansion, all was buried in the deepest repose. I now approached the
principal door, and looking through the keyhole, perceived a lamp, standing on
the lowest step of the staircase. It shed a pale light over the lofty cieling
and marble balustrades. No face or movement of an human being was perceptible.

These tokens assured me that some one was within; they also accounted for the
nonappearance of light, at the window above. I withdrew my eye from this
avenue, and was preparing to knock loudly for admission, when my attention was
awakened by some one, who advanced to the door from the inside, and seemed
busily engaged in unlocking. I started back and waited with impatience, till
the door should open and the person issue forth.

Presently I heard a voice within, exclaim, in accents of mingled terror and
grief -- O what -- what will become of me? Shall I never be released from this
detested prison?

The voice was that of Constance. It penetrated to my heart like an ice-bolt. I
once more darted a glance through the crevice. A figure, with difficulty
recognized to be that of my friend, now appeared in sight. Her hands were
clasped on her breast, her eyes wildly fixed upon the cieling and streaming
with tears, and her hair unbound and falling confusedly over her bosom and neck.

My sensations scarcely permitted me to call -- Constance! For Heaven's sake
what has happened to you? Open the door I beseach you.

What voice is that? Sophia Courtland! O my friend! I am imprisoned. Some
demon has barred the door, beyond my power to unfasten. Ah! Why come thou so
late? Thy succor would have somewhat profited, if sooner given, but now, the
lost Constantia -- here her voice sunk into convulsive sobs. --

In the midst of my own despair, on perceiving the fulfillment of my
apprehensions, and what I regarded as the fatal execution of some project of
Ormond, I was not insensible to the suggestions of prudence. I entreated my
friend to retain her courage, while I flew to Laffert's, and returned with
suitable assistance to burst open the door.

The people of the farm-house readily obeyed my summons. Accompanied by three
men of powerful sinews, sons and servants of the farmer, I returned with the
utmost expedition to the mansion. The lamp still remained in its former place,
but our loudest calls were unanswered. The silence was uninterrupted and
profound.

The door yielded to strenuous and repeated efforts, and I rushed into the
hall. The first object that met my sight, was my friend, stretched upon the
floor, pale and motionless, supine and with all the tokens of death!

From this object my attention was speedily attracted, by two figures,
breathless and supine, like that of Constance. One of them was Ormond. A smile
of disdain still sat upon his features. The wound, by which he fell, was
secret, and was scarcely betrayed by the effusion of a drop of blood. The face
of the third victim was familiar to my early days. It was that of the imposter,
whose artifice had torn from Mr. Dudley his peace and fortune.

An explication of this scene was hopeless. By what disastrous and inscrutable
fate, a place like this became the scene of such complicated havoc, to whom
Craig was indebted for his death, what evil had been meditated or inflicted by
Ormond, and by what means his project had arrived at this bloody consummation,
were topics of wild and fearful conjecture.

But my friend -- the first impulse of my fears was, to regard her as dead.
Hope and a closer observation, outrooted, or at least, suspended this opinion.
One of the men lifted her in his arms. No trace of blood or mark of fatal
violence was discoverable, and the effusion of cold water restored her, though
slowly, to life.

To withdraw her from this spectacle of death was my first care. She suffered
herself to be led to the farm-house. She was carried to her chamber. For a time
she appeared incapable of recollection. She grasped my hand, as I sat by her
bed-^ide, but scarcely gave any other tokens of life.

From this state of inactivity she gradually recovered. I was actuated by a
thousand forebodings, but refrained from molesting her by interrogation or
condolence. I watched by her side in silence, but was eager to collect from her
own lips, an account of this mysterious transaction.

At length she opened her eyes, and appeared to recollect her present
situation, and the events which led to it. I inquired into her condition, and
asked if there were any thing in my power to procure or perform for her.

O! my friend! she answered, what have I done; what have I suffered within the
last dreadful hour? The remembrance, though insupportable, will never leave me.
You can do nothing for my relief. All I claim, is your compassion and your
sympathy.

I hope, said I, that nothing has happened to load you with guilt or with shame.

Alas! I know not. My deed was scarcely the fruit of intention. It was
suggested by a momentary frenzy. I saw no other means of escaping from vileness
and pollution. I was menaced with an evil worse than death. I forbore till my
strength was almost subdued: The lapse of another moment would have placed me
beyond hope.

My stroke was desperate and at random. It answered my purpose too well. He
cast at me a look of terrible upbraiding, but spoke not. His heart was pierced,
and he sunk, as if struck by lightning, at my feet. O much-erring and unhappy
Ormond! That thou should thus untimely perish! That I should be thy
executioner!

These words sufficiently explained the scene that I had witnessed. The
violence of Ormond had been repulsed by equal violence. His foul attempts had
been prevented by his death. Not to deplore the necessity which had produced
this act was impossible; but, since this necessity existed, it was surely not a
deed to be thought upon with lasting horror, or to be allowed to generate
remorse.

In consequence of this catastrophe, arduous duties had devolved upon me. The
people that surrounded me, were powerless with terror. Their ignorance and
cowardice left them of a loss how to act in this emergency. They besought my
direction, and willingly performed whatever I thought proper to enjoin upon
them.

N / o deliberation was necessary to acquaint me with my duty. Laffert was
dispatched to the nearest magistrate with a letter, in which his immediate
presence was entreated, and these transactions were briefly explained. Early
the next day the formalities of justice, in the inspection of the bodies and
the examination of witnesses, were executed. It would be needless to dwell on
the particulars of this catastrophe. A sufficient explanation has been given of
the causes that led to it. They were such as exempted my friend from legal
animadversion. Her act was prompted by motives which every scheme of
jurisprudence known in the world not only exculpates but applauds. To state
these motives, before a tribunal hastily formed, and exercising its functions
on the spot, was a task not to be avoided, though infinitely painful.
Remonstrances, the most urgent and pathetic, could scarcely conquer her
reluctance.

This task, however, was easy, in comparison with that which remained. To
restore health and equanimity to my friend; to repel the erroneous accusations
of her conscience; to hinder her from musing, with eternal anguish, upon this
catastrophe; to lay the spirit of secret upbraiding by which she was
incessantly tormented; which bereft her of repose; empoisoned all her
enjoyments, and menaced, not only, the subversion of her peace, but the speedy
destruction of her life, became my next employment.

My counsels and remonstrances were not wholly inefficacious. They afforded me
the prospect of her ultimate restoration to tranquillity. Meanwhile, I called
to my aid, the influence of time and of a change of scene. I hastened to embark
with her for Europe. Our voyage was tempestuous and dangerous, but storms and
perils at length gave way to security and repose.

Before our voyage was commenced, I endeavored to procure tidings of the true
condition and designs of Ormond. My information extended no further, than that
he had put his American property into the hands of Mr. Melbourne, and was
preparing to embark for France. Courtland, who has since been at Paris, and
who, while there, became confidentially acquainted with Martinette de Beauvais,
has communicated facts of an unexpected nature.

At the period of Ormond's return to Philadelphia, at which his last interview
with Constance, in that city, took place, he visited Martinette. He avowed
himself to be her brother, and supported his pretensions, by relating the
incidents of his early life. A separation, at the age of fifteen, and which had
lasted for the same number of years, may be supposed to have considerably
changed the countenance and figure she had formerly known. His relationship was
chiefly proved by the enumeration of incidents, of which her brother only could
be apprized.

He possessed a minute acquaintance with her own adventures, but concealed from
her the means by which he had procured the knowledge. He had rarely and
imperfectly alluded to his own opinions and projects, and had maintained an
invariable silence, on the subject of his connection with Constance and Hellen.
Being informed of her intention to return to France, he readily complied with
her request to accompany her in this voyage. His intentions in this respect
were frustrated by the dreadful catastrophe that has been just related.
Respecting this event, Martinette had collected only vague and perplexing
information. Courtland, though able to remove her doubts, thought proper to
withhold from her the knowledge he possessed.

Since her arrival in England, the life of my friend has experienced little
variation. Of her personal deportment and domestic habits, you have been a
witness: these, therefore, it would be needless for me to exhibit. It is
sufficient to have related events, which the recentness of your intercourse
with her hindered you from knowing, but by means of some formal narrative like
the present. She and her friend only were able to impart to you the knowledge
which you have so anxiously sought. In consideration of your merits and of your
attachment to my friend, I have consented to devote my leisure to this task.

It is now finished; and I have only to add my wishes, that the perusal of this
tale may afford you as much instruction, as the contemplation of the sufferings
and vicissitudes of Constantia Dudley has afforded to me. Farewell!

FINIS.
LANE, MINERVA-PRESS, LEADENHALL-STREET.

BOOKS PRINTED AT THE MINERVA-PRESS.
A WINTER'S TALE, FOUR VOLUMES, 12MO, PRICE 16s. SEWED. A tender connection of
Edward the Black Prince with the fair Selina, forms the groundwork of this
Tale, which is amusing without being immoral. London Review, January 1800.
HENRY OF NORTHUMBERLAND, THREE VOLUMES, 12mo. PRICE 12s. SEWED. These volumes
profess to be compiled from a manuscript discovered in an ancient mansion in
the North of England, and relate what we are to suppose the domestic history of
the son of the gallant Hotspur, who lost his life at the battle of Shrewsbury.
The circumstances on which the celebrated poem of "The Hermit of Warkworth" is
founded are here narrated, with the addition of various incidents, which will
render the work very acceptable to Novel readers in general. London Review,
January 1800. WESTBROOK VILLAGE, TWO VOLUMES, 12MO. PRICE 7s. SEWED. A pleasing
story, exhibiting several well-drawn characters, and containing many judicious
remarks on life and manners. London Review, November, 1799. MELBOURNE, THREE
VOLUMES, 12MO. PRICE 10s. 6d. SEWED. The hero of this tale, though apparently
the son of a poor peasant, discovers many shining qualities, recommends himself
to splendid patronage, and ultimately finds parents high in the seal of rank
and opulence. The characters are interesting, if not original, and many of the
sentiments inculcate the soundest principles of moral utility, and are
illustrated by an ingenuity and strength of reasoning worthy of the grace and
dignity of virtue. The contrast or disposition, which is often exhibited in
young persons of the same age, is well painted by the author of this Novel, a
part of which reminds us of Mr. Day's Sundford and Merton. There are also some
excellent thoughts on education in general, and on the particular subject of
public schools and colleges. Upon the whole, if an interesting story, a moral
tendency, and much useful delineation of character and manners, can recommend a
Novel, Melbourne deserves the applause of criticism. Critical Review,
September, 1799. BY THE SAME AUTHOR, REGINALD, OR, THE HOUSE OF MIRANDOLA,
THREE VOLUMES, 12MO. PRICE 12s. SEWED. This is professedly an imitation of the
manner of Mrs. Radcliff's "Udolpho," and, in our opinion, not an unsuccessful
one. The story is well told, and is calculated to promote the exercise of the
moral virtues. London Review, January 1800.

