THE PARENT's ASSISTANT; OR, STORIES FOR CHILDREN. PART I. CONTAINING, THE
LITTLE DOG TRUSTY; OR, THE LIAR AND BOY OF TRUTH. THE ORANGE MAN; OR, THE
HONEST BOY AND THE THIEF. TARLTON. LAZY LAWRENCE. THE FALSE KEY: AND
BARRING-OUT. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, AN ADDRESS TO PARENTS.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. 1796.

PREFACE, ADDRESSED TO PARENTS.
All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind have been convinced,
that the fate of empires depended on the education of youth.

ARISTOTLE.
A Motto from Aristotle may appear pedantic, but it was chosen merely to oppose
such high authority to the following assertions of Dr. Johnson.

"Education," says he, is as well known, and has long been as well known as
ever it can be. Endeavoring to make children prematurely wise is useless
labor. Suppose they have more knowledge at five or six years old than other
children, what use can be made of it? It will be lost before it is wanted, and
the waste of so much time and labor of the teacher is never to be repaid
Boswell's Life of Johnson.
. -- The remainder of this passage contains such an illiberal attack upon a
celebrated female writer, as ought surely to have been suppressed by Dr.
Johnson's biographer. When the Doctor attempted to ridicule this lady for
keeping an infant boarding-school, and for condescending to write elementary
books for children, he forgot his own eulogium upon Dr. Watts, of whom he
speaks thus:

For children he condescended to lay aside the philosopher, the scholar, and
the wit, to write little poems of devotion, and systems of instruction adapted
to their wants and capacities, from the dawn of reason, to its gradation of
advance in the morning of life. Every man acquainted with the common principles
of human action, will look with veneration on the writer, who is at one time
combating Lock, and at another time making a catechism for chilaren in their
fourth year. A voluntary descent from the dignity of science is perhaps the
hardest lesson which humility can teach.

It seems however a very easy task to write for children. Those only who have
been interested in the education of a family, who have patiently followed
children through the first processes of reasoning, who have daily watched over
their thoughts and feelings: those only, who know with what ease and rapidity
the early associations of ideas are formed, on which the future taste,
character, and happiness depend, can feel the dangers and difficulties of such
an undertaking.

For a length of time education was classed amongst the subjects of vague and
metaphysical speculation; but, of late, it has attained its proper station in
experimental philosophy. -- The sober sense of Lock, and the enthusiastic
eloquence of Rousseau, have directed to this object the attention of
philosophers and men of genius. Many theories have been invented, several just
observations have been made, and some few facts have been established.

Dr. Reid remarks, that if we could obtain a distinct and full history of all
that has passed in the mind of a child, from the beginning of life and
sensation, till it grows up to the use of reason, how its insant faculties
began to work, and how they brought forth and ripened all the various notions,
opinions, and sentiments, which we find in ourselves, when we come to be
capable of reslection, this would be a treasure of natural history, which would
probably give more light into the human faculties, than all the systems of
philosophers about them, since the beginning of the world. Dr. Reid, on the
Intellectual Powers of Man.


Indeed in all sciences the grand difficulty has been to ascertain sacts -- a
difficulty which, in the science of education, peculiar circumstances conspire
to increase. Here the objects of every experiment are so interesting, that we
cannot hold our minds indifferent to the result. Nor is it to be expected, that
many registers of experiments, successful and unsuccessful, should be kept,
much less should be published, when we consider, that the combined powers of
affection and vanity, of partiality to his child, and to his theory, will act
upon the mind of a parent, in opposition to the abstract love of justice, and
the general desire to increase the wisdom and happiness of mankind.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, an attempt to keep such a register has
actually been made: it was begun in the year 1776, long before Doctor Reid's
book was published. The design has from time to time been pursued to this
present year; and though much has not been collected, every circumstance and
conversation that has been preserved is faithfully and accurately related.

These notes have been of great advantage to the writer of the following
Stories; and will probably, at some future time, be laid before the public, as
a collection of experiments upon a subject which has been hitherto treated
theoretically.

The following tales have been divided into two parts, as they were designed
for different classes of children. The question, whether society could subsist
without the distinction of ranks, is a question involving a variety of
complicated discussions, which we leave to the politician and the legislator.
At present, it is necessary that the education of different ranks should, in
some respects, be different; they have few ideas, few habits in common; their
peculiar vices and virtues do not arise from the same causes, and their
ambition is to be directed to different objects. But justice, truth, and
humanity, are confined to no particular rank, and should be enforced with equal
care and energy upon the minds of young people of every station; and it is
hoped that these principles have never been forgotten in the following pages.

The two first stories, "The Orange Man," and "Trusty," were written for a much
earlier age than any of the others, and with such a perfect simplicity of
expression as, to many, may appear insipid and ridiculous. This degree of
simplicity is, however, necessary sor very young children, who, when they begin
to learn to read, should be rewarded for the trouble of decyphering every word,
by being enabled to understand the sense of the whole. Since these two Stories
were written, a number of excellent little books have supplied the deficiency
which was then complained of by all parents. It was not, therefore, thought
necessary to write any more for that age. In the tales which succeed to them in
this collection the same simplicity of language has not been observed. The use
of elementary books is to store the minds of children with facts, and to
enlarge their vocabulary. After these purposes have been effected, it is waste
of time, and a mere useless exercise of the memory, to continue this species of
reading. As the ideas of children multiply, the language of their books should
become less simple; else their taste will quickly be disgusted, or will remain
stationary. Children that live with people who converse with elegance, will not
be contented with a style inferior to what they hear from every body near them.

It may be remarked, that almost all language is metaphorick -- from the
conversation of the maid in the nursery, who lulls a cross infant to sleep, to
that of the lady in the drawing room, who, with silly civility, takes a child
upon her lap to entertain it by a repetition of fashionable phrases. Slang (the
term is disgracefully naturalized in our vocabulary) contains as much and as
abstract metaphor as can be found in the most refined literary language. Nor
have we reason to suppose, that one kind of metaphor is more difficult than
another to be understood by children; they frequently hear the most complicated
metaphorical expressions in conversation, such as allude to our fashions and
the prejudices of society, with which they are utterly unacquainted.

All poetical allusions have however been avoided in this book -- only such
situations are described, as children can casily imagine, and which may
consequently interest their feelings. -- Such examples of virtue are painted as
are not above their conception of excellence, and their powers of sympathy and
emulation.

It is not easy to give rewards to children, which shall not indirectly do them
harm, by fostering some hurtful taste or passion. In the story of Lazy
Lawrence, where the object was to excite a spirit of industry, care has been
taken to proportion the reward to the exertion, and to point out, that people
feel cheerful and happy whilst they are employed. The reward of our industrious
boy, though it be money, is only money considered as the means of gratifying a
benevolent wish. In a commercial nation, it is especially necessary to
separate, as much as possible, the spirit of industry and avarice; and to
beware lest we introduce Vice under the form of Virtue.

In the story of Tarlton and Loveit are represented the danger and the folly of
that weakness of mind, and easiness to be led, which too often pass for
goodnature; and, in the story of the False Key, are pointed out some of the
evils to which a well-educated boy, when he first goes to service, is exposed,
from the profligacy of his fellow servants.

In the Birthday Present, in the History of Mademoiselle Panache, and in the
character of Mrs. Theresa Tattle, in the second part, the Parent's Assistant
has pointed out the dangers which may arise in education from a bad servant, a
silly governess, and a common acquaintance.

In the Barring-out, the errors to which a high spirit and the love of party
are apt to lead, have been made the subject of correction; and it is hoped that
the common fault of making the most mischievous characters appear the most
active, and the most ingenious, has been as much as possible avoided.
Unsuccessful cunning will not be admired, and cannot induce imitation.

It has likewise been attempted in these Stories to provide antidotes against
ill-humour, the epidemic rage for dissipation, and the fatal propensity to
admire and imitate whatever the fashion of the moment may distinguish. Were
young people, either in public Schools or in private families, absolutely free
from bad examples, it would not be advisable to introduce despicable and
vicious characters in books intended for their improvement. But in real life
they must see vice, and it is best that they should be early shocked with the
representation of what they are to avoid. There is a great deal of difference
between innocence and ignorance.

To prevent precepts of morality from tiring the ear and the mind, it was
necessary to make the stories in which they are introduced in some measure
dramatic; to keep alive hope, and fear, and curiosity, by some degree of
intricacy. At the same time care has been taken to avoid inflaming the
imagination, or exciting a restless spirit of adventure, by exhibiting false
views of life, and creating hopes which, in the ordinary course of things,
cannot be realised.

Dr. Johnson -- to recur to him, not from a spirit of contradiction, but from a
fear that his authority should establish dangerous errors -- Dr. Johnson says,
that Babies do not like to hear stories of babies like themselves; that they
require to have their imaginations raised by tales of giants and fairies, and
castles and enchantments. -- The fact remains to be proved: but supposing that
they do prefer such tales, is this a reason why they should be indulged in
reading them? It may be said that a little experience in life would soon
convince them, that fairies, and giants, and enchanters, are not to be met with
in the world. But why should the mind be filled with fantastic visions, instead
of useful knowledge? Why should so much valuable time be lost? Why should we
vitiate their taste, and spoil their appetite, by suffering them to feed upon
sweetmeats? It is to be hoped, that the magic of Dr. Johnson's name will not
have power to restore the reign of fairies.

But even when the improbability of fairy tales is avoided, care should be
taken to keep objects in their just proportions, when we attempt an imitation
of real life.

Love, hatred, fear and anger, are to be raised in the soul, says an eminent
poet, by showing their objects out of their true proportion, either greater
than the life or less; but instruction is to be given, by showing them what
they really are.

And surely a writer, who sincerely wishes to increase the happiness of
mankind, will find it easy to give up the fame that might be acquired by
eloquence, when it is injurious to the cause of truth.

THE LITTLE DOG TRUSTY; OR, THE LIAR AND THE BOY OF TRUTH.
VERY, very little children must not read this story, for they cannot
understand it; they will not know what is meant by a liear, and a boy of truth.

Very little children, when they are asked a question, say "yes," and "no,"
without knowing the meaning of the words; but you, children, who can speak
quite plain, and who can tell, by words, what you wish for, and what you want,
and what you have seen, and what you have done; you who understand what is
meant by the words "I have done it," or "I have not," you may read this story,
for you can understand it.

Frank and Robert were two little boys, about eight years old. Whenever Frank
did anything wrong, he always told his father a^^ mother of it; and when any
body asked him about any thing which he had done or said, he always told the
truth; so that every body who knew him believed him: but nobody who knew his
brother Robert believed a word which he said, because he used to tell lies.
Whenever he did any thing wrong, he never ran to his father and mother to tell
them of it; but when they asked him about it, he denied it, and said he had not
done the things which he had done. The reason that Robert told lies was,
because he was afraid of being punished for his faults if he confessed them. He
was a coward, and could not bear the least pain; but Frank was a brave boy, and
could bear to be punished for little faults: his mother never punished him so
much for such little faults, as she did Robert for the lies which he told, and
which she found out afterward.

One evening these two little boys were playing together in a room by
themselves; their mother was ironing in a room next to them, and their father
was out at work in the fields, so there was nobody in the room with Robert and
Frank; but there was a l^ttle dog Trusty ^ving by the fireside. Trusty was a
pretty playful little dog, and the children were very fond of him.

"Come," said Robert to Frank, "there is Trusty lying beside the fire asleep,
let us go and waken him, and he will play with us." -- "O yes, do, let us,"
said Frank. So they both ran together toward the hearth to waken the dog. Now
there was a basin of milk standing upon the hearth, and the little boys did not
see whereabouts it stood, for it was behind them: as they were both playing
with the dog, they kicked it with their fe^t, and threw it down; and the basin
broke, and all the milk ran out of it over the hearth, and about the floor; and
when the little boys saw what they had done, they were very sorry, and
frightened, but they did not know what to do: they stood for some time looking
at the broken basin and the milk, without speaking. Robert spoke first.

"So, we shall have no milk for supper tonight," said he, and he sighed --

"No milk for supper! -- why not?" said Frank; "is there no more milk in the
house." "Yes, but we shall have none of it; for do not you remember, last
Monday, when we threw down the milk, my mother said we were very careless, and
that the next time we did so, we should have no more, -- and this is the next
time; so we shall have no milk for supper tonight."

"Well, then," said Frank, "we must do without it, that is all: we will take
more care another time; there is no great harm done; come, let us run and tell
my mother. You know she bid us always tell her directly when we broke any
thing; so come," said he, taking hold of his brother's hand. "I will come just
now," said Robert; "don't be in such a hurry, Frank -- cannot you stay a
minute?" So Frank stayed: and then he said, "Come now, Robert." But Robert
answered, "Stay a little longer, for I dare not go yet -- I am afraid."

Little boys, I ad^ise you, never be afraid to tell the truth; never say "stay
a minute," and, "stay a little longer," but run directly, and tell of what you
have done that is wrong. The longer you stay, the more afraid you will grow;
till at last, perhaps, you will not d^re to tell the truth at all. -- Hear what
happened to Robert.

The longer he stayed, the more unwilling he was to go to tell his mother that
he had thrown the milk down; and at last he pulled his hand away from his
brother, and cried, "I will not go at all; Frank, cannot you go by yourself?" --
"Yes," said Frank, "so I will; I am not afraid to go by myself: I only waited
for you out of goodnature, because I thought you would like to tell the truth
too."

"Yes, so I will; I mean to tell the truth when I am asked; but I need not go
now, when I do not choose it: -- and why need you go either? -- cannot you wait
here? -- sure^y my mother can see the milk when she comes in." -- Frank said no
more, but, as his brother would not come, he went without him. He opened the
door of the nex^ room, where he thought his mother was ironing; but when he
went in, he saw that she was gone, and he thought she was gone to fetch some
more clothes to iron. The clothes, he kn^w, were hanging on the bushes in the
garden; so he thought his mother was gone there, and he ran after her to tell
what had happened.

Now whilst Frank was gon^, Robert was left in the room by himself; and all the
while he was alone he was thinking of some excuses to make to his mother, and
he was sorry that Frank was gone to tell her the truth. He said to himself, "If
Frank and I both were to say, that we did not throw down the basin, she would
believe us, and we should have milk for supper. I am very sorry Frank would go
to tell her about it." Just as he said this to himself, he heard his mother
coming down stairs. "Oh ho!" said he to himself, "then my mother has not been
out in the garden, and so Frank has not met her, and cannot have told her; so
now I may say what I please."

Then this naughty, cowardly boy determined to tell his mother a lie.

She came into the room; but when she saw the broken basin, and the milk
spilled, she stopped short, and cried --

"So, so! -- what a piece of work is here! -- who did this, Robert?"

"I don't know, ma'am," said Robert, in a very low voice.

"You don't know, Robert! -- tell me the truth -- I shall not be angry with
you, child -- you will only lose the milk at supper; and as for the basin, I
would rather have you break all the basins I have, than tell me one lie. -- So
don't tell me a lie. -- I ask you, Robert, did you break the basin?"

" No, ma'am, I did not," said Robert, and he colored as red as fire.

"Then, where is Frank? -- did he do it?" -- "No mother, he did not," said
Robert; for he was in hopes, that when Frank came in, he should persuade him to
say that he did not do it.

"How do you know", said his mother, "that Frank did not do it?"

"Because -- because -- because, ma'am," said Robert, hesitating, as liars do
for an excuse -- "because I was in the room all the time, and I did not see him
do it."

"Then how was the basin thrown down? If you have been in the room all the time
you can tell."

Then Robert, going on from one lie to another, answered --

"I suppose the dog must have done it." -- "Did you see him do it?" says his
mother. "Yes," said this wicked by. "Trusty, Trusty," said his mother, turning
round; and Trusty, who was lying before the fire, drying his legs, which were
wet with the milk, jumped up, and came to her. Then she said, "Fie! fie!
Trusty!" and she pointed to the milk. "Get me a switch out of the garden,
Robert; Trusty must be bent for this." Robert ran for the switch, and in the
garden he met his brother: he stopped him, and told him, in a great hurry, all
that he had said to his mother; and he begged of him not to tell the truth, but
to say the same as he had done.

"No, I will not tell a lie," said Frank. -- "What! and is Trusty to be beat!
-- he did not throw down the milk, and he shall not be beat for it -- let me go to
my mother."

They both ran toward the house; Robert got first home, and he locked the house
door, that Frank might not come in. He gave the switch to his mother. Poor
Trusty! he looked up as the switch was l^fted over his head, but he could not
speak, to tell the truth. Just as the blow was falling upon him, Frank's voice
was heard at the window, -- "Stop, stop! dear mother, stop!" cried he, as loud
as ever he could call; "Trusty did not do it -- let me ^n -- I and Robert did
it -- but do not b^a^ Robert."

"Let us in, let us in," cried another voice, which Robert k^ew to be his
father's; "I am just come from work, and here is the do^^ locked." Robert turned
as pale as ashes when he heard his father's voice, for his father always
whipped him when he told a lie.

His mother went to the door, and unlocked it. "What Is all this?" cried his
father, as he came in; so his mother told him all that had happened; -- how the
milk had been thrown down; how she had asked Robert whether he had done it; and
he said that he had not, nor that Frank had not done it, but that Trusty the
dog had done it; how she was just going to beat Trusty, when Frank came to the
window and told the truth. "Where is the switch with which you were going to
beat Trusty?" said the father.

Then Robert, who saw, by his father's looks, that he was going to beat him,
fell upon his knees, and cried for mercy, saying, "Forgive me this time, and I
will never tell a lie again."

But his father caught hold of him by the arm -- "I will whip you now," said
he, "and then, I hope, you will not." So Robert was whipped, till he cried so
loud with the pain, that the whole neighborhood could hear him.

"There," said his father, when he had done, "now go to supper; you are to have
no milk to night, and you have been whipped. See how liars are served!" Then,
turning to Frank, "Come here, and shake hands with me, Frank; you will have no
milk for supper, but that does not signify; you have told the truth, and have
not been whipped, and every body is pleased with you. And now I Will tell you
what I will do for you -- I will give you the little dog Trusly, to be your own
dog. You shall feed him, and take care of him, and he shall be your dog; you
have saved him a beating, and I Will answer for it you will be a good master to
him. Trusty, Trusty, come here." Trusty came; then Frank's father took off
Trusty's collar. "Tomorrow I Will go to the brazier's," added he, "and get a new
collar made for your dog: from this day forward he shall always be called after
you, Frank! -- And, wife, whenever any of the neighbors children ask you why
the dog Trusty is to be called Frank, tell them this story of our two boys: let
them know the difference between a liar and a boy of truth.

THE ORANGE MAN; OR, THE HONEST BOY AND THE THIEF.
CHARLES was the name of the honest boy; and Ned was the name of the thief.
Charles never touched what was not his own; this is being an honest boy: Ned
often took what was not his own; this is being a thief. Charles's father and
mother, when he was a very little boy, had taught him to be honest, by always
punishing him when he meddled with what was not his own: but when Ned took what
was not his own, his father and mother did not punish him; so he grew up to be
a thief.

Early one summer's morning, as Charles was going along the road to school, he
met a man leading a horse which was laden with panniers. The man stopped at the
door of a public-house which was by the road fide; and he said to the landlord,
who came to the door, "I will not have my horse unloaded, I shall only stop with
you whilst I eat my breakfast; give my horse to some one to hold here on the
road, and let the horse have a little hay to eat." The landlord called, but
there was no one in the way; so he beckoned to Charles, who was going by, and
begged him to ^old the horse. "Oh," said the man, "but can you engage him to be
an honest boy? for these are oranges in my baskets; and it is not every little
boy one can leave with oranges." -- "Yes," said the landlord, "I have known
Charles from the cradle upwards, and I never caught him in a lie or a theft;
all the parish knows him to be an honest boy; I Will engage your oranges will be
as safe with him as if you were by yourself." -- "Can you so?" said the orange
man; "then I Will engage, my lad, to give you the finest orange in my basket,
when I come from breakfast, if you will watch the red whilst I am away." --
"Yes," said Charles, "I will take care of your oranges." So the man put the
bridle into his hand, and he went into the house to eat his breakfast.

Charles had watched the horse and the oranges about five minutes, when he saw
one of his schoolfellows coming toward him; as he came nearer, Charles saw
that it was Ned. Ned stopped as he passed, and said --

"Good Morrow to you, Charles; what are you doing there? whose horse is that?
and what have you got in the baskets?" -- "There are oranges in the baskets,"
said Charles; "and a man, who has just gone into the inn here to eat his
breakfast, bid me take care of them, and so I did; because he said he would
give me an orange when he came back again."

"An orange!" cried Ned; "are you to have a whole orange? -- I wish I was to
have one! However, let me look how large they are." Saying this, Ned went
toward the pannier, and lifted up the cloth that covered it. "La! what fine
oranges!" he exclaimed, the moment he saw them. "Let me touch them to feel if
they are ripe."

"No," said Charles, "you had better not; what signifies it to you whether they
are ripe, you know, since you are not to eat them. You should not meddle with
them, they are not yours, -- you must not touch them." "Not touch them!
surely," said Ned, "there is no harm in touching them. You don't think I mean to
steal them, I suppose." So Ned put his hand into the orange-man's basket, and
he took up an orange, and he felt it; and when he had felt it, he smelled it.
"It smells very sweet," said he, "and it feels very ripe; I long to taste it; I
will only just suck one drop of juice at the top." Saying these words, he put
the orange to his mouth.

Little boys, who wish to be honest, beware of temptation; do not depend too
much upon yourselves; and remember, that it is easier to resolve to do right at
first, than at last. People are led on, by little and little, to do wrong.

The sight of the oranges tempted Ned to touch them; the touch tempted him to
smell them; and the smell tempted him to taste them.

"What are you about, Ned?" cried Charles, taking hold of his arm. "You said,
you only wanted to smell the orange; do, put it down, for shame!"

"Don't say for shame to me," cried Ned, in a surly tone; the oranges are not
yours, Charles!" -- "No, they are not mine, but I promised to take care of
them, and so I will: -- so put down that orange!"

"Oh, if it comes to that, I will not," said Ned, and let us see who can make me,
if I don't choose it; -- I Am stronger than you."

"I am not afraid of you for all that," replied Charles, "for I am in the
right." Then he snatched the orange out of Ned's hand, and he pushed him with
all his force from the basket. Ned, immediately returning, hit him a violent
blow, which almost stunned him. Still, however, this good boy, without minding
the pain, persevered in defending what was left in his care; he still held the
bridle with one hand, and covered the basket with his other arm, as well as he
could. Ned struggled in vain, to get his hands into the pannier again; he could
not; and, finding that he could not win by strength, he had recourse to
cunning. So he pretended to be out of breath and to desist; but he meant, as
soon as Charles looked away, to creep softly round to the basket, on the other
side. Cunning people, though they think themselves very wise, are almost always
very silly.

Ned, intent upon one thing, the getting round to steal the oranges, forgot
that if he went too close to the horse's heels, he should startle him. The
horse indeed, disturbed by the bustle near him, had already left off eating his
hay, and began to put down his ears; but when he felt something touch his hind
legs, he gave a sudden kick, and Ned fell backwards, just as he had seized the
orange.

Ned screamed with the pain; and at the scream all the people came out of the
public house to see what was the matter; and amongst them came the orange-man.

Ned was now so much ashamed, that he almost forgot the pain, and wished to run
away; but he was so much hurt, that he was obliged to sit down again. The truth
of the matter was soon told by Charles, and as soon believed by all the people
present who knew him: for he had the character of being an honest boy, and Ned
was known to be a thief and a liar.

So nobody pitied Ned for the pain he felt. "He deserves it," says one. "Why
did he meddle with what was not his own?" -- "Pugh! he is not much hurt, I Will
answer for it," said another. "And if he was, it is a lucky kick for him, if it
keeps him from the gallows," says a third. Charles was the only person who said
nothing; he helped Ned away to a bank. For brave boys are always good-natured.

"Oh, come here," said the orange-man, calling him; "come here, my honest lad!
what! you got that black eye in keeping my oranges, did you? -- that is a flout
little fellow," said he, taking him by the hand, and leading him into the midst
of the people. Men, women, and children, had gathered around, and all the
children fixed their eyes upon Charles, and wished to be in his place.

In the mean time the orange man took Charles's hat off his head, and filled it
with fine China oranges. "There, my little friend," said he, "take them, and
God bless you with them! If I could but afford it, you should have all that is
in my basket."

Then the people, and especially the children, shouted for joy; but as soon as
there was silence, Charles said to the orange-man, "Thank's, master, with all
my heart; but I cannot take your oranges, only that one I earned; take the rest
back again: as for a black eye, that is nothing! but I will not be paid for it; no
more than for doing what is honest. So I cannot take your oranges, master; but I
thank you as much as if I had them." Saying these words, Charles offered to
pour the oranges back into the basket, bat the man would not let him.

"Then," said Charles, "if they are honestly mine, I may give them away;" so he
emptied the hat amongst the children his companions. "Divide them amongst you,"
said he; and without waiting for their thanks, he pressed through the crowd,
and ran toward home. The children all followed him, clapping their hands, and
thanking him.

The little thief came limping after. Nobody praised him, nobody thanked him;
he had no oranges to eat, nor had he any to give away. People must be honest,
before they can be generous. Ned sighed as he went toward home; "And all
this," said he to himself, "was for one orange; it was not worth while." No. It
is never worth while to do wrong. Little boys who read this story, consider
which would you rather have been, the honest boy, or the thief.

TARLTON.
YOUNG Hardy was educated by Mr. Freeman, a very good master, at one of the
Sunday schools in -- shire. He was honest, obedient, active, and good-natured;
so that he was esteemed and beloved by his master, and by his companions.
Beloved by all his companions who were good, he did not desire to be loved by
the bad; nor was he at all vexed or ashamed, when idle, mischievous, or
dishonest boys attempted to plague or ridicule him. His friend Loveit, on the
contrary, wished to be universally liked; and his highest ambition was to be
thought the best natured boy in the school: -- and so he was. He usually went
by the name of poor Loveit, and every body pitied him when he got into
disgrace, which he frequently did; for though he had a good disposition, he was
often led to do things, which he knew to be wrong, merely because he could
never have the courage to say, no; because he was afraid to offend the
ill-natured, and could not bear to be laughed at by fools.

One fine autumn evening, all the boys were permitted to go out to play in a
pleasant green meadow, near the school. Loveit, and another boy, called
Tarlton, began to play a game at battledore and shuttlecock, and a large party
stood by to look on; for they were the best players at battledore and
shuttlecock in the school, and this was a trial of skill between them. When
they had kept it up to three hundred and twenty, the game became very
interesting: the arms of the combatants grew so tired, that they could scarcely
wield the battledores: -- the shuttlecock began to waver in the air; now it
almost touched the ground, and now, to the astonishment of the spectators,
mounted again high over their heads; yet the strockes became fe^bler and
feebler; and "now Loveit!" "now Tarlton!" resounded on all sides. For another
minute the victory was doubtful; but at length, the setting sun shining full in
Loveit's face so dazzled his eyes, that he could no longer see the shuttlecock,
and it fell at his feet.

After the first shout for Tarlton's triumph was over, every body exclaimed,
"Poor Loveit!" -- he is the best natured fellow in the world! -- what a pity
that he did not stand with his black to the sun."

"Now I dare you all to play another game with me," cried Tarlton, vauntingly;
and as he spoke, he tossed the shuttlecock up with all his force: with so much
force, that it went over the hedge, and dropped into a lane, which went close
beside the field. "Hey-day!" said Tarlton, "what shall we do now?"

The boys were strictly forbidden to go into the lane; and it was upon their
promise not to break this command, that they were allowed to play in the
adjoining field.

No other shuttlecock was to be had, and their play was stopped. They stood on
the top of the bank peeping over the hedge. "I see it yonder," said Tarlton; "I
wish any body would get it. One could get over the gate at the bottom of the
field, and be back again in half a minute," added he, looking at Loveit. "But
you know we must not go into the lane," said Loveit, hesitatingly. "Pugh!" said
Tarlton, "why now what harm could it do?" -- "I don't know," said Loveit,
drumming upon his battledore; "but -- " "You don't know, man! why then what are
you afraid of? I ask you." -- Loveit colored, went on drumming, and again, in
a lower voice, said "he didn't know." But upon Tarlton's repeating, in a more
insolent tone, "I ask you, man, what you're afraid of?" he suddenly left off
drumming, and looking round, said, "he was not afraid of any thing that he knew
of." -- "Yes, but you are," said Hardy, coming forward. "Am I," said Loveit;
"of what, pray, am I afraid?" "Of doing wrong!" "Afraid of doing wrong!"
repeated Tarlton, mimicking him, so that he made every body laugh. "Now had not
you better say, afraid of being flogged?" -- "No," said Hardy, coolly, after
the laugh had somewhat subsided, "I am as little afraid of being flogged as you
are, Tarlton; but I meant -- " "No matter what you meant; why should you
interfere with your wisdom, and your meanings; nobody thought of asking you to
stir a step for us; but we asked Loveit, because he is the best fellow in the
world." -- "And for that very reason you should not ask him, because you know
he cannot refuse you any thing?" "Indeed though," cried Loveit, piqued, " there
you're mistaken, for I could refuse if I chose it." Hardy smiled; and Loveit,
half afraid of his contempt, and half afraid of Tarlton's ridicule, stood
doubtful, and again had recourse to his battledore, which he balanced most
curiously upon his fore finger. "Look at him! -- now do look at him!" cried
Tarlton; "did you ever in your life see any body look so silly! -- Hardy has
him quite under thumb; he is so mortally afraid of Parson Prig, that he dare
not, for the soul of him, turn either of his eyes from the tip of his nose;
look how he squints!" -- "I don't squint," said Loveit, looking up, "and nobody
has me under his thumb; and what Hardy said, was only for fear I should get
into disgrace: -- he is the best friend I have." Loveit spoke this with more
than usual spirit, for both his heart and his pride were touched. "Come along
them," said Hardy, taking him by the arm in an affectionate manner; and he was
just going, when Tarlton called after him, "Ay, go along with its best friend,
and take care it does not get into a scrape; -- good by, Little Panado!" --
"Who do they call Little Panado," said Loveit, turning his head hastily back.
"Never mind," said Hardy, "what does it signify?" -- "No," said Loveit, "to be
sure it does not signify; but one does not like to be called Little Panado:
besides," added he, after going a few steps farther, "they will all think it so
ill-natured. -- I had better go back, and just tell them, that I Am very sorry I
cannot get their shuttlecock; -- do come back with me." -- No, said Hardy, I
cannot go back; and you would better not. "But, I assure you, I will not stay a minute;
wait for me," added Loveit; and he slunk back again to prove that he was not
Little Panado.

Once returned, the rest followed of course; for to support his character for
goodnature, he was obliged to yield to the entreaties of his companions, and
to show his spirit, leapt over the gate, amidst the acclamations of the little
mob: -- he was quickly out of sight.

"Here," cried he, returning in about five minutes, quite out of breath, "I Have
got the shuttlecock; and I Will tell you what I Have seen," cried he, panting for
breath. "What?" cried every body, eagerly. "Why, just at the turn of the
corner, at the end of the lane," panting. "Well," said Tariton, impatiently,
"do go on." -- "Let me just take breath first." "Pugh! never mind your breath."
-- "Well then, just at the turn of the corner, at the end of the lane, as I was
looking about for the shuttlecock, I heard a great rustling somewhere near-me,
and so I looked where it could come from; and I saw, in a nice little garden,
on the opposite side of the way, a boy, about as big as Tarlton, sitting in a
great tree, shaking the branches; and at every shake down there came such a
shower of sine large rosy apples, they made my mouth water: so I called to the
boy, to beg one; but he said, he could not give me one, for that they were his
grandfather's; and just at that minute, from behind a gooseberry bush, up
popped the uncle -- the grandfather poked his head out of the window; so I ran
off as fast as my legs would carry me, though I heard him bawling after me all
the way."

"And let him bawl," cried Tarlton, "he shall not bawl for nothing; I Am determined
we'll have some of his fine large rosy apples before I sleep tonight." -- At
this speech a general silence ensued; every body kept their eyes fixed upon
Tarlton, except Loveit, who looked down, apprehensive that he should be drawn
on much farther than he intended. -- "Oh, indeed!" said he to himself, "as
Hardy told me, I had better not have come back!"

Regardless of this confusion, Tarlton continued, "But before I say any more, I
hope we have no spies amongst us. If there is any one of you afraid to be
slogged, let him march off this instant!" -- Loveith colored, bit his lips,
wished to go, but had not the courage to move first. -- He waited to see what
every body else would do; -- nobody stirred; -- so Loveit stood still.

"Well then," cried Tarlton, giving his hand to the boy next him, then to the
next, "your word and honor that you will not betray me; but stand by me, and I'il
stand by you." -- Each boy gave his hand, and his promise; repeating "stand by
me, and I Will stand by you." -- Loveit hung back till the last; and had almost
twisted off the butten of the boy's coat who sereened him, when Tarlton came
up, holding out his hand, "Come, Loveit, lad, you're in for it: Stand by me,
and I Will stand by you." -- " Indeed, Tarlton," expostulated he, without looking
him in the sace, "I do wish you would give up this seheme; I dare say all the
apples are gone by this time; -- I wish you would -- Do, pray, give up this
scheme." -- "What seheme, man! you hav^n^t heard it yet; you may as well know
your text before you begin preaching." The corners of Loveit's mouth could not
refuse to smile, though in his heart he felt not the slightest inclination to
laugh. "Why I don't know you, I declare I don't know you today," said Tarlton;
"you used to be the best natured, most agreeable lad in the world, and would do
any thing one asked you; but you're quite altered of late, as we were saying
just now, when you skulked away with Hardy: come, do man, pluck up a little
spirit, and be one of us, or you will make us all have you." " Hate me!" repeated
Loveit, with terror; "no, surely, you will not all Hate me!" and he mechanically
stretched out his hand, which Tarlton shook violently, saying, "Ay, now, that is
right." -- "Ay, now, that is wren^!" whispered Loveit's conscience; but his
conscience was of no use to him, for it was always overpowered by the voice of
numbers; and though he had the wish, he never had the power, to do right. "Poor
Loveit! I knew he would not refuse us," cried his companions; and even Tarlton.
the moment he shook hands with him, despised him. It is certain, that weakness
of mind is despised both by the good and by the bad.

The league being thus formed, Tarlton assumed all the airs of a commander,
explained his schemes, and laid the plan of attack, upon the poor old man's
apple tree. It was the only one he had in the world. We shall not dwell upon
their confultation, for the amusement of contriving such expeditions is often
the chief thing which induces idle boys to engage in them.

There was a small window at the end of the back stairease, through which,
between nine and ten o'clock at night, Tarlton, accompanied by Loveit and
another boy, crept out. It was a moonlight night, and, after crossing the
field, and climbing the gate, directed by Loveit, who now resol^ed to go
through the affair with spirit, they proceeded down the lane with rash, yet
fearful shops. At a distance Loveit s^w the write-washed cottage, and the apple
tree beside it: they quickened their pace, and with some difficulty scrambled
through the hedge which fenced the garden, though not without being scratched
and ^o^^ by the briars. Every thing was silent. Yet now and then at every
rustling of the leaves they started, and their hearts beat violently. Once as
Loveit was climbing the apple tree, he thought he heard a door in the cottage
open, and earnestly begged his companions to desist and return home. This
however he could, by no means, persuade them to do, until they had filled their
pockets with apples; then, to his great joy, they returned, crept in at the
staircase window, and each retired, as softly as possible, to his own apartment.

Love it slept in the room with Hardy, whom he had left taste asleep, and whom
he now was extremely afraid of wakening. All the apples were emptied out of
Loverit's pockets, and lodged with Tarlton till the morning, for fear the smell
should betray the secret to Hardy. The ^oom door was apt to creak, but it was
opened with such precaution, that no noise could be heard, and Loveit found his
friend as fast asleep as when he left him.

"Ah," said he to himself, "how quietly he sleeps! I wish I had been sleeping
too." The reproaches of Loveit's conscience, however, served no other purpose
but to torment him; he had not sufficient strength of mind to be good. The very
next night, in spite of all his fears, and all his penitence, and all his
resolutions, by a little fresh ridicule and persuasion he was induced to
accompany the same party on a similar expedition. We must observe, that the
necessity for continuing their depredations became stronger the third day; for,
though at first only a small party had been in the secret, by degrees it was
divulged to the whole school; and it was necessary to secure secresy by sharing
the booty.

Every one was astonished, that Hardy, with all his quickness and penetration,
had not yet discovered their proceedings; but Loveit could not help suspecting
that he was not quite so ignorant as he appeared to be. Loveit had strictly
kept his promise of secresy, but he was by no means an artful boy; and in
talking to his friend, conscious that he had something to conceal, he was
perpetually on the point of betraying himself; then recollecting his
engagement, he blushed, stammered, bungled; and upon Hardy's asking what he
meant, would answer with a filly guilty countenance, that he did not know; or
abruptly break off, saying, Oh nothing! nothing at all!

It was in vain that he urged Tarlton to permit him to consult his friend; a
gloom overspread Tarlton's brow when he began to speak on the subject, and he
always returned a peremptory refusal, accompanied with some such taunting
expression as this -- "I wish we had nothing to do with such a sneaking sellow.
He Will betray us all, I see, before we have done with him." -- "Well," said
Loveit to himself, "so I am abused after all, and called a sneaking fellow for
my pains; that is rather hard to be sure, when l've got so little by the job."

In truth he had not got much, for in the division of the booty only one apple,
and a half of another which was only half ripe, happened to fall to his share;
though, to be sure, when they had all eaten their apples, he had the
satisfaction to hear every body declare they were very sorry they had forgotten
to offer some of theirs to "poor Loveit!"

In the mean time the visits to the apple tree had been now too frequently
repeated to remain concealed from the old man, who lived in the cottage. He
used to examine his only tree very frequently, and missing numbers of ^osy
apples which he had watched ripening, he, though not much prome to suspicion,
began to think that there was something going wrong; especially as a gap was
made in his hedge, and there were several small footsteps in his flower beds.

The good old man was not at all inclined to give pain to any living creature,
much less to children, of whom he was particularly fond. Nor was he in the
least avaricious, for though he was not rich, he had enough to live upon,
because he had been very industrious in his youth; and he was always very ready
to part with the little he had; nort was he a cross old man. If any thing would
have made him angry, it would have been the seeing his favorite tree ro^ bed,
as he had promised himself the pleasure of gaving his red apples to his
grandchildren on his birthday. However he looked up at the tree in sorrow
rather than in anger, and leaning upon his staff, he began to consider what he
had best do.

"If I complain to their master," said he to himself, "they will certainly be
flogged, and that I should be sorry for; yet they must not be let to go on
stealing, that would be worse still, for that would surely bring them to the
gallows in the end. Let me see -- oh, ay, that will do; I will borrow farmer
Kent's dog Barker, he will keep them off, I Will answer for it."

Father Kent lent his dog Barker, cautioning his neighbor at the same time, to
be sure to chain him well, for he was the fiercest mastiff in England. The old
man, with farmer Kent's assistance, chained him fast to the trunk of the apple
tree.

Night came, and Tarlton, Loveit, and his companions, returned at the usual
hour. Grown bolder now by frequent success, they came on talking and laughing.
But the moment they had set their soot in the garden, the dog started up; and,
shaking his chain as he sprang forward, barked with unremitting fury. They
stood still as if fixed to the spot. There was just moonlight enough to see the
dog. "Let us try the other side of the tree," said Tarlton. But to which ever
side they turned the dog flew round in an instant, barking with increased fury.

"He Will break his chain and tear us to pieces," cried Tarlton; and, struck with
ter or, he immediately threw down the basket he had brought with him, and
betook himself to flight with the greatest precipitation. -- "Help me! oh,
pray, help me! I cant't get through the he ge," cried Loveit in a lamentable
tone, whilst the dog growled hideously, and sprang forward to the extremity of
his chain. -- "I cannot get out! Oh, for God's sake, stay for me one minute,
dear Tarlton!"

He called in vain, he was left to struggle through his difficulties by
himself; and of all his dear friends, not one turned back to help him. At last,
torn and terrified, he got through the hedge and ran home, despising his
companions for their selfishness. Nor could he help observing, that Tarlton,
with all his vaunted prowess, was the first to run away from the appearance of
danger The next morning he could not help reproaching the party with their
conduct. -- "Why could not you, any of you, stay one minute to help me?" said
he. "We did not hear you call," answered one. "I was so frightened," said
another, "I would not have turned back for the whole world." -- "And you,
Tarlton?" -- "I," said Tarlton. "Had not I enough to do to take care of myself,
you blockhead? Every one for himself in this world!" "So I see," said Loveit
gravely. "Well, man! is there any thing strange in that" -- "Strange! why yes,
I thought you all loved me?" "Lord, love you, lad! so we do; but we love
ourselves better." -- "Hardy would not have served me so, however," said
Loveit, turning away in disgust. Tarlton was alarmed. -- "Pugh!" said he; "what
nonsense have you taken into your brain? Think no more about it. We are all
very sorry, and beg your pardon; come, shake hands, for give and forget."
Loveit gave his hand, but gave it rather coldly. -- "I forgive it with all my
heart," said he, "but I cannot forget it so soon!" -- "Why then you are not
such a good-humoured follow as we thought you were. Surely you cannot bear
malice, Loveit." Loveit smiled, and allowed that n^ certainly could not bear
malice. "Well then, come; you know at the bottom we all love you, and would do
any thing in the world for you." Poor Loveit, flattered in his foible, began to
believe that they did love him at the bottom, as they said, and even with ^i^
eyes open consented again to be duped.

"How strange it is," thought he, "that I should set such value upon the love
of those I despise! When I Am once out of this scrape, I Will have no more to do
with them, I Am determined."

Compared with his friend Hardy, his new associates did indeed appear
contemptible; for all this time Hardy had treated him with uniform kindness,
avoided to pry into his secrets, yet seemed ready to receive his confidence, if
it had been offered.

After school in the evening, as he was standing silently beside Hardy, who was
ruling a sheet of paper for him, Tarlton, in his brutal manner, came up, and
seizing him by the arm, cried, "Come along with me, Loveit, I Have something to
say to you." -- "I cannot come now," said Loveit, drawing away his arm. -- "Ah,
do come now," said Tarlton in a voice of persuasion. -- "Well, I Will come
presently." -- "Nay, but do, pray; there is a good fellow, come now, because
I Have something to say to you." -- "What is it you have got to say to me? I wish
you would let me alone," said Loveit; yet at the same time he suffered himself to
be led away.

Tarlton took particular pains to humor him and bring him into temper again;
and even, though he was not very apt to part with his play-things, went so far
as to say, "Loveit, the other day you wanted a top; I Will give you mine, if you
desire it." -- Loveit thanked him, and was overjoyed at the thoughts of
possessing this top. "But what did you want to say to me just now?" -- "Aye,
we'll talk of that presently -- not yet -- when we get out of hearing." --
"Nobody is near us," said Loveit. -- "Come a little farther, however," said
Tarlton, looking round suspiciously -- "Well now, well?" "You know the dog that
frightened us so last night?" -- "Yes." -- "It will never frighten us again."
-- "Will Not it? how so?" -- "Look here," said Tarlton, drawing from his pocket
something wrapped in a blue handkerchief. -- "What Is that?" Tarlton opened it.
"Raw meat!" exclaimed Loveit. "How came you by it?" -- "Tom, the servant boy,
Tom got it for me, and I Am to give him sixpence." -- "And is it for the dog?"
-- "Yes; I vowed I Would be revenged on him, and after this he will never bark
again." -- "Never bark again! -- What do you mean? -- Is it poison?' exclaimed
Loveit, s^^^^ing back with horror. "Only poison for (...)," said Tarlton,
confused; "you could not look more shocking if it was poison for a ^^^stia^."
Loveit stood for nearly a minute in profound silence. "Tarlton," said he, at
lasts in a changed tone and altered manner, "I did not know you; I will have no
more to do with you." -- "Nay, but stay," said Tarlton, catching hold of his
arm, "stay; I was only joking." -- "Let go my arm, you were in earnest." --
"But then that was before I knew there was any harm. If you think there is any
harm?" -- " If," said Loveit. "Why you know, I might not know; for Tom told me
it is a thing that is often done; ask Tom." -- "I Will ask nobody! Surely we know
better what is right and wrong than Tom does." -- "But only just ask him, to
hear what he will say." -- "I dont' want to hear what he will say," cried Loveit
vehemently. "The dog will die in agonies -- in horrid agonies! There was a dog
poisoned at my father's, I saw him in the yard. -- Poor creature! he lay, and
howled, and writhed himself!" -- "Poor creature! -- Well, there is no harm done
now," cried Tarlton, in an hypocritical tone. But though he thought sit to
dissemble with Loveit, he was thoroughly determined in his purpose.

Poor Loveit, in haste to get away, returned to his friend Hardy; but his mind
was in such agitation, that he neither talked nor moved like himself; and two
or three times his heart was so full that he was ready to burst into tears.

"How good-natured you are to me," said he to Hardy, as he was trying vainly to
entertain him; "but if you knew --." Here he stopped short, for the bell for
evening prayer rang, and they all took their places, and knelt down. After
prayers, as they were going to bed, Loveit stopped Tarlton -- "Well!" asked he,
in an inquiring manner, fixing his eyes upon him; -- "Well!" replied Tarlton,
in an audacious tone, as if he meant to set his inquiring eye at defiance; --
"what do you mean to do to night?" -- "To go to sleep, as you do, I suppose," I
plied Tarlton, turning away abruptly, and whistling as he walked off.

"Oh, he has certainly changed his mind!" said Leveit to himself, "else he
could not whistle." About t^n minutes after this, as he and Herdy were
undressing, Hardy suddenly recollected that he had left his new kite out upon
the grass. "Oh," said he, "it will be quite spoiled before morning!" -- "Call
Tom," said Loveit, "and bid him bring it in for you in a minute." They both
went to the top of the stairs to call Tom; no one answered. They called again
louder. "Is Tom below?" -- "I Am here," answered he at last, coming out of
Tarlton's room with a look of mixed embarrassment and effrontery. And as he was
receiving Hardy's commission, Loveit saw the corner of the blue handkerchief
hanging out of his pocket. This excited fresh suspicions in Loveit's mind; but,
without saying one word, he immediately stationed himself at the window in his
room, which looked out toward the lane; and, as the moon was risen, he could
see if any one passed that way. "What are you doing there?" said Hardy, after
he had been watching some time; why don't you come to bed?" Loveit returned no
answer, but continued standing at the window. Nor did he watch long in vain;
presently he saw Tom gliding slowly along a by-path, and get over the gate into
the lane.

"He Is gone to do it!" exclaimed Loveit aloud, with an emotion which he could
not command. "Who Is gone! to do what!" cried Hardy, starting up. "How cruel,
how wicked!" continued Loveit. "What Is cruel -- what is wicked? speak out at
once!" returned Hardy, in that commanding tone which, in moments of danger,
strong minds feel themselves entitled to assume toward weak ones. Loveit
instantly, though in an incoherent manner, explained the affair to him.
Scarcely had the words passed his lips, when Hardy sprang up, and began
dressing himself without saying one syllable. "For God's sake, what are you
going to do?" said Loveit in great anxiety. "They Will never forgive me! don't
betray me! they will never forgive me! pray speak to me! only say you will not
betray us." -- "I will not betray you, trust to me," said Hardy; and he left
the room, and Loveit stood in amazement: whilst, in the mean time, Hardy, in
hopes of overtaking Tom before the fate of the poor dog was decided, ran with
all possible speed across the meadow, and then down the lane. He came up with
Tom just as he was climbing the bank into the old man's garden. Hardy, too
mu^ch out of breath to speak, seized hold of him, dragged him down, detaining
him with a firm grasp whilst he panted for utterance -- "What, master Hardy, is
it you? what is the matter? what do you want?" -- "I want the poisoned meat that
you have in your pocket." -- "Who told you that I had any such thing," said
Tom, clapping his hand upon his guilty pocket. "Give it me quietly, and I Will
let you off." -- "Sir, upon my word I hav'n't? I didn't? I don't know what you
mean," said Tom trembling, though he was by far the strongest of the two;
"indeed I don't know what you mean." -- "You do," said Hardy, with great
indignation, and a violent struggle immediately commenced. The dog, now alarmed
by the voices, began to bark outrageously. Tom was terrified lest the old man
should come out to see what was the matter; his strength forsook him, and
flinging the handkerchief and meat over the hedge, he ran away with all his
speed. The handkerchief fell within the reach of the dog, who instantly shapped
at it: luckily it did not come untied. Hardy saw a pitchfork on a dunghill
close beside him, and seizing upon it, stuck it into the handkerchief. The dog
pull^d, tore, growled, grappled, yelled; it was impossible to get the
handkerchief from between his teeth; but the knot was loosed, the meat
unperceived by the dog dropped out, and while he dragged off the handkerchief
in triumph, Hardy with inexpre^^^le joy plunged the pitchfork into the poisoned
meat, and bore it away.

Never did hero retire with more satisfaction from a field of battle. Full of
the pleasure of successful benevolence, Hardy tripped joyfully home, and
vaulted over the window-fill, when the first object he beheld was Mr. Power,
the usher, standing at the head of the stairs, with his candle in his hand.

"Come up, whoever you are," said Mr. William Power in a stern voice; I thought
I should find you out at last. Come up, whoever you are!" Hardy obeyed without
reply. -- "Hardy!" exclaimed Mr. Power, starting back with astonishment; "is it
you, Mr. Hardy?" repeated he, holding the light to his face. "Why, Sir, said he
in a sneering tone, "I Am sure, if Mr. Trueman was here, he wouldn't believe his
own eyes; but for my part, I saw through you long since, I never liked saints
for my share. Will you please to do me the favor, Sir, if it is not too much
trouble, to empty year pockets. -- Hardy obeyed in silence. "Hey day! meat! raw
meat! what next?" -- "That Is all," said Hardy, emptying his pockets inside out.
"This is all," said Mr. Power, taking up the meat. -- "Pray, Sir," said Hardy
eagerly, "let that meat be burned, it is poisoned." -- "Poisoned!" cried Mr.
William Power, letting it drop out of his fingers; "you wretch!" looking at him
with a menacing air, "what is all this? Speak." Hardy was silent. "Why don't
you speak?" cried he, shaking him by the shoulder impatiently. Still Hardy was
silent. "Down upon your knees this minute, and confess all, tell me where
you have been, what you have been doing, and who are your accomplices, for I know
there is a gang of you: so," added he, pressing heavily upon Hardy's shoulder,
"down upon your knees this minute, and confess the whole, that is your only way
now to get off yourself. If you hope for my pardon, I can tell you it is not to
be had without asking for." -- "Sir," said Hardy, in a firm but respectful
voice, "I have no pardon to ask, I have nothing to confess, I am innocent; but
if I were not, I would never try to get off myself by betraying my companions."
-- "Very well, Sir! very well! very fine! stick to it, stick to it, I advise
you -- and we shall see. And how will you look tomorrow, Mr. Innocent, when my
uncle the Doctor comes home?" "As I do now, Sir," said Hardy, unmoved. His
composure threw Mr. Power into a rage too great for utterance. "Sir," continued
Hardy, "ever since I have been at school, I never told a lie, and therefore,
Sir, I hope you will believe me now. Upon my word and honor, Sir, I have done
nothing wrong." -- "Nothing wrong? Better and better! what, when I catched you
going out at night?" -- " That to be sure was wrong," said Hardy, recollecting
himself; "but except that -- " "Except that, Sir! I will except nothing. Come
along with me, young gentleman, your time for pardon is past." Saying these
words, he pulled Hardy along a narrow passage to a small closet, set apart for
desperate offenders, and usually known by the name of the Black Hole. "There,
Sir, take up your lodging there for tonight," said he, pushing him in;
"tomorrow I Will know more, or I Will know why," added he, double locking the
door, with a tremendous noise, upon his prisoner, and locking also the door at
the end of the passage, so that no one could have access to him. "So now I
think I have you safe!" said Mr. William Power to himself, stalking off with
steps which made the whole gallery resound, and which made many a guilty heart
tremble. The conversation which had passed between Hardy and Mr. Power at the
head of the stairs had been anxiously listened to, but only a word or two here
and there had been distinctly overheard. The locking of the black hole door was
a terrible sound -- some knew not what it portended, and others, knew too well;
all assembled in the morring with faces of anxiety. Tarlton's and Loveit's were
the most agitated. Tarlton for himself; Loveit for his friend, for himself, for
every body. Every one of the party, and Tarlton at their head, surrounded him
with reproaches; and considered him as the author of the evils which hung over
them. "How could you do so? and why did you say any thing to Hardy about it?
when you had promised too! Oh what shall we all do! what a serape you have
brought us into! Loveit, it is all your fault!" -- "All my fault!" repeated poor
Loveit, with a sigh; "well, that is hard."

"Goodness! there is the bell," exclaimed a number of voices at once. "Now for
it!" They all stood in a half circle for morning prayers! they listened, "Here
he is coming! No -- Yes -- Here he is!" And Mr. William Power, with a gloomy
brow, appeared and walked up to his place at the head of the room. They knelt
down to prayers, and the moment they rose Mr. William Power, laying his hand
upon the table, cried, "Stand still, gentlemen, if you please." Every body
stood sto^k still; he walked out of the circle; they guessed that he was gone
for Hardy, and the whole room was in commotion. Each with eagerness asked each
what none could answer, "Has be t^ld?" -- " What has he t^ld?" -- "Who has he
told of?" -- "I hope he has not told of me?" cried they. "I Will answer for it he
has told of all of us," said Tarlton. "And I Will answer for it he has told of
none of us," answered Loveit, with a sigh. "You don't think he is such a fool,
when he can get himself off," said Tarlton.

At this instant the prisoner was led in, and as he passed through the circle,
every eye was fixed upon him; his eye turned upon no one, not even upon Loveit,
who pulled him by the coat as he passed -- every one felt almost afraid to
breathe. -- "Well, Sir," said Mr. Power, sitting down in Mr. Trueman's ell^ow
chair, and placing the prisoner opposite to him; "well, Sir, what have you to
say to me this morning?" -- "Nothing, Sir," answered Hardy, in a decided yet
modest manner; "nothing but what I said last night." -- "Nothing more?" --
"Nothing more, Sir." -- "But I have something more to say to you, Sir, then;
and a great deal more, I promise you, before I have done with you; and then
seizing him in a fury, he was just going to give him a severe flogging, when
the school-room door opened, and Mr. Trueman appeared, followed by an old man
whom Loveit immediately knew. He leaned upon his stick as he walked, and in his
other hand carried a basket of apples. When they came within the circle, Mr.
Trueman stopped short -- "Hardy!" exclaimed he, with a voice of unseigned
surprise, whilst Mr. William Power stood with his hand suspended. -- "Aye,
Hardy, Sir," repeated he. "I told him you would not believe your own eyes." -- Mr.
Trueman advanced with a slow step. "Now, Sir, give me leave," said the Usher,
eagerly drawing him aside and whispering. -- "So, Sir," said Mr. T. when the
whisper was done, addressing himself to Hardy with a voice and manner, which,
had he been guilty, must have pierced him to the heart, "I find I have been
deceived in you -- it is but three hours ago that I told your uncle I never had
a boy in my school in whom I placed so much confidence; but, after all this
show of honor and integrity, the moment my back is turned, you are the first
to set an example of disobedience to my orders. Why do I talk of disobeying my
commands, you are a thief!" -- "I, Sir," exclaimed Hardy, no longer able to
repress his feelings. -- "You, Sir -- you and some others," said Mr. Trueman,
looking round the room with a penetrating glance -- "you and some others -- "
"Aye, Sir," interrupted Mr. William Power, "get that out of him if you can --
ask him." -- "I will ask him nothing; I shall neither put his truth or his
honor to the trial; truth and honor are not to be expected amongst thieves."
"I am not a thief! I have never had any thing to do with thieves," cried Hardy,
indignantly. "Have not you robbed this old man? don't you know the taste of
these apples?" said Mr. Trueman, taking one out of the basket. "No, Sir, I do
not; I never touched one of that old man's apples." -- "Never touched one of
them! I suppose this is some vile equivocation; you have done worse, you have
had the barbarity, the baseness, to attempt to poison his dog; the poisoned
meat was found in your pocket last night." -- "The poisoned meat was found in
my pocket, Sir I but I never attempted to poison the dog, I saved his life." --
"Lord bless him," said the old man. "Nonsense! cunning!" said Mr. Power. "I
hope you will not let him impose upon you so, Sir." "No, he cannot impose upon me,
I have a proof he is little prepared for," sa^d Mr. Trueman, producing the blue
handkerchief in which the meat had been wrapped.

Tariton turned pale; Hardy's countenance never changed. -- "Don't you know
this handkerchief, Sir?" -- "I do, Sir?" -- "Is it not your," -- "No, Sir." --
"Don't you know whose it is?" cried Mr. Power. Hardy was silent.

"Now, gentlemen," said Mr. Trueman, "I am not fond of punishing you; but when
I do it y^u know it is always in earnest. I will begin with the eldest of you;
I will begin with Hardy, and flog you with my own hands till this handkerchief
is owned." "I Am sure it is not mine;" and "I Am sure it is none of mine," burst
from every mouth, whilst they looked at each other in dismay, for none but
Hardy, Loveit, and Tarlton knew the secret. -- "My cane!" said Mr. Trueman, and
Power handed him the cane -- Loveit groaned from the bottom of his heart --
Tarlton le^ned back against the wall with a black countenance -- Hardy looked
with a steady eye at the cane.

"But first," said Mr. Trueman, laying down the cane, "let us see; perhaps we
may find out the owner of this handkerchief another way," examining the
corners; it was torn almost to pieces, but luckily the corner that was marked
remained.

"J. T.!" cried Mr. Trueman. Every eye turned upon the guilty Tarlton, who,
now, as pale as ashes and trembling in every limb, sunk down upon his knees,
and in a whining voice begged for mercy. "Upon my word and honor, Sir, I Will
tell you all; I should never have thought of stealing the apples if Loveit had
not first told me of them; and it was Tom who first put the poisoning the dog
into my head: it was he that carried the meat; was not it?" said he, appealing
to Hardy, whose word he knew must be believed -- "Oh, dear Sir!" continued he,
as Mr. Trueman began to move toward him, "do let me off -- do pray let me off
this time! I Am not the only one indeed, Sir! I hope you will not make me an
example for the rest -- It Is very hard I Am to be flogged more than they!" "I Am
not going to flog you." -- "Thank you, Sir," said Tarlton, getting up and
wiping his eyes. "You need not thank me," said Mr. Trueman. "Take your
handkerchief -- go out of this room -- out of this house -- let me never see
you more."

"If I had any hopes of him," said Mr. Trueman, as he shut the door after him;
"if I had any hopes of him, I would have punished him; but I have none --
punishment is meant only to make people better; and those who have any hopes of
themselves will know how to submit to it."

At these words Loveit first, and immediately all the rest of the guilty party,
stepped out of the ranks, confessed their fault, and declared themselves ready
to bear any punishment their master thought proper. -- "Oh, they have been
punished enough," said the old man; "forgive them, Sir."

Hardy looked as if he wished to speak.

"Not because you ask it," said Mr. Trueman, "though I should be glad to oblige
you -- it wouldn't be just -- but there (pointing to Hardy), there is one who
has merited a reward; the highest I can give him is the pardon of his
companions."

Hardy bowed, and his face glowed with pleasure, whilst every body present
sumpathised in his feelings. -- "I am sure," thought Loveit, "this is a lesson
I shall never forget."

"Gentlemen," said the old man with a faultering voice, "it was not for the sake
of my apples that I spoke; and you, Sir," said he to Hardy, "I thank you for
saving my dog. If you please, I Will plant on that mount, opposite the window, a
young apple tree, from my old one; I will water it, and take care of it with my
own hands for your sake, as long as I am able. -- And may God bless you!
(laying his trembling hand on Hardy's head) may God bless you -- I Am sure God
will bless all such boys as you are"

LAZY LAWRENCE.
IN the pleasant valley of Ashton there lived an elderly woman of the name of
Preston; she had a small neat cottage, and there was not a weed to be seen in
her garden. It was upon her garden that she chiefly depended for support: it
consisted of strawberry beds, and one small border for flowers. The pinks and
roses she tied up in nice nosegays, and sent either to Clifton or Bristol to be
sold; as to her strawberries, she did not send them to market, because it was
the custom for numbers of people to come from Clifton, in the summer time, to
eat strawberries and cream at the gardens in Ashton.

Now the widow Preston was so obliging, active, and good humoured, that every
one who came to see her was pleased. She lived happily in this manner for
several years; but, alas! one autumn she fell sick, and, during her illness,
every thing went wrong; her garden was neglected, her cow died, and all the
money which she had saved was spent in paying for medicines. The winter passed
away, while she was so weak that she could earn but little by her work; and,
when the summer came, her rent was called for, and the rent was not ready in
her little purse as usual. She begged a few months delay, and they were granted
to her; but at the end of that time there was no resource but to sell her horse
Lightfoot. Now Lightfoot, though perhaps he had seen his best days, was a very
great favorite: in his youth he had always carried the dame to market behind
her husband; and it was now her little son Jem's turn to ride him. It was Jem's
business to seed Lightfoot, and to take care of him; a charge which he never
neglected, for, besides being a very good-natured, he was a very industrious
boy.

"It will go near to break my Jem's heart," said dame Preston to herself, as
she sat one evening beside the fire stirring the embers, and considering how
she had best open the matter to her son, who stood opposite to her, eating a
dry crust of bread very heartily for supper.

"Jem," said the old woman, "what, ar't hungry?"

"That I am, brave and hungry!"

"Aye! no wonder, you have been brave hard at work -- Eh?"

"Brave hard! I wish it was not so dark, mother, that you might just step out
and see the great bed I Have dug; I know you would say it was no bad day's work --
and, oh mother! I Have good news; Farmer Truck will give us the
giant-strawberries, and I Am to go for 'em tomorrow morning, and I Will be back
before breakfast."

"God bless the boy! how he talks! -- Four mile there, and four mile back
again, before breakfast."

"Aye, upon Lightfoot you know, mother, very easily; may not I?"

"Aye, child!"

"Why do you sigh, mother?"

"Finish thy supper, child."

"I Have done!" cried Jem, swallowing ^^e last mouthful hastily, as if he thought
he had been too long at supper -- "and now for the great needle; I must see and
mend Lightfoot's bridle before I go to bed." -- To work he set, by the light of
the fire, and the dame having once more stirred it, began again with "Jem,
dear, does he go lame at all now" -- "What Lightfoot! Oh la, no, not he! --
never was so well of his lameness in all his life -- he is grown quite young
again, I think, and then he is so fat he can hardly wag." -- "God bless him --
that is right -- we must see, Jem, and keep him fat."

"For what, mother?"

"For Monday fortnight at the fair. He Is to be -- sold!"

"Lightfoot!" cried Jem, and let the bridle fall from his hand; "and will
mother sell Lightfoot?"

" Will; no: but I must, Jem."

"Must; who says you must? why must you, mother?"

"I must, I say, child -- Why, must not I pay my debts honestly -- and must not
I pay my rent; and was not it called for long and long ago; and have not I had
time; and did not I promise to pay it for certain Monday fortnight, and am not
I two guineas short -- and where am I to get two guineas? So what signifies
talking, child," said the widow, leaning her head upon her arm, "Lightfoot must
go."

Jem was silent for a sew minutes. -- "Two guineas; that is a great, great deal.
-- If I worked, and worked, and worked ever so hard, I could no ways earn two
guineas before Monday fortnight -- could I, mother?"

"Lord help thee, no; not an' work thyself to death."

"But I could earn something, though, I say," cried Jem proudly; "and I will
earn something -- if it be ever so little, it will be something -- and I shall
do my very best; so I will."

"That I Am sure of, my child," said his mother, drawing him toward her and
kissing him; "you were always a good industrious lad, that I will say before
your face or behind your back; -- but it will not do now -- Lightfoot must go."

Jem turned away, struggling to hide his tears, and went to bed without saying
a word more. But he knew that crying would do no good, so he presently wiped
his eyes, and l^y awake, considering what he could possibly do to save the
horse. -- "If I get ever so little," he still said to himself, "it will be
something; and who knows but Landlord might then wait a bit longer? and we
might make it all up in time; for a penny a day might come to two guineas in
time."

But how to get the first penny was the question -- The he recollected, that
one day, when he had been sent to Clifton to sell some flowers, he had seen an
old woman with a board beside her covered with various sparkling stones, which
people stopped to look at as they passed, and he remembered that some people
b^^ught the stones; one paid twopence, another threepence, and another sixpence
for them; and Jem heard her say that she got them amon^st the neighboring
rocks: so he thought that if he tried he might find some too, and sell them as
she had done.

Early in the morning he wakened full of this scheme, jumped up, dressed
himself, and, having given one look at poor Lightfoot in his stab^e, s^t off to
Clifton in search of the old woman, to enquire where she found her sparkling
stones. But it was too early in the morning, the old woman was not at her seat;
so he turned back again disappointed* -- He did not waste his time waiting for
her, but saddled and bridled Lightfoot, and went to farmer Truck's for the
g^^^tstrawberries. A great part of the morning was spent in putting them into
the ground; a^^, as soon as that was finished, ^e let out again in quest of the
old woman, who, to his great joy, he spied sitting at her corner of the street
with her board before her. But this old woman was deaf and cross; and when at
last Jem made her hear his questions, he could get no answer from her, but that
she found the fossils where he would never find any more. "But cannot I look
where you looked?" -- "Look away, nobody hinders you," replied the old woman;
and these were the only words she would say. -- Jem was not, however, a boy to
be easily discouraged; he went to the rocks, and walked slowly along, looking
at all the stones as he passed. Presently he came to a place where a number of
men were at work loosening some large rocks, and one amongst the workmen was
stooping down looking for something very eagerly; Jem ran up, and asked if he
could help him. "Yes," said the man, "you can; I Have just dropped, amongst this
heap of rubbish, a fine piece of crystal that I got today." -- "What kind of a
looking thing is it?" said Jem. "White, and like glass," said the man, and went
on working whilst Jem looked very carefully over the heap of rubbish for a
great while. "Come," said the man, "it is gone for ever; don't trouble yourself
any more, my boy." -- " It Is no trouble; I Will look a little longer; we'll not
give it up so soon," said Jem; and, after he had looked a little longer, he
found the piece of crystal. "Thank'e," said the man, "you are a fine little
industrious fellow." Jem, encouraged by the tone of voice in which the man
spoke this, ventured to ask him the same questions which he had asked the old
woman. "One good turn deserves another," said the man; "we are going to dinner
just now, and shall leave off work -- wait for me here, and I Will make it worth
your while."

Jem waited; and, as he was very attentively observing how the workmen went on
with their work, he heard somebody near him give a great yawn, and, turning
round, he saw stretched upon the grass, beside the river, a boy about his own
age, who he knew very well went in the village of Ashton by the name of Lazy
Lawrence: a name which he most justly deserved, for he never did any thing from
morning to night; he neither worked nor played, but sauntered or lounged about
restless and yawning. His father was an alehouse-keeper, and being generally
drunk, could take no care of his son, so that Lazy Lawrence grew every day
worse and worse. However, some of the neighbors said that he was a
good-natured poor fellow enough, and would never do any one harm but himself;
whilst others, who were wiser, often shook their heads, and told him, that
idleness was the root of all evil.

"What, Lawrence!" cried Jem to him, when he saw him lying upon the grass --
"what, are you asleep?" -- "Not quite." -- "Are you a wake?" -- "Not quite." --
"What are you doing there?" -- "Nothing." -- "What are you thinking of?" --
"Nothing." -- "What makes you lie there?" -- "I don't know -- because I cannot
find any body to play with me today -- Will you come and play?" -- "No, I
cannot; I Am busy." -- "Busy," cried Lawrence, stretching himself, "you are
always busy -- I would not be you for the world, to have so much to do always."
-- "And I," said Jem laughing, "would not be you for the world, to have nothing
to do." So they parted, for the workman just then called Jem to follow him. He
took him home to his own house, and showed him a parcel of fossils, which he
had gathered, he said, on purpose to sell, but had never had time yet to sort
them. He set about it however now, and having picked out those which he judged
to be the best, he put them in a small basket, and gave them to Jem to sell,
upon condition that (...) should bring him half of what he got. Jem, pleased to
be employed, was ready to agree to what the man proposed, provided his mother
had no objection to it. When he went home to dinner, he told his mother his
scheme, and she smiled and said he might do as he pleased, for she was not
afraid of his being from home. "You are not an idle boy," said she, "so there
is little danger of your getting into any mischief."

Accordingly Jem that evening took his stand, with his little basket, upon the
bank of the river, just at the place where people land from a ferry-boat, and
where the walk turns to the wells, where numbers of people perpetually pass to
drink the waters. He chose his place well, and waited almost all evening,
offering his fossils with great assiduity to every passenger; but not one
person bought any. "Holla!" cried some sailors, who had just rowed a boat to
land, "bear a hand here, will you, my little fellow! and carry these parcels
for us into yonder house." Jem ran down immediately for the parcels, and did
what he was asked to do so quickly, and with so much good will, that the master
of the boat took notice of him, and, when he was going away, stopped to ask him
what he had got in his little basket; and when he saw that they were fossils,
he immediately told Jem to follow him, for that he was going to carry some
shells he had brought from abroad to a lady in the neighborhood who was making
a grotto. "She will very likely buy your stones into the bargain: come along,
my lad; we can but try."

The lady lived but a very little way off, so that they were soon at her house.
She was alone in her parlour, and was sorting a bundle of feathers of different
colors: they lay on a sheet of pasteboard upon a window-seat, and it happened
that as the sailor was bustling round the table to show off his shells, he
knocked down the sheet of pasteboard, and scattered all the feathers. The lady
looked very sorry, which Jem observing, he took the opportunity, whilst she was
busy looking over the sailor's bag of shells, to gather together all the
feathers, and sort them according to their different colors, as he had seen
them sorted when he first came into the room.

"Where is the little boy you brought with you? I thought I saw him here just
now." -- "And here I am, ma'am," cried Jem, creeping from under the table with
some few remaining feathers which he had picked from the carpet; "I thought,"
added he, pointing to the others, "I had better be doing something than
standing idle, ma'am." She smiled, and, pleased with his activity and
simplicity, began to ask him several questions; such as, who he was, where he
lived, what employment he had, and how much a day he earned by gathering
fossils. "This is the first day I ever tried," said Jem; "I never sold any yet,
and, if you don't buy 'em now, ma'am, I Am afraid nobody else will, for I Have
asked every body else." -- "Come then," said the lady laughing, "if that is the
case, I think I had better buy them all." So emptying all the fossils out of
his basket, she put half a crown into it. Jem's eyes sparkled with joy. "Oh,
thank you, ma'am," said he, "I will be sure and bring you as many more
tomorrow." -- "Yes, but I don't promise you," said she, "to give you half a
crown tomorrow." -- "But, perhaps, though you don't promise it, you will." --
"No," said the lady, "do not deceive yourself; I assure you that I will not.
That, instead of encouraging you to be industrious, would teach you to be
idle." Jem did not quite understand what she meant by this, but answered, "I Am
sure I don't wish to be idle; what I want is to earn something every day, if I
knew how: I Am sure I don't wish to be idle. If you knew all, you would know I did
not." -- "How do you mean, if I knew all?" -- "Why I mean, if you knew about
Lightfoot." -- "Who Is Lightfoot?" -- "Why, mammy's horse," added Jem, looking
out of the window; "I must make haste home and feed him, before it get dark;
he will wonder what is gone with me." -- "Let him wonder a few minutes longer,"
said the lady, "and tell me the rest of your story." -- "I Have no story, ma'am,
to tell, but as how mammy says he must go to the fair Monday fortnight to be
sold, if she cannot get the two guineas for her rent; and I should be main sorry
to part with him, for I love him, and he loves me; so I Will work for him, I
will, all I can: to be sure," as mammy says, "I have no chance, such a little
fellow as I am, of earning two guineas before Monday fortnight." -- "But are you
in earnest willing to work," said the lady; "you know there is a great deal of
difference between picking up a few stones, and working steadily every day, and
all day long." -- "But," said Jem, "I would work every day, and all day long."
-- "Then," said the lady, "I will give you work. Come here tomorrow morning,
and my gardener will set you to weed the shrubberies, and I will pay you
sixpence a day. Remember you must be at the gates by six o'clock." Jem bowed,
thanked her, and went away. It was late in the evening, and he was impatient to
get home to feed Lightfoot; yet he recollected that he had promised the man who
had trusted him to sell the fossils that he would bring him half of what he got
for them; so he thought that he had better go to him directly: and away he
went, running along by the water side about a quarter of a mile, till he came
to the man's house. He was just come home from work, and was surprised when Jem
showed him the half-crown, saying, "Look what I got for the stones: you are to
have half, you know." -- No," said the man, when he had heard his story, "I
shall not take half of that; it was given to you. I expected but a shilling at
the most, and the half of that is but sixpence, and that I Will take. -- Wife!
give the lad two shillings, and take this half-crown." So wife opened an old
glove, and took out two shillings; and the man, as she opened the glove, put in
his fingers, and took out a little silver penny. -- "There, he shall have that
into the bargain for his honesty -- Honesty is the best policy -- There Is a
lucky penny for you, that I Have kept ever since I can remember." -- "Don't you
ever go to part with it, do ye hear!" cried the woman. "Let him do what he will
with it, wife," said the man. "But," argued the wife, "another penny would do
just as well to buy ginger bread, and that is what it will go for." -- "No, that
it shall not, I promise you;" said Jem; and so he ran away home, fed Lightfoot,
stroaked him, went to bed, jumped up at five o'clock in the morning, and went
singing to work as gay as a lark.

Four days he worked "every day and all day long," and the lady every evening,
when she came out to walk in her gardens, looked at his work. At last she said
to her gardener, "This little boy works very hard." -- "Never had so good a
little boy about the grounds," said the gardener; "he is always at his work, let
me come by when I will, and he has got twice as much done as another would do;
yes, twice as much, ma'am; for look here -- he began at this here rose bush,
and now he is got to where you stand, ma'am; and here is the day's work that
the other boy, and he is three years older too, did today -- I say, measure Jem's
fairly, and it is twice as much, I Am sure." -- "Well, said the lady to her
gardener, show me how much is a fair good day's work for a boy of his age." --
"Come at six o'clock, and go at six? why, about this much, ma'am," said the
gardener, marking off a piece of the border with his spade. "Then, little boy,"
said the lady, "so much shall be your task every day; the gardener will mark it
off for you: and when you have done, the rest of the day you may do what you
please." Jem was extremely glad of this; and the next day he had finished his
task by four o'clock; so that he had all the rest of the evening to himself.
Jem was as fond of play as any little boy could be, and, when he was at it,
played with all the eagerness and gaiety imaginable: so as soon as he had
finished his task, fed Lightfoot, and put by the sixpence he had earned that
day, he ran to the play-ground in the village, where he found a party of boys
playing, and amongst them Lazy Lawrence, who indeed was not playing, but
lounging upon a gate with his thumb in his mouth. The rest were playing at
cricket. Jem joined them, and was the merriest and most active amongst them;
till, at last, when quite out of breath with running, he was obliged to give up
to rest himself, and sat down upon the style, close to the gate on which Lazy
Lawrence was swinging. "And why don't you play, Lawrence?" said he. -- "I Am
tired," said Lawrence. -- "Tired of what?" -- "I don't know well what tires me;
grandmother says I Am ill, and I must take something -- I don't know what ails
me." -- "Oh, pugh! take a good race, one, two, three, and away, and you will find
yourself as well as ever. Come, run -- one, two, three, and away." -- "Ah, no,
I cannot run indeed," said he, hanging back heavily; "you know I can play all
day long if I like it, so I don't mind play as you do, who have only one hour
for it." -- "So much the worse for you. Come now, I Am quite fresh again, will
you have one game at ball; do." -- "No, I tell you I cannot; I Am as tired as if
I had been working all day long as hard as a horse." -- "Ten times more," said
Jem, "for I have been working all day long as hard as a horse, and yet you see
I Am not a bit tired; only a little out of breath just now." -- "That Is very
odd," said Lawrence, and yawned, for want of some better answer; then taking
out a handful of halfpence -- "See what I got from father today, because I
asked him just at the right time, when he had drank a glass or two; then I can
get any thing I want out of him -- see! a penny, twopence, threepence,
four-pence -- there is eight-pence in all; would not you be happy if you had
eight-pence?" -- "Why, I don't know," said Jem laughing, "for you don't seem
happy, and you have eight-pence." -- "That does not signify though -- I Am sure
you only say that because you envy me -- you don't know what it is to have
eight-pence -- you never had more than twopence or threepence at a time in
all your life." Jem smiled. "Oh, as to that," said he, "you are mistaken, for I
have at this very time more than twopence, threepence, or eight-pence either;
I have -- let me see -- stones, two shillings; then five day's work, that is
five six-pences, that is two shillings and sixpence, in all makes four
shillings and sixpence, and my silver penny, is four and seven-pence -- Four
and seven-pence!" -- "You have not!" said Lawrence, roused so as absolutely to
stand upright, "four and seven-pence! have you? Show it me, and then I Will
believe you. -- "Follow me then," cried Jem, "and I Will soon make you believe
me; come." -- "Is it far?" said Lawrence, following half running, half
hobbling, till he came to the stable, where Jem showed him his treasure. "And
how did you come by it? honestly?" -- "Honestly; to be sure I did; I earned it
all." -- "Lord bless me, earned it! well, I Have a great mind to work; but then
it is such hot weather; besides grandmother says I Am not strong enough yet for
hard work; and besides, I know how to coax daddy out of money when I want it,
so I need not work. -- But four and seven-pence; let us see, what will you do
with it all? -- "That Is a secret," said Jem, looking great. "I can guess; I
know what I Would do with it if it was mine -- First, I Would buy pockets full of
gingerbread; then I Would buy ever so many apples and nuts; don't you love nuts?
I Would buy nuts enough to last me from this time to Christmas, and I Would make little
Newton crack 'em for me, for that is the worst of nuts, there is the trouble of
cracking 'em." -- "Well, you never deserve to have a nut." -- "But you will give
me some of yours," said Lawrence in a fawning tone, for he thought it easier to
coax than to work -- "you will give me some of your good things, will not you?" --
"I shall not have any of those good things," said Jem. "Then what will you do
with all your money?" -- "Oh, I know very well what to do with it; but, as I
told you, that is a secret, and I shall not tell it any body -- Come now, let us go
back and play -- their game's up, I dare say." -- Lawrence went back with him
full of curiosity, and out of humor with himself and his eight-pence. -- "If I
had four and seven-pence," said he to himself, "I certainly should be happy!"

The next day, as usual, Jem jumped up before six o'clock and went to his work,
whilst Lazy Lawrence sauntered about without knowing what to do with himself.
In the course of two days he laid out sixpence of his money in apples and
gingerbread, and as long as these lasted he sound himself well received by his
companions; but at length the third day he spent his last halfpenny, and when
it was gone, unfortunately some nuts tempted him very much, but he had no money
to pay for them; so he ran home to coax his father, as he called it. When he
got home, he heard his father talking very loud, and at first he thought he was
drunk; but when he opened the kitchen door, he saw that he was not drunk, but
angry.

"You lazy dog!" cried he, turning suddenly upon Lawrence, and gave him such a
violent box on the ear as made the light flash from his eyes; "you lazy dog!
see what you have done for me -- look! -- look, look, I say!" Lawrence looked as
soon as he came to the use of his senses, and, with fear, amazement, and
remorse, beheld at least a dozen bottles burst, and the fine Worcestershire
cider streaming over the floor. "Now, did not I-order you three days ago to
carry these bottles to the cellar; and did not I charge you to wire the corks?
answer me, you lazy rascal; did not I?" -- "Yes," said Lawrence, scratching his
head. "And why was not it done? I ask you," cried his father with renewed
anger, as another bottle burst at the moment. "What do you stand there for, you
lazy brat? why don't you move? I say -- No, no," catching hold of him, "I
believe you cannot move; but I Will make you." And he shook him, till Lawrence was
so giddy he could not stand. "What had you to think of? what had you to do all
day long, that you could not carry my cider, my Worcestershire cider, to the
cellar when I bid you? But go, you will never be good for any thing, you are such
a lazy rascal -- get out of my sight!" So saying, he pushed him out of the
house door, and Lawrence sneaked off, seeing that this was no time to make his
petition for halfpence.

The next day he saw the nuts again, and, wishing for them more than ever, went
home in hopes that his father, as he said to himself, would be in a better
humor. But the cider was still fresh in his recollection, and the moment
Lawrence began to whisper the word "halfpenny" in his ear, his father swore,
with a loud oath, "I will not give you a halfpenny, no, not a farthing, for a
month to come; if you want money, go work for it; I Have had enough of your
laziness -- Go work!" At these terrible words Lawrence burst into tears, and,
going to the side of a ditch, sat down and cried for an hour; and when he had
cried till he could cry no more, he exerted himself so far as to empty his
pockets, to see whether there might not happen to be one halfpenny left; and,
to his great joy, in the farthest corner of his pocket one halfpenny was found.
With this he proceeded to the fruit woman's stall. She was busy weighing out
some plums, so he was obliged to wait; and, whilst he was waiting, he heard
some people near him talking and laughing very loud. The fruit woman's stall
was at the gate of an inn-yard; and peeping through the gate in this yard,
Lawrence saw a postilion and a stable-boy about his own size playing at
pitch-farthing. He stood by watching them for a few minutes. "I begun but with
one halfpenny," cried the stable-boy with an oath, "and now I Have got
twopence!" added he, jingling the halfpence in his waistcoat pocket Lawrence
was moved at the sound, and said to himself, "If I begin with one halfpenny, I
may end like him with having twopence; and it is easier to play at
pitch-farthing than to work."

So he stepped forward, presenting his halfpenny, offering to toss up with the
stable-boy, who, after looking him full in the face, accepted the proposal, and
threw his halfpenny into the air. "Head or tail!" cried he. "Head," replied
Lawrence, and it came up head. He seized the penny, surprised at his own
success, and would have gone instantly to have laid it out in nuts; but the
stable-boy stopped him, and tempted him to throw again. This time he lost; he
threw again and won; and so he went on, sometimes losing, but most frequently
winning, till half the morning was gone. At last, however, he chanced to win
twice running, and, finding himself master of three halfpence, said he would
play no more. The stable-boy, grumbling, swore he would have his revenge
another time, and Lawrence went and bought the nuts. "It is a good thing," said
he to himself, "to play at pitch-farthing: the next time I want a halfpenny
I Will not ask my father for it, nor go to work neither." Satisfied with this
resolution, he sat down to crack his nuts at his leisure, upon the horse-block
in the inn-yard. Here, whilst he eat, he overheard the conversation of the
stable-boys and postilions. At first their shocking oaths and loud wrangling
frightened and shocked him; for Lawrence, though a lazy, had not yet learned to
be a wicked boy. But, by degrees, he was accustomed to their swearing and
quarrelling, and took a delight and interest in their disputes and battles. As
this was an amusement which he could enjoy without any sort of exertion on his
part, he soon grew so fond of it, that every day he returned to the
stable-yard, and the horse-block became his constant seat. Here he sound some
relief from the insupportable fatigue of doing nothing, and here, hour after
hour, with his elbows on his knees, and his head on his hands, he sat the
spectator of wickedness. Gaming, cheating, and lying, soon became familiar to
him; and, to complete his ruin, he formed a sudden and close intimacy with the
stable-boy with whom he had first began to game -- a very bad boy. The
consequences of this intimacy we shall presently see. But it is now time to
inquire what little Jem has been doing all this while.

One day, after he had finished his task, the gardener asked him to stay a
little while, to help him to carry some geranium pots into the hall. Jem.
always active and obliging, readily stayed from play, and was carrying in a
heavy flower-pot, when his mistress crossed the h^ll. "What a terrible litter!"
said the, "you are making here -- why don't you wipe your shoes upon the mat?"
Jem turned round to look for the mat, but he saw none. "Oh," said the lady,
recollecting herself, "I cannot blame you, for there is no mat." -- "No, ma'am"
said the gardener, "nor I don't know when, if ever, the man will bring home
those mats you bespoke, ma'am." -- "I am very sorry to hear that," said the
lady, "I wish we could find somebody who would do them, if he cannot -- I should
not care what sort of mats they were, so that one could wipe one's feet on
them." Jem, as he was sweeping away the litter, when he heard these last words,
said to himself, "perhaps I could make a mat?" And all the way home, as he
trudged along whistling, he was thinking over a scheme for making mats, which,
however bold it may appear, he did not despair of executing, with patience and
industry. Many were the difficulties which his "prophetic eye" foresaw; but he
felt within himself that spirit, which spurs men on to great enterprises, and
makes them "trample on impossibilities."

He recollected, in the first place, that he had seen Lacy Lawrence, whilst he
lounged upon the gate, twist a bit of heath into different shapes, and he
thought, that if he could find some way of plaiting heath firmly together, it
would make a very pretty green soft mat, which would do very well for one to
wipe one's shoes on. About a mile from his mother's house, on the common which
Jem rode over when he went to farmer Truck's for the giant-strawberries, he
remembered to have seen a great quantity of this heath; and, as it was now only
six o'clock in the evening, he knew that he should have time to feed Lightfoot,
stroke him, go to the common, return, and make one trial of his skill before he
went to bed.

Lightfoot carried him swiftly to the common, and there Jem gathered as much of
the heath as he thought he should want. But, what toil! what time! what pains
did it cost him, before he could make any thing like a mat! Twenty times he was
ready to throw aside the heath, and give up his project, from impatience of
repeated disappointments. But still he persevered. Nothing truly great can be
accomplished without toil and time. Two hours he worked before he went to bed.
All his play hours the next day he spent at his mat; which, in all, made five
hours of fruitless attempts -- The sixth, however, repaid him for the labors
of the other five; he conquered his grand difficulty of fastening the heath
substantially together, and at length completely finished a mat, which far
surpassed his most sanguine expectations. He was extremely happy -- sung,
danced round it -- whistled -- looked at it again and again, and could hardly
leave off looking at it when it was time to go to bed. He laid it by his
bedside, that he might see it the moment he wakened in the morning.

And now came the grand pleasure of carrying it to his mistress. She looked
full as much surprised as he expected, when she saw it, and when she heard who
made it. After having duly admired it, she asked him how much he expected for
his mat. "Expect! -- Nothing, ma'am," said Jem; "I meant to give it you, if
you would have it; I did not mean to sell it. I made it at my play hours, and I was
very happy making it; and I Am very glad too that you like it; and if you please
to keep it, ma'am -- that is all." -- "But that is not all," said the lady.
"Spend your time no more in weeding in my garden, you can employ yourself much
better; you shall have the reward of your ingenuity as well as of your
industry. Make as many more such mats as you can, and I will take care and
dispose of them for you." -- "Thank'e, ma'am," said Jem, making his best bow,
for he thought by the lady's looks that she meant to do him a favor, though he
repeated to himself, "dispose of them," what does that mean?'

The next day he went to work to make more mats, and he soon learned to make
them so well and quickly, that he was surprised at his own success. In every
one he made he found less difficulty, so that, instead of making two, he could
soon make sour, in a day. In a fortnight he made eighteen. It was Saturday
night when he finished, and he carried, at three journeys, his eighteen mats to
his mistress's house; piled them all up in the hall, and stood with his hat
off, with a look of proud humility, beside the pile, waiting for his mistress's
appearance. Presently a folding door, at one end of the hall, opened, and he
saw his mistress, with a great many gentlemen and ladies, rising from several
tables.

"Oh! there is my little boy, and his mats," cried the lady; and, followed by
all the rest of the company, she came into the hall. Jem modestly retired
whilst they looked at his mats; but in a minute or two his mistress beckoned to
him, and, when he came into the middle of the circle, he saw that his pile of
mats had disappeared. "Well," said the lady smiling, "what do you see that
makes you look so surprised?" -- "That all my mats are gone," said Jem; "but
you are very welcome." -- "Are we?" said the lady; "well, take up your hat, and
go home then, for you see that it is getting late, and you know, "Lightfoot
will wonder what is become of you." Jem turned round to take up his hat, which
he had left on the floor.

But how his countenance changed! the hat was heavy with shillings. Every one
who had taken a mat had put in two shillings; so that for the eighteen mats he
had got thirty-six shillings. "Thirty-six shillings!" said the lady; "five and
seven-pence I think you told me you had earned already -- how much does that
make? I must add, I believe, one other sixpence to make out your two guineas."
-- "Two guineas!" exclaimed Jem, now quite conquering his bashfulness, for at
the moment he forgot where he was, and saw nobody that was by. "Two guineas!"
cried he, clapping his hands together -- "Oh Lightfoot! -- oh mother!" Then,
recollecting himself, he saw his mistress, whom he now looked up to quite as a
friend. "Will you thank them all," said he, scarcely daring to glance his eye
round upon the company, "will you thank 'em, for you know I don't know how to
thank 'em rightly." Every body thought, however, that they had been thanked
rightly.

"Now we will not keep you any longer-only," said his mistress, "I have one thing
to ask you, that I may be by when you show your treasure to your mother." --
"Come, then," said Jem, "come with me now." -- "Not now," said the lady
laughing, "but I will come to Ashton tomorrow evening; perhaps your mother can
find me a few strawherries."

"That she will," said Jem; "I Will search the garden myself." He now went home,
but felt it a great restraint to wait till tomorrow evening before he told his
mother. To console himself he flew to the stable: "Lightfoot, you're not to be
sold tomorrow! poor fellow!" said he, patting him, and then could not refrain
from counting out his money. Whilst he was intent upon this, Jem was startled
by a noise at the door: somebody was trying to pull up the latch. It opened,
and there came in Lazy Lawrence, with a boy in a red jacket, who had a cock
under his arm. They started when they got into the middle of the stable, and
when they saw Jem, who had been at first hidden by the horse.

"We -- we -- we came" -- stammered Lazy Lawrence -- "I mean, I came to -- to
-- to -- " "To ask you," continued the stable-boy in a bold tone, "whether you
will go with us to the cock-fight on Monday? See, I Have a fine cock here, and
Lawrence told me you were a great friend of his, so I came."

Lawrence now attempted to say something in praise of the pleasures of
cock-fighting, and in recommendation of his new companion. But Jem looked at
the stable-boy with dislike, and a sort of dread; then turning his eyes upon
the cock with a look of compassion, said in a low voice to Lawrence, "Shall you
like to stand by and see its eyes pecked out?" -- "I don't know," said
Lawrence, "as to that; but they say a cock-fight's a fine fight, and it is no
more cruel in me to go than another; and a great many go; and I Have nothing else
to do, so I shall go." -- "But I have something else to do," said Jem,
laughing, "so I shall not go." -- "But," continued Lawrence, "you know Monday
is the great Bristol fair, and one must be merry then, of all days in the
year." -- "One day in the year, sure, there is no harm in being merry," said the
stable-boy. "I hope not," said Jem; for I know, for my part, I am merry every
day in the year." -- "That Is very odd," said Lawrence; "but I know, for my
part, I would not for all the world miss going to the fair, for at least it
will be something to talk of for half a year after -- come, you will go, will not
you?" -- "No," said Jem, still looking as if he did not like to talk before the
ill-looking stranger. "Then what will you do with all your money?" -- "I Will
tell you about that another time," whispered Jem; "and don't you go to see that
cock's eyes pecked out; it will not make you merry, I Am sure." -- "If I had any
thing else to divert me," said Lawrence, hesitating and yawning. -- "Come,"
cried the stable-boy, seizing his stretching arm, "come along," cried he; and,
pulling him away from Jem, upon whom he cast a look of extreme contempt, "leave
him alone, he is not the sort." -- "What a sool you are," said he to Lawrence,
the moment he got him out of the stable, "you might have known he would not go
-- else we should soon have trimmed him out of his four and seven-pence. But
how came you to talk of four and seven-pence; I saw in the manger a hat full of
silver." -- "Indeed!" exclaimed Lawrence. "Yes, indeed -- but why did you
stammer so when we first got in? you had like to have blown us all up." -- "I
was so ashamed," said Lawrence, hanging down his head. "Ashamed! but you must
not talk of shame now you are in for it, and I shall not let you off: you owe us
half a crown, recollect, and I must be paid tonight; so see and get the money
some how or other." After a considerable pause he added, "I Will answer for it
he would never miss half a crown out of all that silver." -- "But to steal," said
Lawrence, drawing back with horror -- "I never thought I should come to that --
and from poor Jem too -- the money that he has worked so hard for too." -- "But
it is not stealing; we don't mean to steal; only to borrow it: and, if we win,
as we certainly shall, at the cock-fight, pay it back again, and he will never
know any thing of the matter; and what harm will it do him? Besides, what
signifies talking, you cannot go to the cock-fight, or the fair either, if you
don't; and I tell ye we don't mean to steal it; we'll pay it again Monday
night." Lawrence made no reply, and they parted without his coming to any
determination.

Here let us pause in our story -- we are almost afraid to go on -- the rest is
very shocking -- our little readers will shudder as they read. But it is better
that they should know the truth, and see what the idle boy came to at last.

In the dead of the night Lawrence heard somebody tap at his window. He knew
well who it was, for this was the signal agreed upon between him and his wicked
companion. He trembled at the thoughts of what he was about to do, and lay
quite still, with his head under the bed-clothes, till he heard the second tap.
Then he got up, dressed himself, and opened his window. It was almost even with
the ground. His companion said to him in a hollow voice, "Are you ready." He
made no answer, but got out of the window and followed. When he got to the
stable, a black cloud was just passing over the moon, and it was quite dark.
"Where are you?" whispered Lawrence, groping about, "where are you? Speak to
me." -- "I am here; give me your hand." Lawrence stretched out his hand. "Is
that your hand?" said the wicked boy, as Lawrence laid hold of him; "how cold
it felt." -- "Let us go back," said Lawrence; "it is time yet." -- "It is no
time to go back," replied the other opening the door; "you have gone too far now
to go back:" and he pushed Lawrence into the stable. -- "Have you found it --
take care of the horse -- have you done? -- what are you about? -- make haste,
I hear a noise," said the stableboy, who watched at the door. "I am feeling for
the half crown, but I cannot find it." -- "Bring all together." He brought Jem's
broken flower-pot, with all the money in it, to the door.

The black cloud was now passed over the moon, and the light shone full upon
them. -- "What do we stand here for?" said the stableboy, snatching the
flower-pot out of Lawrence's trembling hands, and pulled him away from the
door. "Good God!" cried Lawrence, "you will not take all -- you said you would only
take half a crown, and pay it back on Monday -- you said you would only take half a
crown!" -- "Hold your tongue," replied the other walking on, deaf to all
remonstrances -- "if I am to be hanged ever, it sha'n't be for half a crown."
Lawrence's blood ran cold in his veins, and he felt as if all his hair stood on
end. Not another word passed. His accomplice carried off the money, and
Lawrence crept, with all the horrors of guilt upon him, to his restless bed.
All nigh he was starting from frightful dreams; or else, broad awake, he lay
listening to every small noise, unable to stir, and scarcely daring to breathe
-- tormented by that most dreadful of all kinds of fear, that fear which is the
constant companion of an evil conscience. He thought the morning would never
come; but when it was day, when he heard the birds sing, and saw every thing
look cheerful as usual, he selt still more miscrable. It was Sunday morning,
and the bell rang for church. All the children of the village, dressed in their
Sunday clothes, innocent and gay, and little Jem, the best and gayest amongst
them, went flocking by his door to church. "Well, Lawrence," said Jem, pulling
his coat as he passed, and saw Lawrence leaning against his father's door,
"what makes you look so black?" -- "I!" said Lawrence starting, "why do you say
that I look black?" -- "Nay then," said Jem, "you look white enough, now, if
that will please you; for you're turned as pale as death." -- "Pale!" replied
Lawrence, not knowing what he said; and turned abruptly away, for he dared not
stand another look of Jem's; conscious that guilt was written in his sace, he
shunned every eye. He would now have given the world to have thrown off the
load of guilt which lay upon his mind; he longed to follow Jem, to fall upon
his knees, and confess all; dreading the moment when Jem should discover his
loss, Lawrence dared not stay at home, and not knowing what to do, or where to
go, he mechanically went to his old haunt at the stableyard, and lurked
thereabouts all day, with his accomplice, who tried in vain to quiet his fears
and raise his spirits, by talking of the next day's cock-fight. It was agreed,
that, as soon as the dusk of the evening came on, they should go together into
a certain lonely field, and there divide their booty.

In the mean time Jem, when he returned from church, was very full of business,
preparing for the reception of his mistress, of whose intended visit he had
informed his mother; and, whilst she was arranging the kitchen and their little
parlour, he ran to search the strawberry-beds. "Why, my Jem, how merry you are
today!" said his mother when he came in with the strawberries, and was jumping
about the room playfully. "Now keep those spirits of yours, Jem, till you want
'em, and don't let it come upon you all at once. Have it in mind that
tomorrow's fair day, and Lightfoot must go. I bid farmer Truck call for him
tonight; he said he would take him along with his own, and he will be here just now
-- and then I know how it will he with you, Jem!" -- "So do I!" cried Jem,
swallowing his secret with great difficulty, and then tumbling head over heels
four times running. A carriage passed the window and stopped at the door. Jem
ran out; it was his mistress. She came in smiling, and soon made the old woman
smile too, by praising the neatness of every thing in the house. But we shall
pass over, however important they were deemed at the time, the praises of the
strawberries, and of "my grandmother's china plate." Another knock was heard at
the door. "Run, Jem," said his mother, "I hope it is our milk-woman with cream
for the lady." No; it was farmer Truck come for Lightfoot. The old woman's
countenance fell. "Fetch him out, dear," said she, turning to her son; but Jem
was gone; he flew out to the stable the moment he saw the flap of farmer
Truck's great-coat. "Sit ye down, farmer," said the old woman, after they had
waited about five minutes in expectation of Jem's return. "You Would best sit down,
if the lady will give you leave; for he will not hurry himself back again. My
boy's a fool, madam, about that there horse." Trying to laugh, she added, "I
knew how Lightfoot and he would be loath enough to part -- he will not bring him
out till the last minute; so do sit ye down, neighbor." The sarmer had
scarcely sat down, when Jem, with a pale wild countenance, came back. "What Is
the matter?" said his mistress. "God bless the boy!" said his mother, looking
at him quite frightened, whilst he tried to speak, but could not. She went up
to him, and then lean^ng his head against her, he cried, "It Is gone! -- it is
all gone!" and, bursting into tears, he sobbed as if his little heart would
break. "What Is gone, love?" said his mother. "My two guineas -- Lightfoot's two
guineas. I went to fetch 'em to give you, mammy; but the broken flower-pot that
I put them in, and all is gone! -- quite gone!" repeated he, checking his sobs.
"I saw them safe last night, and was showing 'em to Lightfoot; and I was so
glad to think I had earned them all myself; and I thought how surprised you would
look, and how glad you would be, and how you would kiss me, and all!"

His mother listened to him with the greatest surprise, whilst his mistress
stood in silence, looking first at the old woman, and then at Jem with a
penetrating eye, as if she suspected the truth of his story, and was afraid of
becoming the dupe of her own compassion. "This is a very strange thing!" said
she gravely. "How came you to leave all your money in a broken flower-pot in
the stable? How came you not to give it to your mother to take care of?" --
"Why, don't you remember," said Jem, looking up in the midst of his tears;
"why, don't you remember you your own self bid me not tell her about it till
you were by." -- "And did you not tell her?" -- "Nay, ask mammy," said Jem, a
little offended; and, when afterward the lady went on questioning him in a
severe manner, as if she did not believe him, he at last made no answer. "Oh,
Jem! Jem! why don't you speak to the lady? said his mother. "I have spoke, and
spoke the truth," said Jem proudly, "and she did not believe me."

Still the lady, who had lived too long in the world to be without suspicion,
maintained a cold manner, and determined to wait the event without interfering,
saying only, that she hoped the money would be found; and advised Jem to have
done crying. "I have done," said Jem, "I shall cry no more." And as he had the
greatest command over himself, he actually did not shed another tear, not even
when the farmer got up to go, saying, he could wait no longer. Jem silently
went to bring out Lightfoot. -- The lady now took her seat where she could see
all that passed at the open parlour window. -- The old woman stood at the door,
and several idle people of the village, who had gathered round the lady's
carriage examining it, turned about to listen. In a minute or two Jem appeared,
with a steady countenance, leading Lightfoot; and, when he came up, without
saying a word, put the bridle into farmer Truck's hand. "He has been a good
horse," said the farmer. "He is a good horse!" cried Jem, and threw his arm
over Lightfoot's neck, hiding his own face as he leaned upon him.

At this instant a party of milkwomen went by; and one of them having set down
her pail, came behind Jem, and gave him a pretty smart blow upon the back. --
He looked up. -- "And don't you know me?" said she. "I forget," said Jem;" I
think I have seen your face before, but I forget." -- "Do you so? and you will
tell me just now," said she, "half opening her hand, "that you forget who gave
you this, and who charged you not to part with it too." Here she quite opened
her large hand, and on the palm of it appeared Jem's silver penny. "Where?"
exclaimed Jem seizing it, "oh where did you find it? and have you? -- oh tell
me, have you got the rest of my money?" -- "I know nothing of your money -- I
don't know what you would be at," said the milkwoman. "But where, pray tell me
where, did you find this?" -- "With them that you gave it to, I suppose," said
the milkwoman, turning away suddenly to take up her milk-pail. But now Jem's
mistress called to her through the window, begging her to stop, and joining in
his entreaties to know how she came by the silver penny.

"Why, madam," said she, taking up the corner of her apron, "I came by it in an
odd way too -- You must know my Betty is sick, so I come with the milk myself,
though it is not what I Am used to; for my Betty -- you know my Betty," said she,
turning round to the old woman, "my Betty serves you, and she is a tight and
stirring lassy, ma'am, I can assure -- " "yes, I don't doubt it," said the lady
impatiently; "but about the silver penny?" -- "Why, that is true; as I was
coming along all alone, for the rest came round, and I came a short cut across
yon field -- No, you cannot see it, madam, where you stand -- but if you were
here -- " "I see it -- I know it," said Jem, out of breath with anxiety. "Well
-- well -- I rested my pail upon the style, and sets me down awhile, and there
comes out of the hedge -- I don't know well how, for they startled me so I Would
like to have thrown down my milk -- two boys, one about the size of he," said
she, pointing to Jem, "and one a matter taller, but illlooking like, so I did
not think to stir to make way for them, and they were like in a desperate
hurry: so, without waiting for the style, one of 'em pulled at the gate, and
when it would not open (for it was tied with a pretty stout cord) one of 'em
whips out with his knife and cuts it --

"Now have you a knife about you, Sir?" continued the milk-woman to the farmer.
He gave her his knife.

"Here now, ma'am, just sticking as it were here, between the blade and the
haft, was the filver penny. He took no notice, but when he opened it, out it
falls; still he takes no heed, but cuts the cord, as I said before, and through
the gate they went, and out of sight in half a minute. I picks up the penny,
for my heart misgave me that it was the very one husband had had a long time,
and had given against my voice to he," pointing to Jem; "and I charged him not
to part with it; and, ma'am, when I looked I knew it by the mark, so I thought
I would show it to he," again pointing to Jem, "and let him give it back to
those it belongs to." -- "It belongs to me," said Jem, "I never gave it to any
body -- but -- " "But," cried the farmer, "those boys have robbed him -- it is
they who have all his money." -- "Oh, which way did they go?" cried Jem, "I Will
run after them."

"No, no," said the lady, calling to her servant; and she desired him to take
his horse and ride after them. "Aye," added farmer Truck, do you take the road,
and I Will take the fieldway, and I Will be bound we'll have 'em presently."

Whilst they were gone in pursuit of the thieves, the lady, who was now
thoroughly convinced of Jem's truth, desired her coachman would produce what
she had ordered him to bring with him that evening. Out of the boot of the
carriage the coachman immediately produced a new saddle and bridle.

How Jem's eyes sparkled when the saddle was thrown upon Lightfoot's back! "Put
it on your horse yourself, Jem," said the lady -- "it is yours."

Consused reports of Lightfoot's splendid accoutrements, of the pursuit of
thieves, and of the fine and generous lady who was standing at dame Preston's
window, quickly spread through the village, and drew every body from their
houses. They crowded round Jem to hear the story. The children especially, who
were all fond of him, expressed the strongest indignation against the thieves.
Every eye was on the stretch; and now some, who had run down the lane, came
back shouting, "Here they are! they have got the thieves!"

The footman on horseback carried one boy before him; and the farmer, striding
along, dragged another. The latter had on a red jacket, which little Jem
immediately recollected, and scarcely dared lift his eyes to look at the boy on
horseback. "Good God!" said he to himself, "it must be -- yet surely it cannot
be Lawrence!" The footman rode on as fast as the people would let him. The
boy's hat was flouched, and his head hung down, so that nobody could see his
face.

At this instant there was a disturbance in the crowd. A man who was half drunk
pushed his way forwards, swearing that nobody should stop him; that he had a
right to see; and he would see. And so he did; for, forcing through all
resistance, he staggered up to the footman just as he was lifting down the boy
he had carried before him. "I will -- I tell you I will see the thief!" cried
the drunken man, pushing up the boy's hat. -- It was his own son. --
"Lawrence!" exclaimed the wretched father. The shock sobered him at once, and
he hid his face in his hands.

There was an awful silence. Lawrence fell on his knees, and in a voice that
could scarcely be heard made a full confession of all the circumstances of his
guilt. "Such a young creature so wicked! What could put such wickedness into
your head?" -- "Bad company," said Lawrence. "And how came you -- what brought
you into bad company?" -- "I don't know -- except it was idleness." While this
was saying, the farmer was emptying Lazy Lawrence's pockets; and when the money
appeared, all his former companions in the village looked at each other with
astonishment and terror. Their parents grasped their little hands closer, and
cried, "Thank God! he is not my son -- how often, when he was little, we used,
as he lounged about, to tell him that idleness was the root of all evil."

As for the hardened wretch his accomplice, every one was impatient to have him
sent to gaol. He had put on a bold, insolent countenance, till he heard
Lawrence's confession; till the money was found upon him; and he heard the
milk-woman declare, that she would swear to the silver penny which he had
dropped. Then he turned pale, and betrayed the strongest signs of fear. "We
must take him before the justice," said the farmer, "and he will be lodged in
Bristol gaol. "Oh!" said Jem, springing forwards when Lawrence's hands were
going to be tied, "let him go -- will not you -- cannot you let him go?" -- "Yes,
madam, for mercy's sake," said Jem's mother to the lady, "think what a disgrace
to his family to be sent to gaol." His father stood by wringing his hands in an
agony of despair. "It Is all my fault," cried he; "I brought him up in
idleness." -- "But he will never be idle any more," said Jem; will not you speak for
him, ma'am?" -- "Don't ask the lady to speak for him," said the farmer; "it is
better he should go to bridewell now, than to the gallows by and by."

Nothing more was said, for every body felt the truth of the farmer's speech.
Lawrence was sent to bridewell for a month, and the stable-boy was transported
to Botany Bay.

During Lawrence's confinement, Jem often visited him, and carried him such
little presents as he could afford to give; and Jem could afford to be
generous, because he was industrious. Lawrence's heart was touched by his
kindness, and his example struck him so forcibly, that, when his confinement
was ended, he resolved to set immediately to work; and, to the astonishment of
all who knew him, soon became remarkable for industry: he was found early and
late at his work, established a new character, and for ever lost the name of
Lazy Lawrence.

THE FALSE KEY.
MR. SPENCER, a very benevolent and sensible man, undertook the education of
several poor children. Amongst the rest was a boy of the name of Franklin, whom
he had bred up from the time he was five years old. Franklin had the misfortune
to be the son of a man of infamous character; and for many years this was a
disgrace and reproach to his child. When any of the neighbors children
quarrelled with him, they used to tell him he would turn out like his father.
But Mr. Spencer always assured him, that he might make himself whatever he
pleased; that by behaving well he would certainly, sooner or later, secure the
esteem and love of all who knew him, even of those who had the strongest
prejudice against him on his father's account.

This hope was very delightful to Franklin, and he showed the strongest desire
to learn and to do every thing that was right; so that Mr. Spencer soon grew
fond of him, and took great pains to instruct him, and to give him all the good
habits and principles which might make him a useful, respectable, and happy man.

When he was about thirteen years of age, Mr. Spencer one day sent for him into
his closet; and as he was folding up a letter which he had been writing, said
to him with a very kind look, but in a graver tone than usual, "Franklin, you
are going to leave me." -- "Sir!" said Franklin. "You are now going to leave
me, and to begin the world for yourself. You will carry this letter to my
sister, Mrs. Churchill, in Queen's Square -- you know Queen's Square." Franklin
bowed. "You must expect," continued Mr. Spencer, "to meet with several
disagreeable things, and a great deal of rough work, at your first setting out;
but be faithful and obedient to your mistress, and obliging to your
fellow servants, and all will go well. Mrs. Churchill will make you a very good
mistress if you behave properly, and I have no doubt but you will." -- "Thank
you, Sir." -- "And you will always (I mean as long as you deserve it) find a
friend in me." -- "Thank you, Sir -- I am sure you are -- " There Franklin
stopped short, for the recollection of all Mr. Spencer's goodness rushed upon
him at once, and he could not say another word. "Bring me a candle to seal this
letter," said his master; and he was very glad to get out of the room. He came
back with the candle, and with a stout heart stood by whilst the letter was
sealing; and when his master put it into his hand, said, in a cheerful voice,
"I hope you will let me see you again, Sir, sometimes." -- "Certainly: whenever
your mistress can spare you I shall be very glad to see you; and, remember, if
ever you get into any difficulty, don't be afraid to come to me. I have
sometimes spoken harshly to you, but you will not meet with a more indulgent
friend." Franklin at this turned away with a full heart; and, after making two
or three attempts to express his gratitude, left the room without being able to
speak.

He got to Queen's Square about three o'clock. The door was opened by a large
red-faced man in a blue coat and scarlet waistcoat, to whom he felt afraid to
give his message, lest he should not be a servant. "Well, what is your business,
Sir?" said the butler. "I have a letter for Mrs. Churchill, Sir," said
Franklin, endeavoring to pronounce his Sir in a tone as respectful as the
butler's was insolent. The man having examined the direction, seal, and edges
of the letter, carried it up stairs, and in a few minutes returned, and ordered
Franklin to rub his shoes well and follow him. He was then shown into a
handsome room, where he found his mistress, an elderly lady. She asked him a
few questions, examining him attentively as she spoke; and her severe eye at
first, and her gracious smile afterward, made him feel that she was a person
to be both loved and feared. "I shall give you in charge," said she, ringing a
bell, "to my housekeeper, and I hope she will have no reason to be displeased
with you."

The housekeeper, when she first came in, appeared with a smiling countenance;
but the moment she cast her eyes on Franklin, it changed to a look of surprise
and suspicion. Her mistress recommended him to her protection, saying,
"Pomfret, I hope you will keep this boy under your own eye." And she received
him with a cold "very well, ma'am;" which plainly showed she was not disposed
to like him. In fact Mrs. Pomfret was a woman so fond of power, and so jealous
of favor, that she would have quarrelled with an angel who had got so near her
mistress without her introduction. She smothered her displeasure, however, till
night; when, as she attended her mistres's toilette, she could not refrain from
expressing her sentiments. She began cautiously: "Ma'am, is not this the boy
Mr. Spencer was talking of one day -- that has been brought up by the
Villaintropic Society, I think they call it?" -- "Philanthropic Society; yes;
and my brother gives him a high character: I hope he will do very well." --
"I Am sure I hope so too; but I cannot say; for my part, I Have no great notion of
those low people. They say all those children are taken from the very lowest
drugs and refugees of the town, and surely they are like enough, ma'am, to take
after their own fathers and mothers." -- "But they are not suffered to be with
their parents, and therefore cannot be hurt by their example. This little boy
to be sure was unfortunate in his father, but he has had an excellent
education." -- "Oh, edication! to be sure, ma'am, I know -- I don't say but
what edication is a great thing. But then, ma'am, edication cannot change the
nature that is in one, they say; and one that is born naturally bad and low, they
say, all the edication in the world will not do no good; and, for my part, ma'am,
I know you knows best, but I should be afraid to let any of those Villaintropic
folks get into my house, for nobody can tell the nature of them aforehand: I
declare it frights me." -- "Pomfret, I thought you had better sense: how would
this poor boy earn his bread? he would be forced to starve or steal if every
body had such prejudices." Pomfret, who really was a good woman, was softened
at this idea, and said, "God forbid he should starve or steal, and God forbid I
should say any thing prejudiciary of the boy, for there may be no harm in him."
-- "Well," said Mrs. Churchill, changing her tone, "but, Pomfret, if we don't
like the boy at the end of a month, we have done with him; for I have only
promised Mr. Spencer to keep him a month upon trial -- there is no harm done."
-- "Dear, no, ma'am, to be sure -- and cook must put up with her
disappointment, that is all." -- "What disappointment?" -- "About her nephew,
ma'am; the boy she and I was speaking to you for." -- "When?" -- "The day you
called her up about the almond pudding, ma'am; if you remember, you said you
should have no objections to try the boy; and upon that cook bought him new
shirts; but they are to the good, as I tell her." -- "But I did not promise to
take her nephew." -- "Oh, no, ma'am, not at all; she does not think to say
that, else I should be very angry; but the poor woman never let fall a word,
any more than frets that the boy should miss such a good place." -- "Well, but
since I did say that I should have no objection to try him, I shall keep my
word; let him come tomorrow: let them both have a fair trial, and at the end
of the month I can decide which I like best, and which we have better keep."

Dismissed with these orders, Mrs. Pomfret hastened to report all that had
passed to the cook, like a favorite minister; proud to display the extent of
her secret influence. In the morning Felix, the cook's nephew, arrived; and the
moment he came into the kitchen every eye, even the scullion's, was fixed upon
him with approbation, and afterward glanced upon Franklin with contempt --
contempt which Franklin could not endure without some confusion, though quite
unconscious of having deserved it; nor, upon the most impartial and cool
self-examination, could be comprehend the justice of his judges. He perceived
indeed, for the comparisons were minutely made in audible and scornful
whispers, that Felix was a much handsomer, or, as the kitchen-maid expressed
it, a much more genteeler gentlemanly-looking like sort of person than he was;
and he was made to understand, that he wanted a frill to his shirt, a cravat, a
pair of thin shoes, and, above all, shoe-strings, besides other nameless
advantages, which justly made his rival the admiration of the kitchen. However,
upon calling to mind all that his friend Mr. Spencer had ever said to him, he
could not recollect his having warned him that shoe-strings were indispensable
requisites to the character of a good servant; so that he could only comfort
himself with resolving, if possible, to make amends for these deficiencies, and
to dissipate the prejudices which he saw were formed against him, by the
strictest adherence to all that his tutor had taught him to be his duty. He
hoped to secure the approbation of his mistress by scrupulous obedience to all
her commands, and faithful care of all that belonged to her; at the same time
he flattered himself he should win the good will of his fellow servants, by
showing a constant desire to oblige them. He pursued this plan of conduct
steadily for nearly three weeks, and found that he succeeded beyond his
expectations in pleasing his mistress; but unfortunately he found it more
difficult to please his fellow servants, and he sometimes offended when he
least expected it.

He had made great progress in the affections of Corkscrew the butler, by
working indeed very hard for him, and doing every day at least half his
business. But one unfortunate night the butler was gone out -- the bell rang --
he went up stairs; and his mistress asking where Corkscrew was, he answered
that he was gone out. "Where to?" said his mistress. "I don't know," answered
Franklin. And as he had told exactly the truth, and meant to do no harm, he was
surprised, at the butler's return, when he repeated to him what had passed, to
receive a sudden box on the ear, and the appellation of a mischievous,
impertinent, mean-spirited brat! "Mischievous, impertinent, mean!" repeated
Franklin to himself; but, looking in the butler's face, which was of a deeper
scarlet than usual, he judged that he was far from sober, and did not doubt but
that the next morning, when he came to the use of his reason, he would be
sensible of his injustice, and apologize for this box of the ear. But no
apology coming all day, Franklin at last ventured to request an explanation, or
rather to ask what he had best do on the next occasion. "Why," said Corkscrew,
"when mistress asked for me, how came you to say I was gone out?" -- "Because
you know, I saw you go out." -- "And when she asked you where I was gone, how
came you to say that you did not know? -- "Because indeed I did not." -- "You
are a stupid block-head: could not you say I was gone to the washerwoman's?" --
"But were you?" said Franklin. "Was I!" cried Corkscrew, and looked as if he
would have struck him again; "how dare you give me the lie? -- Mr. Hypocrite,
you would be ready enough, I Will be bound, to make excuses for yourself. -- Why
are not mistress's clogs cleaned? go along and blacken 'em this minute, and
send Felix to me.

From this time forward Felix alone was privileged to enter the butler's
pantry. Felix became the favorite of Corkscrew; and though Franklin by no
means sought to pry into the mysteries of their private conferences, nor ever
entered without knocking at the door, yet it was his fate once to be sent of a
message at an unluckly time, and as the door was half open he could not avoid
seeing Felix drinking a bumper of red liquor, which he could not help
suspecting to be wine; and as the decanter, which usually went up stairs after
dinner, was at this time in the butler's grasp, without any stopper in it, he
was involuntarily forced to suspect they were drinking his mistress's wine.

Nor were the bumpers of port of the only unlawful rewards which Felix
received; his aunt the cook had occasion for his assistance, and she had many
delicious douceurs in her gift. Many a handful of currants, many a half
custard, many a triangular remnant of pie, besides the choice of his own meal
at breakfast, dinner, and supper, f^li to the share of the favorite Felix;
whilst Franklin was neglected, though he took the utmost pains to please the
cook in all honorable service, and, when she was hot, angry, or hurried, he
was always at hand to help her; and in the hour of adversity, when the clock
struck five, and no dinner was dished, and no kitchen maid with twenty pair of
hands was to be had, Franklin would answer to her call, with flowers to garnish
her dishes, and presence of mind to know, in the midst of the commotion, where
every thing that was wanting was to be found; so that, quick as lightning, all
difficulties vanished before him. Yet when the danger was over, and the hour of
adversity passed, the ungrateful cook would forget her benefactor, and, when it
came to be his supper time, would throw him, with a carelessness which touched
him sensibly, any thing which the other servants were too nice to eat. All this
Franklin bore with fortitude, nor did he envy Felix the dainties which he eat
sometimes close beside him: "For," said he to himself, "I have a clear
conscience, and that is more than Felix can have. I know how he wins cook's
favor too well, and I fancy I know how I have offended her; for, since the day
I saw the basket, she has done nothing but huff me."

The history of the basket was this. Mrs. Pomfret, the housekeeper, had several
times, directly and indirectly, given the world below to understand that she
and her mistress thought there was a prodigious quantity of meat eaten of late.
Now when she spoke, it was usually at dinnertime; she always looked, or
Franklin imagined that she looked, suspiciously at him. Other people looked
still more maliciously; but as he felt himself perfectly innocent, he went on
eating his dinner in silence. But at length it was time to explain. One Sunday
there appeared a handsome sirloin of beef, which before noon on Monday had
shrunk almost to the bare bone, and presented such a deplorable spectacle to
the opening eyes of Mrs. Pomfret, that her long smothered indignation burst
forth, and she boldly declared she was now certain there had been foul play,
and she would have the beef found, or she would know why. She spoke, but no
beef appeared; till Franklin, with a look of sudden recollection, cried, "Did
not I see something like a piece of beef in a basket in the dairy -- I think --
" The cook, as if somebody had smote her a deadly blow, grew pale; but suddenly
recovering the use of her speech, turned upon Franklin, and with a voice of
thunder gave him the lie direct; and forthwith, taking Mrs. Pomfret by the
ruffle, led the way to the dairy, declaring she could defy the world -- "that
so she could, and would." -- "There, ma'am," said she, kicking an empty basket
which lay on the floor -- "there is malice for you -- ask him why he don't show
you the beef in the basket." -- "I thought I saw -- " poor Franklin began. "You
thought you saw!" cried the cook coming close up to him with kimboed arms, and
looking like a dragon. -- "And pray, Sir, what business have such a one as you
to think you see?" -- "And pray, ma'am, will you be pleased to speak --
perhaps, ma'am, he will condescend to obey you -- ma'am, will you be pleased to
forbid him my dairy -- for here he comes prying and spying about -- and how,
ma'am, am I to answer for my butter and cream, or any thing at all? -- I Am sure
it is what I cannot pretend to, unless you do me the justice to forbid him my
places."

Mrs. Pomfret, whose eyes were blinded by her prejudices against the folks of
the Villaintropic Society, and also by her secret jealously of a boy whom she
deemed to be a growing favorite of her mistress's, took part with the cook,
and ended, as she began, with a firm persuasion that Franklin was the guilty
person. "Let him alone, let him alone!" said she; "he has as many turns and
windings as a hare; but we shall catch him yet, I Will be bound, in some of his
doublings. I knew the nature of him well enough, from the first time I ever set
my eyes upon him; but mistress shall have her own way, and see the end of it."
These words, and the bitter sense of injustice, drew tears at length fast down
the proud cheek of Franklin, which might possibly have touched Mrs. Pomfret, if
Felix, with a sneer, had not called them crocodile tears. "Felix too!" thought
he, "this is too much." In fact Felix had till now professed himself his firm
ally, and had on his part received from Franklin unequivocal proofs of
friendship; for it must be told, that every other morning, when it was Felix's
turn to get breakfast, Felix never was up in decent time, and must inevitably
have come to public disgrace, if Franklin had not got all the breakfast things
ready for him, the bread and butter spread and the toast toasted; and had not
moreover regularly, when the clock struck eight, and Mrs. Pomfret's foot was
heard overhead, ran to call the sleeping Felix, and helped him constantly
through the hurry of getting dressed one instant before the housekeeper came
down stairs. All this could not but be present to his memory; but, scorning to
reproach him, Franklin wiped away his crocodile tears, and preserved a
magnanimous silence.

The hour of retribution was however not so far off as Felix imagined. Cunning
people may go on cleverly in their devices for some time, but though they may
escape once, twice, perhaps ninety-nine times, what does that signify, for the
hundredth they come to shame, and lose all their character. Grown bold by
frequent success, Felix became more careless in his operations; and it happened
that one day he met his mistress full in the passage, as he was going on one of
the cook's secret errands. "Where are you going, Felix?" said his mistress. "To
the washerwoman's, ma'am," answered he with his usual effrontery. "Very well,"
said she, "call at the bookseller's in -- stay, I must write down the
direction. -- Pomfret," said she, opening the housekeeper's room door, "have
you a bit of paper." Pomfret came with the writing-paper, and looked very angry
to see that Felix was going out without her knowledge; so, while Mrs. Churchill
was writing the direction, she stood talking to him about it; whilst he, in the
greatest terror imaginable, looked up in her face as she spoke, but was all the
time intent upon parrying on the other side the attacks of a little French dog
of his mistres's, which, unluckily for him, had followed her into the passage.
Manchon was extremely fond of Felix, who, by way of pleasing his mistress, had
paid most assiduous court to her dog; yet now his caresses were rather
troublesome. Manchon leaped up, and was not to be rebuffed. "Poor fellow, poor
fellow -- down! down! poor fellow!" cried Felix, and put him away. But Manchon
leaped up again, and began smelling near the fatal pocket in a most alarming
manner. "You will see by this direction where you are to go," said his
mistress. "Manchon, come here -- and you will be so good as to bring me --
down! down! Manchon, be quiet!" But Manchon knew better; he had now got his
head into Felix's pocket, and would not be quiet till he had drawn from thence,
rustling out of its brown paper, half a cold turkey, which had been missing
since morning. "My cold turkey, as I Am alive!" exclaimed the housekeeper,
darting upon it with horror and amazement. "What is all this?" said Mrs.
Churchill in a composed voice. "I don't know, ma'am," answered Felix, so
confused that he knew not what to say -- "but -- " "But what?" cried Mrs.
Pomfret, indignation flashing from her eyes. "But what?" repeated his mistress,
waiting for his reply with a calm air of attention, which still more
disconcerted Felix; for though with an angry person he might have some chance
of escape, he knew that he could not invent any excuse in such circumstances
which could stand the examination of a person in her sober senses. He was
struck dumb. "Speak," said Mrs. Churchill, in a still lower tone; "I am ready
to hear all you have to say: in my house every body shall have justice -- speak
-- but what?" -- "But," stammered Felix; and, after in vain attempting to
equivocate, confessed that he was going to take the turkey to his cousin's: but
he threw all the blame upon his aunt, the cook, who, he said, had ordered him
upon this expedition. The cook was now summoned; but she totally denied all
knowledge of the affair, with the same violence with which she had lately
confounded Franklin about the beef in the basket; not entirely, however, with
the same success, for Felix, perceiving by his mistress eye that she was upon
the point of desiring him to leave the house immediately, and not being very
willing to leave a place in which he had lived so well with the butler, did not
hesitate to confront his aunt with assurance equal to her own. He knew how to
bring his charge home to her. He produced a note in her own handwriting, the
purport of which was to request her cousin's acceptance of "some delicate cold
turkey," and to beg she would send her by the return of the bearer a little of
her cherry-brandy.

Mrs. Churchill coolly wrote upon the back of the note her cook's discharge,
and informed Felix she had no further occasion for his services; but, upon his
pleading with many tears, which Franklin did not call crocodile tears, that he
was so young, and that he was under the dominion of his aunt, he touched Mrs.
Pomfret's compassion, and she obtained for him permission to stay till the end
of the month, to give him yet a chance of redeeming his character.

Mrs. Pomfret, now seeing how far she had been imposed upon, resolved for the
future to be more upon her guard with Felix, and felt that she had treated
Franklin with great injustice, when she accused him of mal-practices about the
sirloin of beef. Good people, when they are made sensible that they have
treated any one with injustice, are impatient to have an opportunity to rectify
their mistake; and Mrs. Pomfret was now prepared to see every thing which
Franklin did in the most favorable point of view, especially as the next day
she discovered that it was he who every morning boiled the water for her tea,
and buttered her toast, services for which she had always thought she was
indebted to Felix. Besides, she had rated Felix's abilities very highly,
because he made up her weekly accounts for her; but unluckily once, when
Franklin was out of the way, and she brought a bill in a hurry to her favorite
to cast up, she discovered that he did not know how to cast up pounds,
shillings, and pence, and he was obliged to confess that he must wait till
Franklin came home.

But, passing over a number of small incidents which gradually unfolded the
character of the two boys, we must proceed to a more serious affair.

Corkscrew, frequently, after he had finished taking away supper, and after the
housekeeper was gone to bed, sallied forth to a neighboring alehouse to drink
with his friends. The alehouse was kept by that cousin of Felix's who was so
fond of " delicate cold turkey," and who had such choice cherry-brandy.
Corkscrew kept the key of the house door, so that he could return home at what
hour he thought proper; and, if he should by accident be called for by his
mistress after supper, Felix knew where to find him, and did not scruple to
make any of those excuses which poor Franklin had too much integrity to use.
All these precautions taken, the butler was at liberty to indulge his favorite
passion, which so increased with indulgence, that his wages were by no means
sufficient to support him in this way of life. Every day he felt less
resolution to break through his bad habits, for every day drinking become more
necessary to him. His health was ruined. With a red, pimpled, bloated face,
emaciated legs, and a swelled, diseased body, he appeared the victim of
intoxication. In the morning when he got up his hands trembled, his spirits
slagged, he could do nothing till he had taken a dram; an operation which he
was obliged to repeat several times in the course of the day, as all those
wretched people must who once acquire this custom.

He had run up a long bill at the alehouse which he frequented; and the
landlord, who grew urgent for his money, refused to give him further credit.
One night, when Corckscrew had drank enough only to make him fretful, he leaned
with his elbow surlily upon the table, began to quarrel with the landlord, and
swore that he had not of late treated him like a gentleman. To which the
landlord coolly replied, "That as long as he had paid like a gentleman, he had
been treated like one, and that was as much as any one could expect, or, at any
rate, as much as any one would meet with, in this world." For the truth of this
assertion he appealed, laughing, to a party of men who were drinking in the
room. The men, however, took part with Corkscrew, and, drawing him over to
their table, made him sit down with them. They were in high good humor, and
the butler soon grew so intimate with them, that, in the openness of his heart,
he soon communicated to them, not only all his own affairs, but all that he
knew, and more than all that he knew, of his mistress's.

His new friends were by no means uninterested in his conversation, and
encouraged him as much as possible to talk; for they had secret views, which
the butler was by no means sufficiently sober to discover. Mrs. Churchill had
some fine old family plate; and these men belonged to a gang of housebreakers.
Before they parted with Corkscrew, they engaged him to meet them again the next
night; their intimacy was still more closely cemented. One of the men actually
offered to lend Corkscrew three guineas toward the payment of his debt, and
hinted that, if he thought proper, he could easily get the whole cleared off.
Upon this hint Corkscrew be came all attention, till, after some hesitation on
their part, and repeated promises of secresy on his, they at length disclosed
their plans to him. They gave him to understand, that if he would assist in
letting them into his mistres's house, they would let him have an ample share
in the booty. The butler, who had the reputation of being an honest man, and
indeed whose integrity had hitherto been proof against every thing but his
mistres's port, turned pale and trembled at this proposal; drank two or three
bumpers to drown thought; and promised to give an answer the next day.

He went home more than half intoxicated. His mind was so full of what had
passed, that he could not help bragging to Felix, whom he found awake at his
return, that he could have his bill paid off at the alehouse whenever he
pleased; dropping besides some hints, which were not lost upon Felix. In the
morning Felix reminded him of the things which he had said; and Corkscrew,
alarmed, endeavored to evade his questions, by saying that he was not in his
senses when he talked in that manner. Nothing however that he could urge made
any impression upon Felix, whose recollection on the subject was perfectly
distinct, and who had too much cunning himself, and too little confidence in
his companion, to be the dupe of his dissimulation. The butler knew not what to
do when he saw that Felix was absolutely determined either to betray their
scheme, or to become a sharer in the booty.

The next night came, and he was now to make a final decision; either to
determine on breaking off entirely with his new acquaintance, or taking Felix
with him to join in the plot.

His debt, his love of drinking, the impossibility of indulging it without a
fresh supply of money, all came into his mind at once, and conquered his
remaining scruples. It is said by those whose fatal experience give them a
right to be believed, that a drunkard will sacrifice any thing, every thing,
sooner than the pleasure of habitual intoxication.

How much easier is it never to begin a bad custom, than to break through it
when once formed!

The hour of rendezvous came, and Corkscrew went to the alehouse, where he
found the house-breakers waiting for him, and a glass of brandy ready poured
out. He sighed -- drank -- hesitated -- drank again -- heard the landlord talk
of his bill -- saw the money produced, which would pay it in a moment -- drank
again -- cursed himself, and, giving his hand to the villain who was whispering
in his ear, swore that he could not help it, and must do as they would have
him. They required of him to give up the key of the house-door, that they might
get another made by it. He had left it with Felix, and was now obliged to
explain the new difficulty which had arisen. Felix knew enough to ruin them,
and must therefore be won over. This was no very difficult task; he had a
strong desire to have some worked cravats, and the butler knew enough of him to
believe that this would be a sufficient bribe. The cravats were bought and
shown to Felix. He thought them the only things wanting to make him a complete
fine gentleman, and to go without them, especially when he had once seen
himself in the glass with one tied on in a splendid bow, appeared impossible.
Even this paltry temptation, working upon his vanity, at length prevailed with
a boy, whose integrity had long been corrupted by the habits of petty pilfering
and daily falsehood. It was agreed that, the first time his mistress sent him
out on a message, he should carry the key of the house door to his cousin's,
and deliver it into the hands of one of the gang, who were there in waiting for
it. Such was the scheme. Felix, the night after all this had been planned, went
to bed and fell fast asleep; but the butler, who had not yet stifled the voice
of conscience, felt, in the silence of the night, so insupportably miserable,
that, instead of going to rest, he stole softly into the pantry for a bottle of
his mistress's wine, and there, drinking glass after glass, he stayed till he
became so far intoxicated that, though he contrived to find his way back to
bed, he could by no means undress himself. Without any power of recollection,
he flung himself upon the bed, leaving his candle half hanging out of the
candlestick beside him. Franklin slept in the next room to him, and presently
wakening, thought he perceived a strong smell of something burning. He jumped
up, and seeing a light under the butler's door, gently opened it, and to his
astonishment beheld one of the bed curtains in flames. He immediately ran to
the butler, and pulled him with all his force to rouse him from his lethargy.
He came to his senses at length, but was so terrified, and so helpless, that,
if it had not been for Franklin, the whole house would soon inevitably have
been on fire. Felix, trembling and cowardly, knew not what to do; and it was
curious to see him obeying Franklin, whose turn it was now to command. Franklin
ran up stairs to waken Mrs. Pomfret, whose terror of fire was so great that she
came from her room almost out of her senses, whilst he, with the greatest
presence of mind, recollected where he had seen two large tubs of water, which
the maids had prepared the night before for their washing, and, seizing the wet
linen which had been left to soak, threw them upon the flames. He exerted
himself with so much good sense, that the fire was presently extinguished.
Every thing was now once more safe and quiet. Mrs. Pomfret, recovering from her
fright, postponed all enquiries till the morning, and rejoiced that her
mistress had not been wakened, whilst Corkscrew flattered himself that he
should be able to conceal the true cause of the accident. "Don't you tell Mrs.
Pomfret where you found the candle when you came into the room," said he to
Franklin. "If she asks me, you know I must tell the truth," replied he. "Must!"
repeated Felix sneeringly; "what you must be a tell-tale!" -- "No, I never told
any tales of any body, and I should be very sorry to get any one into a scrape;
but for all that I shall not tell a lie, either for myself or any body else,
let you call me what names you will." -- "But if I were to give you something
that you would like," said Corkscrew; -- "something that I know you would
like!" repeated Felix. "Nothing you can give me will do," answered Franklin
steadily; "so it is useless to say any more about it -- I hope I shall not be
questioned." In this hope he was mistaken; for the first thing Mrs. Pomfret did
in the morning was to come into the butler's room to examine and deplore the
burnt curtains, whilst Corkscrew stood by endeavoring to exculpate himself by
all the excuses he could invent. Mrs. Pomfret, however, thought sometimes
blinded by her prejudices, was no fool, and it was absolutely impossible to
make her believe that a candle which had been left on the hearth, where
Corkscrew protested he had left it, could have set curtains on fire which were
at least six foot distance. Turning short round to Franklin, she desired that
he would show her where he found the candle when he came into the room. He
begged not to be questioned; but she insisted. He took up the candlestick; but
the moment the housekeeper cast her eye upon it, she snatched it from his hands
-- "How did this candlestick come here? This was not the candlestick you found
here last night," cried she. "Yes, indeed, it was," answered Franklin. "That is
impossible," retorted she vehemently, "for I left this candlestick with my own
hands, last night, in the hall, the last thing I did after you," said she,
turning to the butler, "was gone to bed -- I Am sure of it -- Nay, don't you
recollect my taking this japanned candlestick out of your hand, and making you
go up to bed with the brass one, and I bolted the door at the stair head after
you?"

This was all very true; but Corkscrew had afterward gone down from his room
by a ba^k staircase, unbolted that door, and, upon his return from the
alehouse, had taken the japanned candlestick by mistake up stairs, and had left
the brass one in its stead upon the hall table.

"Oh, ma'am," said Felix, "indeed you forget, for Mr. Corkscrew came into my
room to desire me to call him betimes in the morning, and I happened to take
particular notice, and he had the japanned candlestick in his hand, and that
was just as I heard you bolting the door -- indeed, ma'am, you forget." --
"Indeed, Sir," retorted Mrs. Pomfret, rising in ang^r, "I do not forget; I Am
not come to be supper-annuated yet, I hope -- How do you dare to tell me I
forget?" -- "Oh, ma'am," cried Felix, "I beg your pardon, I did not -- I did
not mean to say you forgot -- but only I thought, perhaps, you might not
particularly remember; for it you please to recollect -- " "I will not please to
recollect just whatever you please, Sir! -- Hold your tongue -- Why should you
poke yourself into this scrape -- What have you to do with it, I should be glad
to know?" -- "Nothing in the world, oh nothing in the world; I Am sure I beg
your pardon, ma'am," answered Felix in a soft tone, and, sneaking off, left his
friend Corkscrew to fight his own battle, secretly resolving to desert in good
time if he saw any danger of the alehouse transactions coming to light.

Corkscrew could make but very blundering excuses for himself; and, conscious
of guilt, he turned pale, and appeared so much more terrified than butlers
usually appear when detected in a lie, that Mrs. Pomfret resolved, as she said,
to sift the matter to the bottom. Impatiently did she wait till the clock
struck nine, and her mistress's bell rang, the signal for her attendance at her
levee. -- "How do you find yourself this morning, ma'am," said she, undrawing
the curtains. "Very sleepy, indeed," answered her mistress in a drowsy voice;
"I think I must sleep half an hour longer -- shut the curtains." -- "As you
please, ma'am; but I suppose I had better open a little of the window shutter,
for it is past nine." -- "But just struck." -- "Oh dear, ma'am, it struck before
I came up stairs, and you know we are twenty minutes slow -- Lord bless us?"
exclaimed Mrs. Pomfret, as she let fall the bar of the window, which roused her
mistress -- "I Am sure I beg pardon a thousand times -- it is only the bar --
because I had this great key in my hand." -- Put down the key then, or you will
knock something else down; and you may open the sthutters now, for I Am quite
awake." -- "Dear me! I Am so sorry to think of disturbing you," cried Mrs.
Pomfret, at the same time throwing the shutters wide open: "but, to be sure,
ma'am, I have something to tell you, which will not let you sleep again in a
hurry. I brought up this here key of the house door for reasons of my own,
which I Am sure you will approve of -- but I Am not come to that part of my story
yet -- I hope you were not disturbed by the noise in the house last night,
ma'am." -- "I heard no noise." -- "I am surprised at that though," continued
Mrs. Pomfret, and now proceeded to give a most ample account of the fire, of
her fears, and her suspicions. -- "To be sure, ma'am, what I say is, that,
without the spirit of prophecy, one can no ways account for what has passed.
I Am quite clear in my own judgment that Mr. Corkscrew must have been out last
night after I went to bed; for, besides the japanned candlestick, which of
itself I Am sure is strong enough to hang a man, there is another circumstance,
ma'am, that certifies it to me -- though I have not mentioned it, ma'am, to no
one yet," lowering her voice -- "Franklin, when I questioned him, told me, that
he left the lantern in the outside porch in the court last night, and this
morning it was on the kitchen table: now, ma'am, that lantern could not come
without hands; and I could not forget about that, you know; for Franklin says
he is sure he left the lantern out." -- "And do you believe him?" -- "To be
sure, ma'am -- how can I help believing him? I never found him out in the least
symptom of a lie since ever he came into the house; so one cannot help believing
in him, like him or not." -- "Without meaning to tell a falsehood, however, he
might make a mistake." -- "No, ma'am, he never makes mistakes; it is not his
way to go gossipping and tattling; he never tells any thing till he is asked,
and then it is fit he should. About the sirloin of beef, and all, he was right
in the end I found, to do him justice; and I Am sure he is right now about the
lantern -- he is always right." Mrs. Churchill could not help smiling. -- "If
you had seen him, ma'am, last night in the midst of the fire -- I Am sure we may
thank him that we were not burned alive in our beds -- and I shall never forget
his coming to call me -- Poor fellow! he that I was always scolding and
scolding, enough to make him hate me. But he is too good to hate any body; and
I Will be bound I Will make it up to him now." -- "Take care that you don't go from
one extreme into another, Pomfret; don't spoil the boy." -- No, ma'am, there is
no danger of that; but I Am sure if you had seen him last night yourself, you
would think he deserved to be rewarded." -- "And so he shall be rewarded," said
Mrs. Churchill; "but I will try him more fully yet." -- "There Is no occasion, I
think, for trying him any more, ma'am," said Mrs. Pomfret, who was as violent
in her likings as as in her dislikes. "Pray desire," continued her mistress,
"that he will bring up breakfast this morning; and leave the key of the house
door, Pomfret, with me."

When Franklin brought the urn into the breakfast parlour, his mistress was
standing by the fire with the key in her hand. She spoke to him of his last
night's exertions in terms of much approbation. "How long have you lived with
me?" said she, pausing; "three weeks, I think?" -- "Three weeks and four days,
madam." -- "That is but a short time; yet you have conducted yourself so as to
make me think I may depend upon you. You know this key?" -- "I believe, madam,
it is the key of the house door." -- "It is: I shall trust it in your care. It
is a great trust for so young a person as you are." Franklin stood silent, with
a firm but modest look. "If you take the charge of this key," continued his
mistress, "remember it is upon condition that you never give it out of your own
hands. In the daytime it must not be left in the door. You must not tell any
body where you keep it at night; and the house door must not be unlocked after
eleven o'clock at night, unless by my orders. Will you take charge of the key
upon these conditions?" -- "I will, madam, do any thing you order me," said
Franklin, and received the key from her hands.

When Mrs. Churchill's orders were made known, they caused many secret
marvellings and murmurings. Corkscrew and Felix were disconcerted, and dared
not openly avow their discontent; and they treated Franklin with the greatest
seeming kindness and cordiality. Every thing went on smoothly for three days;
the butler never attempted his usual midnight visits to the alehouse, but went
to bed in proper time, and paid particular court to Mrs. Pomfret, in order to
dispel her suspicions. She had never had any idea of the real fact, that he and
Felix were joined in a plot with house-breakers to rob the house, but thought
he only went out at irregular hours to indulge himself in his passion for
drinking. -- So stood affairs the night before Mrs. Churchill's birthday.
Corkscrew, by the housekeeper's means, ventured to present a petition that
hemight go to the play the next day, and his request was granted. Franklin came
into the kitchen just when all the servants had gathered round the butler, who,
with great importance was reading aloud the play-bill. Every body present soon
began to speak at once, and with great enthusiasm talked of the playhouse, the
actors and actresses; and then Felix, in the first pause, turned to Franklin,
and said, "Lord, you know nothing of all this! you never went to a play, did
you?" -- "Never," said Franklin, and felt, he did not know why, a little
ashamed; and he longed extremely to go to one. "How should you like to go to
the play with me tomorrow," said Corkscrew. "Oh," exclaimed Franklin, "I should
like it exceedingly." -- "And do you think mistress would let you if I asked."
-- "I think -- may be she would, if Mrs. Pemfret asked her." -- "But then you
have no money, have you?" -- "No," said Franklin, sighing. "But stay, said
Corkscrew, "what I am thinking of is, that if mistress will let you go, I Will
treat you myself, rather than that you should be disappointed."

Delight, surprise, and gratitude, appeared in Franklin's face at these words.
Corkscrew rej^^ced to see that now, at least, he had found a most powerful
temptation. "Well, then, I Will go just now and ask her: in the mean time lend me
the key of the house door for a minute or two." -- "The key!" answered Franklin
starting; "I Am sorry, but I cannot do that, for I Have promised my mistress never
to let it out of my own hands." -- "But how will she know any thing of the
matter? -- Run, run and get it for us." -- "No, I cannot," replied Franklin,
resisting the push which the butler gave his shoulder. "You cannot?" cried
Corkscrew, changing his tone; "then, Sir, I cannot take you to the play." --
"Very well, Sir," said Franklin sorrowfully, but with steadiness. "Very well,
Sir," said Felix, mimicking him, "you need not look so important, nor fancy
yourself such a great man, because you're master of a key." -- "Say no more to
him," interrupted Corkscrew; let him alone to take his own way -- Felix, you
would have no objection, I suppose, to going to the play with me?" -- "Oh, I
should like it of all things, if I did not come between any body else" -- "But
come, come!" added the hypocrite, assuming a tone of friendly persuasion, "you
will not be such a blockhead, Franklin, as to lose going to the play for nothing;
it is only just obstinacy: what harm can it do to lend Mr. Corkscrew the key for
five minutes; he will give it to you back again safe and sound. "I don't doubt
that," answered Franklin "Then it must be all because you don't wish to oblige
Mr. Corkscrew." -- "No; but I cannot oblige him in this: for, as I told you
before, my mistress trusted me; I promised never to let the key out of my own
hands; and you would not have me break my trust: Mr. Spencer told me that was
worse than robbing." At the word robbing both Corkscrew and Felix involuntarily
cast down their eyes, and turned the conversation immediately, saying that he
did very right; that they did not really want the key, and had only asked for
it just to try if he would keep his word. "Shake hands," said Corksorew, "I am
glad to find you out to be an honest fellow!" -- "I Am sorry you did not think
me one before, Mr. Corkscrew:" said Franklin, giving his hand rather proudly;
and he walked away.

"We shall make no hand of this prig," said Corkscrew. "But we'll have the key
from him in spite of all his obstinacy," said Felix; "and let him make his
story good as he can afterward. He shall repent of these airs. Tonight I Will
watch him, and find out where he hides the key; and when he is asleep we'll get
it without thanking him."

This plan Felix put in execution. They discovered the place where Franklin
kept the key at night, stole it whilst he slept, took off the impression in
wax, and carefully replaced it in Franklin's trunk, exactly where they found it.

Probably our young readers cannot guess what use they could mean to make of
this impression of the key in wax. Knowing how to do mischief is very different
from wishing to do it; and the most innocent persons are generally the least
ignorant. By means of the impression, which they had thus obtained, Corkscrew
and Felix proposed to get a false key made by Picklock, a smith who belonged to
their gang of housebreakers; and with this false key they knew they could open
the door whenever they pleased.

Little suspecting what had happened, Franklin the next morning went to unlock
the housedoor as usual; but finding the key entangled in the lock, he took it
out to examine it, and perceived a lump of wax sticking in one of the wards.
Struck with this circumstance, it brought to his mind all that had passed the
preceding evening, and, being sure that he had no wax near the key, he began to
suspect what had happened; and he could not help recollecting what he had once
heard Felix say, that "give him but a halfpenny worth of wax, and he could open
the strongest lock that ever was made by hands."

All these things considered, Franklin resolved to take the key just as it was,
with the wax sticking in it, to his mistress. "I was not mistaken when I
thought I might trust you with this key," said Mrs. Churchill, after she had
heard his story. "My brother will be here to day, and I shall consult him; in
the mean time say nothing of what has passed."

Evening came, and after tea Mr. Spencer sent for Franklin up stairs. "So, Mr.
Franklin," said he, I Am glad to find you are in such high trust in this family.
Franklin bowed. "But you have lost, I understand, the pleasure of going to the
play tonight." -- "I don't think any thing -- much, I mean -- of that, Sir,"
answered Franklin smiling. "Are Corkscrew and Felix gone to the play." -- "Yes;
half an hour ago, Sir." -- "Then I shall look into his room, and examine the
pantry and the plate that is under his care."

When Mr. Spencer came to examine the pantry, he found the large salvers and
cups in a basket behind the door, and the other things placed so as to be
easily carried off. Nothing at first appeared in Corkscrew's bedchamber to
streng then their suspicions, till, just as they were going to leave the room,
Mrs. Pomfret exclaimed, "why, if there is not Mr. Corkscrew's dress coat
hanging up there! and if here is not Felix's fine cravat that he wanted in such
a hurry to go to the play! -- Why, Sir, they cannot be gone to the play -- look
at the cravat. -- Ha! upon my word, I am afraid they are not at the play -- No,
Sir, no! you may be sure that they are plotting with their barbarous gang at
the alehouse -- and they will certainly break into the house tonight -- we shall
all be murdered in our beds, as sure as I Am a living woman, Sir -- But if
you will only take my advice -- " "Pray, good Mrs. Pomfret, don't be alarmed." --
"Nay, Sir, but I will not pretend to sleep in the house, if Franklin is not to have
a blunderbuss, and I a baggonet." -- "You shall have both indeed, Mrs Pomfret;
but don't make such a noise, for every body will hear you."

The love of mystery was the only thing which could have conquered Mrs.
Pomfret's love of talking. She was silent; and contented herself the rest of
the evening with making signs, looking ominous and stalking about the house
like one possessed with a secret.

Escaped from Mrs. Pomfret's fears and advice, Mr. Spencer went to a shop
within a few doors of the alehouse, which he heard Corkscrew frequented, and
sent to beg to speak to the landlord. He came; and, when Mr. Spencer questioned
him, confessed that Corkscrew and Felix were actually drinking in his house,
with two men of suspicious appearance. That, as he passed through the passage,
he heard them disputing about a key; and that one of them said, "Since we have
got the key, we'll go about it tonight." This was sufficient information. Mr.
Spencer, lest the landlord should give them information of what was going
forwards, took him along with him to Bow-street.

A constable and proper assistance was sent to Mrs. Churchill's. They stationed
themselves in a back parlour, which opened on a passage leading to the butler's
pantry, where the plate was kept. A little after midnight they heard the
hall-door; Corkscrew and his accomplices went directly to the pantry, and there
Mr. Spencer and the constable immediately secured them, as they were carrying
off their booty.

Mrs. Churchill and Pomfret had spent the night at the house of an acquaintance
in the same street. "Well, ma'am," said Mrs. Pomfret, who had heard all the
news in the morning, "the villains are all safe, thank God; I was afraid to go
to the window this morning, but it was my luck to see them all go by to gaol --
they looked so shocking! -- I am sure I never shall forget Felix's look to my
dying day! -- But poor Franklin! ma'am, that boy has the best heart in the
world -- I could not get him to give a second look at them as they passed --
poor fellow! I thought he would have dropped; and he was so modest, ma'am, when
Mr. Spencer spoke to him, and told him he had done his duty." -- "And did my
brother tell him what reward I intend for him." -- "No, ma'am, and I Am sure
Franklin thinks no more of reward than I do." -- "I intend," continued Mrs.
Churchill," to sell some of my old useless plate, and to lay it out in an
annuity for Franklin's life." -- "La, ma'am!" exclaimed Mrs. Pomfret with
unfeigned joy, "I Am sure you are very good; and I Am very glad of it." -- "And,"
continued Mrs. Churchill, "here are some tickets for the play, which I shall
beg you, Pomfret, to give him, and to take him with you." -- "I am very much
obliged to you, indeed, ma'am; and I Will go with him with all my heart, and
choose such plays as will not do no prejudice to his morality. -- And ma'am," said
Mrs. Pomfret, "the night after the fire I left him my great bible, and my
watch, in my will; for I never was more mistaken at the first in any boy in my
born days: but he has won me by his own deserts, and I shall from this time
forth love all the Villaintropic folks for his sake."

THE BARRING OUT; OR, PARTY SPIRIT.
"THE mother of mischief," says an old proverb, "is no bigger than a midge's
wing"

At Doctor Middleton's school in England, there was a great tall dunce of the
name of Fisher, who never could be taught how to look out a word in a
dictionary. He used to torment every body with -- "Do pray help me! I cannot
make out this one word." -- The person who usually helped him in his distress
was a very clever good-natured boy, of the name of De Gray. De Gray had been
many years under Dr. Middleton's care, and by his abilities and good conduct
did him great credit. The doctor certainly was both proud and fond of him; but
he was so well beloved, or so much esteemed by his companions, that nobody had
ever called him by the odious name of favorite, until the arrival of a new
scholar of the name of Archer.

Till Archer came, the ideas of favorites and parties, were almost unknown at
Dr. Middleton's; but he brought all these ideas fresh from a great
public-school, at which he had been educated -- at which he had acquired a
sufficient quantity of Greek and Latin, and a superabundant quantity of
party-spirit. His aim, the moment that he came to a new school, was, to get to
the head of it, or at least to form the strongest party. His influence, for he
was a boy of considerable abilities, was quickly felt, though he had a powerful
rival, as he thought proper to call him, in De Gray; and, with him, a rival was
always an enemy. De Gray, so far from giving him any cause of hatred, treated
him with a degree of cordiality, which would probably have had an effect upon
Archer's mind, if it had not been for the artifices of Fisher.

It may seem surprising, that a great dunce should be able to work upon a boy
like Archer, who was called a great genius; but when genius is joined to a
violent temper, instead of being united to good sense, it is at the mercy even
of dunces.

Fisher was mortally offended one morning by De Grey's refusing to translate
his whole lesson for him. He went over to Archer, who, considering him as a
partisan deserting from the enemy, received him with open arms, and translated
his whole lesson, without expressing much contempt for his stupidity. From this
moment Fisher forgot all De Grey's former kindness, and considered only how he
could in his turn mortify the person, whom he felt to be so much his superior.

De Gray and Archer were now reading for a premium, which was to be given in
their class. Fisher betted on Archer's head, who had not sense enough to
despise the bet of a blockhead. On the contrary, he suffered him to excite the
spirit of rivalship in its utmost fury by collecting the bets of all the
school. -- So, that this premium now became a matter of the greatest
consequence, and Archer, instead of taking the means to secure a judgment in
his favor, was listening to the opinions of all his companions. It was a prize
which was to be won by his own exertions, but he suffered himself to consider
it as an affair of chance. The ^onsequence was, that he trusted to chance --
his partisans lost their wagers, and he the premium -- and his temper.

"Mr. Archer," said Dr. Middleton, after the grand affair was decided, "you
have done all, that genius alone could do; but you, De Gray, have done all that
genius, and industry united, could do."

"Well!" cried Archer with affected gaiety, as soon as the Doctor had left the
room -- "Well, I Am content with my sentence -- Genius alone! for me -- industry
for those who want it" -- added he, with a significant look at De Gray.

Fisher applauded this as a very spirited speech, and by insinuations, that Dr.
Middleton "always gave the premium to De Gray," and that "those who had lost
their bets might thank themselves for it, for being such simpletons as to bet
against the favorite," he raised a murmur, highly flattering to Archer,
amongst some of the most credulous boys; whilst others loudly proclaimed their
belief in Dr. Middleton's impartiality. These warmly congratulated De Gray. At
this Archer grew more and more angry, and when Fisher was proceeding to speak
nonsense for him, pushed forward into the circle to De Gray, crying -- "I wish,
Mr. Fisher, you would let me fight my own battles!"

"And I wish," said young Townsend, who was fonder of diversions than of
premiums, or battles, or of any thing else -- " I wish, that we were not to
have any battles; after having worked like horses, don't set about to fight
like dogs. Come," said he, tapping De Grey's shoulder, "let us see your new
playhouse, do -- It Is a holiday, and let us make the most of it -- let us have
the School for Scandal, do, and I Will play Charles for you, and you De Gray
shall be my little Premium. -- Come, do open this new playhouse of yours
tonight."

"Come then!" said De Gray, and he ran across the play-ground to a waste
building, at the farthest end of it, in which, at the earnest request of the
whole community, and with the permission of doctor Middleton, he had with much
pains and ingenuity erecte^ a theater.

"The new theater is going to be opened! Follow the Manager! -- Follow the
Manager!" -- echoed a multitude of voices.

"Follow the Manager!" echoed very disagreeably in Archer's ear; but as he
could not be left alone, he was also obliged to follow the Manager. The moment
that the door was unlocked, the crowd rushed in; the delight and wonder
expressed at the sight was great, and the applauses and thanks which were
bestowed upon the Manager were long and loud.

Archer at least thought them long, for he was impatient till his voice could
be heard. When at length the exclamations had spent themselves, he walked
across the stage with a knowing air, and looking round contemptuously --

"And is this your famous playhouse?" cried he. "I wish you had any of you
seen the playhouse I have been used to!"

These words made a great and visible change in the feelings and opinions of
the public. "Who would be a servant of the public? or who would toll for
popular applause?" -- A few words spoken in a decisive tone by a new voice
operated as a charm, and the playhouse was in an instant metamorphosed in the
eyes of the spectators. All gratitude for the past was forgotten, and the
expectation of something better justified to the capricious multitude their
disdain of what they had so lately pronounced to be excellent.

Every one now began to cri^^cise. One observed, "that the green certain was
full of holes, and would not draw up." -- Another attacked the scenes --
"Scenes! they were not like real scenes -- Archer must know best, because he
was used to these things." -- So every body crowded to hear something of the
other playhouse. They gathered round Archer to hear the description of his
playhouse, and at every sentence insulting comparisons were made. When he had
done, his auditors looked round -- dighed -- and wished that Archer had been
their Manager. They turned from De Gray, as from a person who had done them an
injury. Some of his friends -- for he had friends, who were not swayed by the
popular opinion -- felt indignation at this ingratitude, and were going to
express their feelings, but De Gray stopped them, and begged that he might
speak for himself.

"Gentlemen," said he, coming forward, as soon as he felt that he had
sufficient command of himself --

"My friends, I see you are discontented with me and my playhouse. I have done
my best to please you: but if any body else can please you better, I shall be
glad of it. I did not work so hard for the glory of being your Manager. You
have my free leave to tear down" -- Here his voice faultered, but he hurried on
-- "You have my free leave to tear down all my work as fast as you please --
Archer, shake hands first, however, to show that there is no malice in the case."

Archer, who was touched by what his rival said, and stopping the hand of his
new partisan Fisher, cried, "No, Fisher! no! -- no pulling down. We can alter
it. There is a great deal of ingenuity in it considering."

In vain Archer would now have recalled the public to reason. The time for
reason was past, enthusiasm had taken hold of their minds. -- "Down with it! --
Down with it!" "Archer for ever!" cried Fisher, and tore down the curtain. The
riot once begun, nothing could stop the little mob, till the whole theater was
demolished. The love of power prevailed in the mind of Archer; he was secretly
flattered by the zeal of his party, and he mistook their love of mischief for
attachment to himself. De Gray looked on superior. "I said I could bear to see
all this, and I can," said he -- "now it is all over." -- And now it was all
over there was silence. The rioters stood still to take breath, and to look at
what they had done. There was a blank space before them.

In this moment of silence there was heard something like a female voice. --
"Hush! -- What strange voice is that?" said Archer. Fisher caught fast hold of
his arm -- Every body looked round to see where the voice came from It was dusk
-- Two window-shutters at the farthest end of the building were seen to move
slowly inwards. De Gray, and in the same instant Archer went forward; and as
the shutters opened, there appeared through the hole the dark face and
shrivelled hands of a very old gypsey. She did not speak; but she looked first
at one, and then at another. At length she fixed her eyes upon De Gray --
"Well, my good woman, what do you want with me?"

"Want! -- nothing -- with you," said the old woman; "do you want nothing with
me?"

"Nothing," said De Gray. Her eye immediately turned upon Archer -- " You want
something with me," said she with emphasis -- "I! -- What do I want!" replied
Archer -- "No," said she, changing her tone, "you want nothing -- nothing will
you ever want, or I am much mistaken in that face."

In that watch-chain, she should have said, for her quick eye had espied
Archer's watch-chain. He was the only person in company who had a watch, and
she therefore judged him to be the richest.

"Had you ever your fortune told, Sir, in your life?"

"Not I!" said he, looking at De Gray, as if he was afraid of his ridicule if
he listened to the gypsey.

"Not you! -- no! -- for you will make your own fortune, and the fortune of all
that belong to you!"

"There Is good news for my friends!" cried Archer -- "And I Am one of them,
remember that," cried Fisher. -- "And I" -- "And I" -- joined a number of
voices.

"Good luck to them!" cried the gypsey, "good luck to them all!"

Then as soon as they had acquired sufficient confidence in her good will, they
pressed up to the window -- "There," cried Townsend, as he chanced to stumble
over the carpenter's mitre-box, which stood in the way -- "There Is a good omen
for me. I Have stumbled on the mitre-box; I shall certainly be a Bishop."

Happy he who had sixpence, for he bid fair to be a Judge upon the Bench. And
happier he who had a shilling, for he was in the high road to be one day upon
the woolsack, Lord High Chancellor of England. No one had half a crown, or no
one would surely have kept it in his pocket upon such an occasion, for he might
have been an Archbishop, a King, or what he pleased.

Fisher, who like all weak people was extremely credulous, had kept his post
immovable in the front row all the time, his mouth open, and his stupid eyes
fixed upon the gypsey, in whom he felt implicit faith.

Those, who have least confidence in their own powers, and who have least
expectation from the success of their own exertions, are always most disposed
to trust in fortune tellers and fortune. They hope to win, when they cannot
earn; and as they can never be convinced by those who speak sense, it is no
wonder they are always persuaded by those who talk nonsense.

"I have a question to put," said Fisher in a solemn tone. "Put it then," said
Archer, "what hinders you?" "But they will hear me," said he, looking
suspiciously at De Gray. " I shall not hear you," said De Gray, "I am going."
Every body else drew back, and left him to whisper his question in the gypsey's
ear.

"What is become of my Livy?"

"Your sister Livy, do you mean?" said the gypsey.

"No, my Latin Livy."

The gypsey paused for further information -- It had a leaf torn out in the
beginning, and I hate Dr. Middleton --

"Written in it," interrupted the gypsey --

"Right -- the very book!" cried Fisher with joy. "But how could you know it
was Dr. Middleton's name? I thought I had scratched it, so that nobody could
make it out."

"Nobody could make it out but me," replied the gypsey. "But never think to
deceive me," said she, shaking her head at him in a manner that made him
tremble."

"I don't deceive you indeed. I tell you the whole truth. I lost it a week ago."

"True."

"And when shall I find it?"

"Meet me here at this hour tomorrow evening, and I will answer you. -- No
more! -- I must be gone -- Not a word more tonight."

She pulled the shutters toward her, and left the youth in darkness. All his
companions were gone. He had been so deeply engaged in this conference, that he
had not perceived their departure. He found all the world at supper, but no
entreaties could prevail upon him to disclose his secret. Townsend rallied in
vain. As for Archer, he was not disposed to destroy by ridicule the effect,
which he saw that the old woman's predictions in his favor had had upon the
imagination of many of his little partisans. He had privately slipped two good
shillings into the gypsey's hand to secure her; for he was willing to pay any
price, for any means of acquiring power.

The watch-chain had not deceived the gypsey, for Archer was the richest person
in the community. His friends had imprudently supplied him with more money than
is usually trusted to boys of his age. Doctor Middleton had refused to give him
a larger monthly allowance than the rest of his companions; but he brought to
school with him secretly the sum of five guineas. This appeared to his friends
and to himself an inexhaustible treasure.

Riches and talents would, he flattered himself, secure to him that ascendancy
of which he was so ambitious. "Am I your Manager, or not?" was now his
question. "I scorn to take advantage of a hasty moment, but since last night
you have had time to consider. If you desire me to be your Manager, you shall
see what a theater I will make for you. In this purse," said he, showing
through the network a glimpse of the shining treasure -- "in this purse is
Aladdin's wonderful lamp -- Am I your Manager? -- Put it to the vote."

It was put to the vote. About ten of the most reasonable of the assembly
declared their gratitude, and high approbation of their old friend De Gray; but
the numbers were in favor of the new friend. And as no metaphysical
distinctions relative to the idea of a majority had ever entered their
thoughts, the most numerous party considered themselves as now beyond dispute
in the right. They drew off on one side in triumph, and their leader, who knew
the consequence of a name in party matters, immediately distinguished his
partisans by the gallant name of Archers, stigmatising the friends of De Gray
by the odious epithet of Greybeards.

Amongst the Archers was a class, not very remarkable for their mental
qualifications; but who, by their bodily activity, and by the peculiar
advantages annexed to their way of life, rendered themselves of the highest
consequence, especially to the rich and enterprising. The judicious reader will
apprehend that I allude to the persons called day-scholars. Amongst these,
Fisher was distinguished by his knowledge of all the streets and shops in the
adjacent town; and, though a dull scholar, he had such reputation as a man of
business, that whoever had commissions to execute at the confectioner's were
sure to apply to him. Some of the youngest of his employers had, it is true, at
times complained, that he made mistakes of halfpence and pence in their
accounts; but as these affairs could never be brought to a public trial,
Fisher's character and consequence were undiminished, till the fatal day when
his aunt Barbara forbad his visits to the confectioner -- or rather, till she
requested the confectioner, who had his private reasons for obeying her, not to
receive her nephew's visits, as he had made himself sick at his house, and Mrs.
Barbara's fears for his health were incessant.

Though his visits to the confectioner's were thus at an end, there were many
other shops open to him; and, with officious zeal, he offered his services to
the new Manager, to purchase whatever might be wanting for the theater.

Since his father's death, Fisher had become a boarder at Dr. Middleton's; but
his frequent visits to his aunt Barbara afforded him opportunities of going
into the town. The carpenter, De Grey's friend, was discarded by Archer, for
having said "lack-a-daisy!" when he saw that the old theater was pulled down. A
new carpenter and paper-hanger, recommended by Fisher, were appointed to
attend, with their tools, for orders at two o'clock. Archer, impatient to show
his ingenuity and his generosity, gave his plan and his orders in a few
minutes, in a most decided manner. -- "These things," he observed, "should be
done with some spirit."

To which the carpenter readily assented, and added, that "Gentlemen of spirit
never looked to the expense, but always to the effect." Upon this pri^ciple Mr.
Chip set to work with all possible alacrity. In a few hours time he promised to
produce a grand effect. High expectations were formed -- nothing was talked of
but the new playhouse; and so intent upon it was every head, that no lessons
could be got. Archer was obliged, in the midst of his various occupations, to
perform the part of grammar and dictionary for twenty different people.

"Oh, ye Athenians!" he exclaimed, "how hard do I work to obtain your praise!"

Impatient to return to the theater, the moment the hours destined for
instruction, or, as they are termed by schoolboys, school hours, were over,
each prisoner started up with a shout of joy.

"Stop one moment, gentlemen, if you please," said Dr. Middleton, in an aweful
voice. "Mr. Archer, return to your place. -- Are you all here?" -- The names of
all the boys were called over, and when each had answered to his name, Dr.
Middleton said,

"Gentlemen, I am sorry to interrupt your amu^ements; but, till you have
contrary orders from me, no one, on pain of my serious displeasure, must go
into that building," (pointing to the place where the theater was erecting) --
"Mr. Archer, your carpenter is at the door, you will be so good as to dismiss
him. -- I do not think proper to give my reasons for these orders; but you who
know me," said the doctor, and his eye turned toward De Gray, "will not
suspect me of caprice -- I depend, gentlemen, upon your obedience."

To the dead silence, with which these orders were received, succeeded in a few
minutes an universal groan -- "So!" said Townsend, "all our diversion is over."
-- "So," whispered Fisher in the Manager's ear, "This is some trick of the
Greybeards, did you not observe how he looked at De Gray?" -- Fired by this
idea, which had never entered his mind before, Archer started from his reverie,
and striking his hand upon the table, swore, that he would not be outwitted by
any Greybeard in Europe -- No, nor by all of them put together. The A chefs
were surely a match for them -- he would stand by them, if they would stand by
him," he declared with a loud voice, "against the whole world, and Dr.
Middleton himself, with "little Premium" at his right hand."

Every body admired Archer's spirit, but were a little appalled at the sound of
standing against Dr. Middleton.

"Why not?" resumed the indignant Manager, "Dr. Middleton, nor no doctor upon
earth shall treat me with injustice. This, you see, is a stroke at me and my
party, and I will not bear it."

"Oh, you are mistaken!" said De Gray, who was the only one who dared to oppose
reason to the angry orator -- "It cannot be a stroke aimed at "you and your
party," for he does not know that you have a party."

"I Will make him know it, and I Will make you know it too," said Archer; "before I
came here you reigned alone, now your reign is over, Mr. De Gray. Remember my
majority this morning, and your theater last night." -- "He has remembered it,"
said Fisher, "you see, the moment he was not to be our Manager, we were to have
no theater -- no playhouse -- no plays. We must all sit down with our hands
before us -- all for "good reasons" of Dr. Middleton's, which he does not
vouchsafe to tell us."

"I will not be governed by any man's reasons that he will not tell me," cried
Archer; "he cannot have good reasons, or why not tell them."

"Nonsense! we shall not suspect him of caprice!"

"Why not?"

"Because we who know him," said De Gray, "have never known him capricious."

"Perhaps not, I know nothing about him," said Archer.

"No," said De Gray, "for that very reason I speak, who do know him. -- Don't
be in a passion, Archer."

"I will be in a passion -- I will not submit to tyranny -- I will not be made a fool
of by a few soft words. -- You don't know me, De Gray -- I Will go through with
what I Have begun -- I am Manager, and I will be Manager, and you shall see my
theater finished in spite of you, and my party triumphant."

"Party," repeated De Gray. -- "I cannot imagine what is in the word "party"
that seems to drive you mad. We never heard of parties till you came amongst
us."

"No; before I came, I say, nobody dared oppose you, but I dare; and I tell you
to your face, -- take care of me -- a warm friend and a bitter enemy is my
motto."

"I am not your enemy! -- I believe you are out of your senses, Archer!" said
he laughing.

"Out of my senses! -- No -- you are my enemy! -- Are not you my rival? -- Did
not you win the premium? -- Did not you want to be Manager? -- Answer me, are
not you, in one word, a Greybeard?"

"You called me a Greybeard, but my name is De Gray," said he, still laughing.

"Laugh on!" cried the other furiously. Come Archers, sollow me! -- we shall
laugh by and by, I promise you."

At the door Archer was stopped by Mr. Chip -- "Oh, Mr. Chip, I am ordered to
discharge you."

"Yes, Sir; and here is a little bill --

"Bill! Mr. Chip -- why, you have not been at work for two hours!"

"Not much over, Sir; but if you will please to look into it, you will see it is for
a few things you ordered. The stuff is all laid out and delivered. The paper,
and the festoon-bordering for the drawing room scene is cut out, and left
yander, within."

"Yander, within! -- I wish you had not been in such a confounded hurry --
six-and-twenty shillings!" cried he, "but I cannot stay to talk about it now. --
I Will tell you, Mr. Chip," said Archer, lowering his voice, "what you must do
for me, my good fellow." -- Then drawing Mr. Chip aside, he begged him to pull
down some of the wood-work which had been put up, and to cut it into a certain
number of wooden bars, of which he gave him the dimensions, with orders to
place them all, when ready, under a hay-stack, which he pointed out. Mr. Chip
scrupled and hesitated, and began to talk of "the doctor." Archer immediately
began to talk of the bill, and throwing down a guinea and a half, the
conscientious carpenter pocketed the money directly, and made his bow.

"Well, Master Archer," said he, "there is no refusing you nothing. -- You have
such a way of talking one out of it -- you manage me just like a child."

"Aye, aye!" said Archer, knowing that he had been cheated, and yet proud of
managing a carpenter -- "Aye, aye, I know the way to manage every body -- let
the things be ready in an hour's time -- and hark'e! leave your tools by
mistake behind you, and a thousand of twenty-penny nails. -- Ask no questions,
and keep your own counsel, like a wise man -- off with you, and take care of
"the doctor."

"Archers! Archers! -- To the Archer's tree follow your leader," cried he,
sounding his well known whistle as a signal. -- His followers gathered round
him, and he raising himself upon the mount, at the foot of the tree, counted
his numbers, and then, in a voice lower than usual, addressed them thus:

"My friends, is there a Greyberad amongst us? If there is, let him walk off
now -- he has my free leave."

No one stirred. -- "Then we are all Archers, and we will stand by one another
-- join hands my friends."

They all joined hands.

"Promise me not to betray me, and I will go on -- I ask no security but your
honor."

They all gave their honor to be secret and faithful, as he called it, and he
went on --

"Did you ever hear of such a thing as a Barring out, my friends?"

They had heard of such a thing; but they had only heard of it.

Archer gave the history of a Barring out, in which he had been concerned at
his school; in which the boys stood out two days against the master, and gained
their point at last, which was a week's more holidays at Easter.

"But if we should not succeed," said they, "Dr. Middleton is so steady, he
never goes back from what he has said."

"Did you ever try to push him back? -- Let us be steady, and he will tremble --
tyrants always tremble when --

"Oh!" interrupted a number of voices, "but he is not a tyrant, is he?"

"All schoolmasters are tyrants, are not they?" replied Archer, "and is not he
a schoolmaster?"

To this logic there was no answer; but, still reluctant, they asked "What they
should get by a Barring out?"

"Get! -- Every thing! -- What we want! -- which is every thing to lads of
spirit -- victory and liberty! -- Bar him out till he repeals his tyrannical
law -- till he lets us in to our own theater again, or till he tells us his
"good reasons" against it.

"But perhaps he has reasons for not telling us."

"Impossible!". cried Archer, "that is the way we are always to be governed by a
man in a wig, who says he has good reasons, and cannot tell them. -- Are you
fools? -- Go -- go back to De Gray -- I see you are all Greybeards -- Go -- who
goes first?"

Nobody would go first.

"I will have nothing to do with ye, if ye are resolved to be slaves!"

"We will not be slaves!" they all exclaimed at once.

"Then," said Archer, "stand out in the right and be free."

"The right." -- It would have taken up too much time to examine what "the
right" was. Archer was always sure, that "the right" was what his party chofe
to do -- that is, what he chose to do himself; and such is the influence of
numbers upon each other in conquering the feelings of shame, and in confusing
the powers of reasoning, that in a few minutes "the right" was forgotten, and
each said to himself,

"To be sure, Archer is a very clever boy, and he cannot be mistaken;" -- or,
"To be sure Townsend thinks so, and he would not do any thing to get us into a
scrape:" -- or, "To be sure every body will agree to this but myself, and I
cannot stand out alone, to be pointed at as a Greybeard and a slave. Every body
thinks it is right, and every body cannot be wrong."

By some of these arguments, which passed rapidly through the mind, without his
being conscious of them, each boy decided, and deceived himself -- what none
would have done alone, none scrupled to do as a party.

It was determined then, that there should be a Barring out. The arrangement of
the affair was left to their new Manager, to whom they all pledged implicit
obedience.

Obedience, it seems, is necessary, even from rebels to their ringleaders --
not reasonable, but implicit obedience.

Scarcely had the assembly adjourned to the Ball-alley, when Fisher, with an
important length of face, came up to the Manager, and desired to speak one word
to him --

"My advice to you, Archer, is, to do nothing in this till we have consulted
you know who about whether it is right or wrong."

"You know who! -- Who do you mean? -- Make haste, and don't make so many
faces, for I Am in a hurry. -- Who is "You know who?"

"The old woman," said Fisher gravely; "the Gypsey."

"You may consult the old woman," said Archer, bursting out a laughing, "about
what is right and wrong, if you please; but no old woman shall decide for me."

"No; but you don't take me," said Fisher, "You don't take me. By right and
wrong, I mean lucky and unlucky."

"Whatever I do will be lucky," replied Archer. "My Gypsey told you that
already."

"I know, I know," said Fisher, "and what she said about your friends being
lucky -- that went a great way with many," added he, with a sagacious nod of
his head, "I can tell you that -- more than you think. -- Do you know," said
he, laying hold of Archer's button, "I Am in the secret. There are nine of us
have crooked our little fingers upon it, not to stir a step till we get her
advice; and she has appointed me to meet her about particular business of my
own at eight. So I Am to consult her and to bring her answer."

Archer knew too well how to govern fools to attempt to reason with them; and,
instead of laughing any longer at Fisher's ridiculous superstition, he was
determined to take advantage of it. He affected to be persuaded of the wisdom
of the measure -- looked at his watch, urged him to be exact to a moment,
conjured him to remember exactly the words of the oracle, and, above all
things, to demand the lucky hour and minute when the Barring out should begin.

With these instructions, Archer put his watch into the solemn dupe's hand, and
left him to count the seconds, till the moment of his appointment, whilst he
ran off himself to prepare the oracle. At a little gate which locked into a
lane, through which he guessed that the Gypsey must pass, he stationed himself,
saw her, gave her half a crown and her instructions, made his escape, and got
back unsuspected to Fisher, whom he found in the attitude in which he had left
him, watching the motion of the minutehand.

Proud of his secret commission, Fisher slouched his hat, he knew not why, over
his face, and proceeded toward the appointed spot. To keep, as he had been
charged to do by Archer, within the letter of the law, he stood behind the
forbidden building and waited some minutes. Through a gap in the hedge the old
woman at length made her appearance, muffled up and looking cautiously about
her.

"There Is nobody near us!" said Fisher, and he began to be a little afraid. --
"What answer," said he, recollecting himself, "about my Livy?"

"Lost! -- Lost! -- Lost!" said the Gypsey, lifting up her hands, "never,
never, never to be found! -- But no matter for that now -- that is not your
errand tonight -- no tricks with me -- speak to me of what is next your heart."

Fisher, astonished, put his hand upon his heart, told her all that she knew
before, and received the answers, which Archer had dictated -- "That the
Archers should be lucky as long as they stuck to their Manager and to one
another; that the Barring out should end in woe, if not begun precisely as the
clock should strike nine on Wednesday night; but if begun in that lucky moment,
and all obedient to their lucky leader, all should end well."

A thought, a provident thought now struck Fisher; for even he had some
foresight, where his favorite passion was concerned. -- "Pray, in our Barring
out, shall we be starved?"

"No," said the Gypsey, "not if you trust to me for food, and if you give me
money enough -- silver will not do for so many, gold is what must cross my hand."

"I have no gold," said Fisher, "and I don't know what you mean by "so many,"
-- I Am only talking of number one, you know -- I must take care of that first."

So, as Fisher thought that it was possible that Archer, clever as he was,
might be disappointed in his supplies, he determined to take secret measures
for himself. His aunt Barbara's interdiction had shut him out of the
confectioner's shop, but he flattered himself that he could out-wit his aunt;
he therefore begged the Gypsey to procure him twelve buns by Thursday morning,
and bring them secretly to one of the windows of the school-room.

As Fisher did not produce any money when he made this proposal, it was at
first absolutely rejected; but a bribe at length conquered his difficulties;
and the bribe which Fisher found himself obliged to give -- for he had no
pocket money left of his own, he being as much restricted in that article as
Archer was indulged -- the bribe that he found himself obliged to give to quiet
the Gypsey was half a crown, which Archer had entrusted to him to buy candles
for the theater. -- "Oh," thought he to himself, "Archer's so careless about
money, he will never think of asking me for the half crown again; and now he will
want no candles for the theater -- or at any rate it will be some time first;
and may be aunt Barbara may be got to give me that much at Christmas -- then,
if the worst comes to the worst, one can pay Archer. -- My mouth waters for the
buns, and have 'em I must now."

So, for the hope of twelve buns, he sacrificed the money which had been
entrusted to him. -- The meanest motives, in mean minds, often prompt to the
commission of those great faults, to which, one should think, nothing but some
violent passion could have tempted.

The ambassador having thus, in his opinion, concluded his own and the public
business, returned well satisfied with the result, after receiving the Gypsey's
reiterated promise to tap three times at the window on Thursday morning.

The day appointed for the Barring out at length arrived, and Archer,
assembling the confederates, informed them, that all was prepared for carrying
their design into execution; that he now depended for success upon their
punctuality and courage. He had, within the last two hours, got all the bars
ready to fasten the doors and window shutters of the school-room; he had, with
the assistance of two of the day-scholars who were of the party, sent into the
town for provisions, at his own expense, which would make a handsome supper for
that night; he had also negociated with some cousins of his, who lived in the
town, for a constant supply in future.

"Bless me," exclaimed Archer, suddenly stopping in this narration of his
services, "there is one thing, after all, I Have forgot, we shall be undone
without it -- Fisher, pray did you ever buy the candles for the playhouse."

"No, to be sure," replied Fisher, extremely frightened, "you know you don't
want candles for the playhouse now."

"Not for the playhouse, but for the Barring-out -- we shall be in the dark,
man -- you must run this minute, run."

"For candles?" said Fisher confused, "how many? -- what sort?"

"Stupidity!" exclaimed Archer, "you are a pretty fellow at a dead list! --
Lend me a pencil and a bit of paper, do; I Will write down what I want myself! --
Well, what are you fumbling for?"

"For money!" said Fisher, coloring.

"Money, man! Didn't I give you half a crown the other day?"

"Yes," replied Fisher, stammering; "but I was not sure that that might be
enough."

"Enough! yes, to be sure it will -- I don't know what you are at."

"Nothing, nothing," said Fisher, "here, write upon this then," said Fisher,
putting a piece of paper into Archer's hand, upon which Archer wrote his
orders. -- "Away, away!" cried he.

And away went Fisher. -- He returned; but not until a considerable time
afterward.

They were at supper when he returned -- "Fisher always comes in at
supper-time," observed one of the Greybeards, carelessly.

"Well, and would you have him come in after supper-time," said Townsend, who
always supplied his party with ready wit.

"I Have got the candles," whispered Fisher, as he passed by Archer to his place
-- "And the tinder-box?" said Archer.

"Yes; I got back from my aunt Barbara under pretense, that I must study for
repetition-day an hour later tonight -- So I got leave. -- Was not that
clever?"

A dunce always thinks it clever to cheat even by sober lies.

How Mr. Fisher procured the candles and the tinder-box without money, and
without credit, for he had no credit, we shall discover in future.

Archer and his associates had agreed to stay the last in the school-room, and
as soon as the Greybeards were gone out to bed, he as the signal was to shut
and lock one door, Townsend the other; a third conspirator was to strike a
light, in case they should not be able to secure a candle; a fourth was to take
charge of the candle as soon as lighted; and all the rest were to run to their
bars, which were secreted in the room; then to fix them to the common fastening
bars of the window, in the manner in which they had been previously instructed
by the Manager. Thus each had his part assigned, and each was warned, that the
success of the whole depended upon their order and punctuality.

Order and punctuality it appears are necessary even in a Barring out, and even
rebellion must have its laws.

The long expected moment at length arrived. De Gray and his friends,
unconscious of what was going forward, walked out of the school-room as usual
at bed time. The clock began to strike nine. There was one Greybeard left in
the room, who was packing up some of his books, which had been left about by
accident. It is impossible to describe the impatience with which he was
watched, especially by Fisher, and the nine who depended upon the Gypsey oracle.

When he bad got all his books together under his arm, he let one of them fall;
and whilst he stooped to pick it up Archer gave the signal. The doors were
shut, locked, and double-locked in an instant. A light was struck, and each ran
to his post. The bars were all in the same moment put up to the windows, and
Archer, when he had tried them all, and seen that they were secure, gave a loud
"Huzza!" -- in which he was joined by all the party most manfully -- by all but
the poor Greybeard, who, the picture of astonishment, stood stock still in the
midst of them with his books under his arm; at which spectacle Townsend, who
enjoyed the srolic of the fray more than any thing else, burst into an
immoderate fit of laughter. -- "So, my little Greybeard," said he, holding a
candle full in his eyes, "what think you of all this? -- How came you amongst
the wicked ones?"

"I don't know indeed," said the little boy very gravely, "you shut me up
amongst you -- will not you let me out?"

"Let you out! No, no, my little Greybeard," said Archer, catching hold of him,
and dragging him to the window bars -- "Look ye here -- Touch these -- Put your
hand to them -- pull, push, kick -- Put a little spirit into it, man -- Kick
like an Archer, if ye can -- away with ye. It Is a pity that the King of the
Greybeards is not here to admire me -- I should like to show him our
fortifications. But come, my merry-men all, now to the feast. -- Out with the
table into the middle of the room -- Good cheer, my jolly Archers! -- I Am your
Manager?"

Townsend, delighted with the bustle, rubbed his hands, and capered about the
room, whilst the preparations for the feast were hurried forward.

"Four candles! -- Four candles on the table. Let Us have things in style when
we are about it, Mr. Manager," cried Townsend. "Places! -- Places! There Is
nothing like a fair scramble, my boys -- Let every one take care of himself --
Halloo! Grey-beard, I Have knocked Greybeard down here in the scuffle -- Get up
again, my lad, and see a little of life."

"No, no," cried Pisher, "he shall not sup with us."

"No, no," cried the Manager, "he shall not live with us; a Greybeard is not sit
company for Archers."

"No, no," cried Townsend, "evil communication corrupts good manners."

So with one unanimous hiss they hunted the poor little gentle boy into a
corner; and having pent him up with benches, Fisher opened his books for him,
which he thought the greatest mortification, and set up a candle beside him --
"There, now he looks like a Greybeard as he is!" cried they.

"Tell me what is the Latin for cold roast beef?" said Fisher, exulting, and
they returned to their feast.

Long and loud they revelled. They had a few bottles of cider. "Give me the
corkscrew, the cider shall not be kept till it is sour," cried Townsend, in answer
to the Manager, who, when he beheld the provisions vanishing with surprising
rapidity, began to fear for the morrow.

"Hang tomorrow!" cried Townsend, "let Greybeards think of tomorrow; Mr.
Manager, here is your good health."

The Archers all stood up as their cup^ were filled to drink the health of
their chief with an universal cheer.

But at the moment that the cups were at their lips, and as Archer bowed to
thank the company, a sudden shower from above astonished the whole assembly.
They looked up and beheld the rose of a watering engine, whose long neck
appeared through a trap-door in the ceiling.

"Your good health, Mr. Manager!" said a voice, which was known to be the
gardener's, and in the midst of their surprise and dismay the candles were
suddenly extinguished -- the trapdoor shut down, and they were left in utter
darkness.

"The Devil!" said Archer --

"Don't swear, Mr. Manager," said the same voice from the ceiling, "I hear
every word you say."

"Mercy upon us!" exclaimed Fisher. "The clock," added he, whispering, "must
have been wrong, for it had not done striking when we began. -- Only you
remember, Archer; it had just done before you had done locking your door."

"Hold your tongue, blockhead!" said Archer. -- "Well, boys! were ye never in
the dark before? You are not afraid of a shower of rain, I hope -- Is any body
drowned?"

"No," said they with a faint laugh, "but what shall we do here in the dark all
night long, and all day tomorrow? -- we cannot unbar the shu^ters." "It Is a
wonder nobody ever thought of that trap-door!" said Townsend.

The trap-door had indeed escaped the Manager's observation; as the house was
new to him, and the ceiling being newly white-washed, the opening was scarcely
perceptible. Vexed to be out-generalled, and still more vexed to have it
remarked, Archer poured forth a volley of incoherent exclamations, and
reproaches against those, who were thus so soon discouraged by a trifle: and
groping for the tinder box, he asked if any thing could be easier than to
strike a light again.

The light appeared. But at the moment that it made the tinder-box visible,
another shower from above aimed, and aimed exactly at the tinder-box, drenched
it with water, and rendered it totally unfit for further service.

Archer in a fury dashed it to the ground. And now for the first time he f^lt
what it was to be the unsuccessful head of a party. He heard in his turn the
murmurs of the discontented, changeable populace; and recollecting all his bars
and bolts, and ingenious contrivances, he was more provoked at their blaming
him for this one only oversight, than he was grieved at the disaster itself.

"Oh, my hair is all wet!" cried one dolefully.

"Wring it then," said Archer.

"My hand's cut with your broken glass," cried another.

"Glass!" cried a third, "mercy! is there broken glass? and it is all about, I
suppose, amongst the supper -- and I ^^d but one bit of bread all the time.

"Bread!" cried Archer -- " Eat, if you want it -- Here Is a piece here, and no
glass near it."

"It Is all wet -- And I don't like dry bread by itself -- That Is no feast."

"Heigh-day! -- What, nothing but moaning and grumbling! -- If these are the
joys of a Barring out," cried Townsend, "I Would rather be snug in my bed. I
expected that we should have sat up till twelve o'clock, talking and laughing
and singing."

"So you may still, what hinders you?" said Archer -- "Sing and we'll join you,
and I should be glad those fellows over-head heard us singing. Begin, Townsend
-- "Come now all ye social Powers,
"Spread your influence over us" --
or else -- "Rule Britannia! Britannia rule the waves!
"Britons never will be slaves."


Nothing can be more melancholy than forced merriment. In vain they roared in
chorus. In vain they tried to appear gay -- It would not do. The voices died
away, and dropped off one by one. They had each provided himself with a great
coat to sleep upon, but now in the dark there was a peevish scrambling contest
for the coats, and half the company, in very bad humor, stretched themselves
upon the benches for the night.

There is great pleasure in bearing any thing that has the appearance of
hardship, as long as there is any glory to be acquired by it; but when people
feel themselves foiled, there is no further pleasure in endurance: and if in
their misfortune there is any mixture of the ridiculous, the motives for
heroism are immediately destroyed. Dr. Middleton had probably considered this
in the choice he made of his first attack.

Archer, who had spent the night as a man, who had the cares of government upon
his shoulders, rose early in the morning, whilst every body else was fast
asleep. In the night he had revolved the affair of the trap-door, and a new
danger had alarmed him. It was possible that the enemy might descend* upon them
through the trap-door. The room had been built high to admit a free circulation
of air. It was twenty feet high; to that it was in vain to think of reaching to
the trap-door. As soon as the daylight appeared Archer rose softly, that he
might reconnoitre, and devise some method of guarding against this new danger.
Luckily there were round holes in the top of the window shutters, which
admitted sufficient light for him to work by. The remains of the soaked feast,
wet candles, and broken glass spread over the table in the middle of the room,
looked rather dismal this morning.

"A pretty set of fellows I have to manage!" said Archer, contemplating the
groupe of sleepers before him. -- "It is well they have somebody to think for
them. Now if I wanted -- which, thank goodness, I don't -- but if I did want to
call a call cabinet-council to my assistance, who could I pitch upon? -- Not
this stupid snorer, who is dreaming of Gypseys, if he is dreaming of any
thing," continued Archer, as he looked into Fisher's open mouth.

"This next chap is quick enough; but then he is so fond of having every thing
his own way.

"And this curl-pated monkey, who is grinning in his sleep, is all tongue, and
no brains.

"Here are brains, though nobody would think it, in this lump," said he,
looking at a fat, rolled up, heavy-breathing sleeper; "but what signify brains
to such a lazy dog; I might kick him for my football this half-hour before I
should get him awake.

"This lank-jawed Harlequin beside him is a handy fellow, to be sure; but then
if he has hands he has no head -- and he would be afraid of his own shadow too, by
this light, he is such a coward!

"And Townsend, why he has puns in plenty; but when there is any work to be
done, he is the worst fellow to be near one in the world -- he can do nothing
but laughed at his own puns.

"This poor little fellow, that we hunted into the corner, has more sense than
all of them put together; but then he is a Greybeard."

Thus speculated the chief of a party upon his sleeping friends. -- And how did
it happen, that he should be so ambitious to please and govern this set, when,
for each individual of which it was composed, he felt such supreme contempt? --
He had formed them into a party, had given them a name, and he was at their
head. -- If these be not good reasons, none better can be assigned for Archer's
conduct.

"I wish ye could all sleep on," said he, "but I must waken ye, though you will
be only in my way. The sound of my hammering must waken them -- so I may as
well do the thing handsomely, and flatter some of them by pretending to ask
their advice."

Accordingly he pulled two or three to waken them. -- "Come, Townsend, waken,
my boy! -- Here Is some diversion for you -- up! up!"

"Diversion!" cried Townsend, "I Am your man! -- I Am up -- up to any thing."

So, under the name of diversion, Archer set Townsend to work at four o'clock
in the morning. They had nails, a few tools, and several spars, still left from
the wreck of the playhouse. These, by Archer's directions, they sharpened at
one end, and nailed them to the ends of several forms. All hands were now
called to clear away the supper things, and to erect these forms
perpendicularly under the trap-door; and, with the assistance of a few braces a
chevaux-de-frise was formed, upon which nobody could venture to descend. At the
farthest end of the room they likewise formed a penthouse of the tables, under
which they proposed to breakfast, secure from the pelting storm, if it should
again assail them through the trap-door. They crowded under the penthouse as
soon as it was ready, and their admiration of its ingenuity paid the workmen
for the job.

"Lord! I shall like to see the gardener's phiz through the trap-door, when he
beholds the spikes under him!" cried Townsend. -- "Now for breakfast!"

"Aye, now for breakfast," said Archer, looking at his watch; "past eight
o'clock, and my town boys not come! -- I don't understand this!"

Archer had expected a constant supply of provisions from two boys who lived in
the town, who were cousins of his, and who had promised to come every day, and
put food in at a certain hole in the wall, in which a ventilator usually
turned. This ventilator Archer had taken down, and had contrived it so, that it
could be easily removed and replaced at pleasure; but, upon examination, it was
now perceived that the hole had been newly stopped up by an iron back, which it
was impossible to penetrate or remove.

"It never came into my head that any body would ever have thought of the
ventilator but myself!" exclaimed Archer, in great perplexity. -- He listened
and waited for his cousins, but no cousins came; and, at a late hour, the
company were obliged to breakfast upon the scattered fragments of the last
night's feast. That feast had been spread with such imprudent profusion, that
little now remained to satisfy the hungry guests. Archer, who well knew the
effect which the apprehension of a scarcity would have upon his associates, did
every thing that could be done by a bold countenance and reiterated assertions
to persuade them, that his cousins would certainly come at last, and that the
supplies were only delayed. -- The delay, however, was alarming.

Fisher alone heard the Manager's calculations, and saw the public fears
unmoved. Secretly rejoicing in his own wisdom, he walked from window to window,
slily listening for the Gypsey's signal. -- "There it is!" cried he, with more
joy sparkling in his eyes than had ever enlightened them before; "Come this
way, Archer -- but don't tell any body -- hark! do ye hear those three taps at
the window! -- This is the old woman with twelve buns for me! -- I Will give you
one whole one for yourself, if you will unbar the window for me."

"Unbar the window!" interrupted Archer; "no, that I will not, for you or the
Gypsey either; but I have head enough to get your buns without that. But stay;
there is something of more consequence than your twelve buns -- I must think
for ye all, I see, regularly."

So he summoned a council and proposed, that every one should subscribe, and
trust the subscription to the Gypsey, to purchase a fresh supply of provisions.
Archer laid down a guinea of his own money for his subscription; at which sight
all the company clapped their hands, and is popularity ro^e to a high pitch
with their renewed hopes of plenty. Now, having made a list of their wants,
they folded the money in the paper, put it into a bag, which Archer tied to a
long string, and, having broken the pane of glass behind the round hole in the
window shutter, he let down the bag to the Gypsey. She promised to be punctual,
and having filled the bag with Fisher's twelve buns, they were drawn up in
triumph, and every body anticipated the pleasure with which they should see the
same bag drawn up at dinnertime. The buns were a little squeezed in being
drawn through the hole in the window shutter; but Archer immediately sawed out
a piece of the shutter, and broke the corresponding panes in each of the other
windows, to prevent suspicion, and to make it appear that they had all been
broken to admit air.

What a pity that so much ingenuity should have been employed to no purpose. It
may have surprised the intelligent reader, that the Gypsey was so punctual to
her promise to Fisher; but we must recollect, that her apparent integrity was
only cunning; she was punctual that she might be employed again -- that she
might be entrusted with the contribution which, she foresaw, must be raised
amongst the famishing garrison. No sooner had she received the money than her
end was gained.

Dinnertime came -- it struck three, four, five, six. They listened with
hungry ears, but no signal was heard. The morning had been very long, and
Archer had in vain tried to dissuade them from devouring the remainder of the
provisions before they were sure of a fresh supply. And now, those who had been
the most confident were the most impatient of their disappointment.

Archer, in the division of the food, had attempted, by the most scrupulous
exactness, to content the public, and he was both astonished and provoked to
perceive that his impartiality was impeached. So differently do people judge in
different situations! -- He was the first person to accuse his master of
injustice, and the least capable of bearing such an imputation upon himself
from others. He now experienced some of the joys of power, and the delight of
managing unreasonable numbers.

"Have not I done every thing I could to please ye? -- Have not I spent my
money to buy ye food? -- Have not I divided the last morsel with ye? -- I have
not tasted one mouthful today! -- Did not I set to work for ye at sunrise? Did
not I lie awake all night for ye? -- Have not I had all the labor, all the
anxiety? -- Look round and see my contrivances, my work, my generosity! -- And
after all, you think me a tyrant, because I want you to have common sense. --
Is not this bun which I hold in my hand my own? -- Did not I earn it by my own
ingenuity from that selfish dunce (pointing to Fisher) who could never have
gotten one of his twelve buns, if I had not shown him how; eleven of them he
has eaten since morning for his own share, without offering any mortal a
morsel; but I scorn to eat even what is justly my own, when I see so many
hungry creatures longing for it. I was not going to touch this last morsel
myself; I only begged you to keep it till supper time, when perhaps you will want
it more, and Townsend, who cannot bear the slightest thing that crosses his own
whims, and who thinks there is nothing in this world to be minded but his own
diversion, calls me a tyrant. -- You all of you promised to obey me -- the
first thing I ask you to do for your own good, and when, if you had common
sense, you must know I can want nothing but your good, you rebel against me. --
Traitors! -- Fools! -- Ungrateful fools!"

Archer walked up and down unable to command his emotion, whilst, for the
moment, the discontented multitude was silenced.

"Here," said he, striking his hand upon the little boy's shoulder, "Here Is the
only one amongst ye, who has not uttered one word of reproach or complaint, and
he has had but one bit of bread -- a bit that I gave him myself this day. --
Here" said he, snatching the bun, which nobody had dared to touch -- "Take it
-- it is mine -- I give it to you, though you are a Greybeard -- you deserve it
-- eat it, and be an Archer. -- You shall be my captain -- will you?" said he,
listing him up in his arms above the rest.

"I like you now," said the little boy courageously; "but I love De Gray
better; he has always been my friend, and he advised me never to call myself
any of those names, Archer or Gray beard, so I will not -- though I am shut in
here, I have nothing to do with it -- I love Dr. Middleton; he was never unjust
to me; and, I dare say that he has very good reasons, as De Gray said, for
forbidding us to go into that house -- besides, it is his own.

Instead of admiring the good sense and steadiness of this little lad, Archer
suffered Townsend to snatch the untasted bun out of his hands. He flung it at
the hole in the window, but it fell back. The Archers scrambled for it, and
Fisher eat it.

Archer saw this, and was sensible that he had not done handsomely in suffering
it. A few moments ago he had admired his own generosity, and though he had felt
the injustice of others, he had not accused himself of any. He turned away from
the little boy, and sitting down at one end of the table hid his face in his
hands. He continued immovable in this posture for some time.

"Lord!" said Townsend, "it was an excellent joke!"

"Pooh!" said Fisher, "what a fool, to think so much about a bun!"

"Never mind, Mr. Archer, if you are thinking about me," said the little boy,
trying gently to pull his hands from his face.

Archer stooped down, and lifted him up upon the table; at which sight the
enraged partisans set up a general hiss -- "He has forsaken us! -- He deserts
his party! -- He wants to be a Greybeard! -- After he has got us all into this
scrape he will leave us!"

"I am not going to leave you," cried Archer -- "No one shall ever accuse me of
deserting my party. I Will stick by the Archers, right or wrong, I tell you, to
the last moment. But this little fellow -- Take it as you please, mutiny if you
will, and throw me out of the window -- Call me traitor! coward! Greybeard! --
This little fellow is worth you all put together, and I Will stand by him against
whoever dases to lay a finger upon him -- And the next morsel of food that I
see shall be his -- Touch him who dares!"

The commanding air with which Archer spoke and looked; and the belief, that
the little boy deserved his protection, silenced the crowd. But the storm was
only hushed.

No sound of merriment was now to be heard, no battledore and shuttlecock -- no
ball -- no marbles. Some sat in a corner, whispering their wishes that Archer
would unbar the doors and give up. Others stretching their arms, and gaping as
they sauntered up and down the room, wished for air, or food or water. Fisher
and his nine, who had such firm dependence upon the Gypsey, now gave themselves
up to utter despair. It was eight o'clock, growing darker and darker every
minute, and no candles, no light could they have. The prospect of another long
dark night made them still more discontented. Townsend at the head of the
yawners, and Fisher at the head of the hungry malcontents, gathered round
Archer and the few yet unconquered spirits, demanding "how long he meant to
keep them in this dark dungeon? and whether he expected, that they should
starve themselves to death for his sake?"

The idea of giving up was more intolerable to Archer than all the rest; he
saw, that the majority, his own convincing argument, was against him. He was
therefore obliged to condescend to the arts of persuasion. He flattered some
with hopes of food from the town-boys. Some he reminded of their promises.
Others he praised for former prowess; and others he shamed by the repetition of
their high vaunts in the beginning of the business.

It was at length resolved that at all events they would hold out. With this
determination they stretched themselves again to sleep, for the second night,
in weak and weary obstinacy.

Archer slept longer and more soundly than usual the next morning, and when he
awoke -- he found his hands tied behind him. Three or four boys had just got
hold of his feet, which they pressed down, whilst the trembling hands of Fisher
were fastening the cord round them. With all the force which rage could
inspire, Archer struggled and roared to "his Archers!" -- his friends -- his
party! -- for help against the traitors.

But all kept aloof. Townsend in particular stood laughing, and looking on --
"I beg your pardon, Archer, but really you look so droll! -- All alive and
kicking! -- Don't be angry -- I Am so weak, I cannot help laughing to day."

The packthread cracked -- "His hands are free! -- He Is loose!" cried the least
of the boys, and ran away, whilst Archer leaped up, and seizing hold of Fisher
with a powerful grasp, sternly demanded "what he meant by this?"

"Ask my party" -- said Fisher terrified -- "they set me on -- Ask my party."

"Your party!" cried Archer, with a look of ineffable contempt -- "You reptile!
-- your party! -- Can such a thing as you have a party?"

To be sure," said Fisher, settling his collar, which Archer in his surprise
had let go -- "To be sure -- Why not? -- Any man who chooses it may have a party
as well as yourself, I suppose -- I have my nine Fishermen" --

At these words, spoken with much sullen importance, Archer, in spite of his
vexation, could not help laughing -- "Fishermen!" cried he, "Fishermen!" --
"And why not Fishermen as well as Archers!" cried they -- "One party is just as
good as another; it is only a question, which can get the upper hand -- and we
had your hands tied just now."

"That Is right, Townsend," said Archer, "laugh on, my boy! -- Friend or foe,
it is all the same to you. I know how to value your friendship now. You are a
mighty good fellow when the sun shines; but let a storm come, and how you slink
away!"

At this instant Archer felt the difference between a good companion, and a
good friend; a difference which some people do not discover till late in life.

"Have I no friend? -- no real friend amongst ye all? And could ye stand by and
see my hands tied behind me like a thief's. What signifies such a party? -- All
mute?"

"We want something to eat," answered the Fishermen -- "What signifies such a
party indeed? -- and such a Manager, who can do nothing for one?"

"And have I done nothing?"

"Don't let us hear any more prosing," said Fisher -- "We are too many for you.
I Have advised my party, if they have a mind not to be starved, to give you up for
the ringleader as you were; and Dr. Middleton will let us all off, I dare say."

So depending upon the sullen silence of the assembly, he again approached
Archer with a cord. A cry of "No! -- no! -- no! -- Don't tie him" -- was seebly
raised.

Archer stood still -- But the moment Fisher touched him he knocked him down to
the ground, and turning to the rest with eyes sparkling with indignation --
"Archers!" cried he.

A voice at this instant was heard at the door -- It was De Grey's voice -- "I
have got a large basket of provisions for your breakfast"

A general shout of joy was sent forth by the voracious public -- "Breakfast!
-- Provisions! -- a large basket -- De Gray lor ever! -- Huzza!"

De Gray promised upon his honor, that if they would unbar the door nobody
should come in with him, and no advantage should be taken of them. This promise
was enough even for Archer.

"I will let him in," said he, "myself, for I Am sure he will never break his
word."

He pulled away the bar -- the door opened -- and having bargained for the
liberty of Melsom, the little boy who had been shut in by mistake, De Gray
pushed in his basket of provisions, and locked and barred the door instantly.

Joy and gratitude sparkled in every face, when he unpacked his basket, and
spread the table with a plentiful breakfast. A hundred questions were asked him
at once -- "Eat first," said he, "and we will talk afterward." This business
was quickly dispatched by people, who had not tasted food for several hours.
Their curiosity increased as their hunger diminished. -- "Who sent us
breakfast? -- Does Dr. Middleton know?" -- were questions reiterated from every
mouth.

"He does know," answered De Gray, "and the first thing I have to tell you is,
that I am your fellow prisoner. I am to stay here till you give up. This was
the only condition on which Dr. Middleton would allow me to bring you ^ood, and
he will allow no more."

Every one looked at the empty basket. But Archer, in whom half-vanquished
party-spirit revived with the strength he had got from his breakfast, broke
into exclamations in praise of De Grey's magnanimity, as he now imagined that
De Gray was become one of themselves.

"And you will join us, will you? -- that is a noble fellow!"

"No," answered De Gray calmly, "but I hope to persuade, or rather to convince
you that you ought to join me."

"You would have found it no hard task to have persuaded or convinced us,
whichever you pleased," said Townsend, "if you had appealed to Archers fasting,
but Archers feasting are quite other animals. Even Caesar himself after
breakfast is quite another thing!" added he, pointing to Archer.

"You may speak for yourself, Mr. Townsend," replied the insulted hero, "but
not for me, or for Archers in general if you please. We unbarred the door upon
the faith of De Grey's promise -- that was not giving up. And it would have
been just as difficult, I promise you, to persuade or convince me either, that
I should give up against my honor before breakfast as after."

This spirited speech was applauded by many, who had now forgotten the feelings
of famine. Not so Fisher, whose memory was upon this occasion very distinct.

"What nonsense" -- and the orator paused for a synonymous expression, but none
was at hand. "What nonsense and -- nonsense is here! -- Why, don't you remember
that dinnertime, and supper-time, and breakfast-time will come again? -- So
what signifies mouthing about persuading and convincing. -- We will not go
through again what we did yesterday! -- Honor me no honor, I don't understand
it. -- I Would rather be flogged at once, as I have been many's the good time for a
less thing -- I say, we'd better all be flogged at once, which must be the end
of it sooner or later, than wait here to be without dinner, breakfast, and
supper, all only because Mr. Archer will not give up because of his honor, and
nonsense!'

Many prud^nt faces amongst the Fishermen seemed to deliberate at the close of
this oration, in which the arguments were brought to "home to each man's
business and bosom."

"But," said De Gray, "when we yield, I hope it will not be merely to get our
dinner, gentlemen. -- When we yield, Archer -- "

"Don't address yourself to me," interrupted Archer, struggling with his pride,
"you have no farther occasion to try to win me -- I have no power, no party,
you see! -- and now I find that I have no friends, I don't care what becomes of
myself. -- I suppose I Am to be given up as ringleader. -- Here Is this Fisher,
and a party of his Fishermen, were going to tie me hand and foot, if I had not
knocked him down, just as you came to the door, De Gray; and now perhaps you
will join Fisher's party against me."

De Gray was going to assure him, that he had no intention of joining any
party, when a sudden change appeared in Archer's countenance.

"Silence!" cried Archer, in an imperious tone, and there was silence. Some one
was heard to whistle the beginning of a tune, that was perfectly new to every
body present, except to Archer, who immediately whistled the conclusion.

"There!" cried he, looking at De Gray, with triumph -- "That Is a method of
holding secret correspondence, whilst a prisoner, which I learned from "Richard
Coeur de Lion." I know how to make use of every thing. -- Holla! Friend! are
you there at last?" cried he, going to the ventilator.

"Yes, but we are barred out here."

"Round to the window then, and fill our bag; we'll let it down, my lad, in a
trice, bar me out who can!"

Archer let down the bag with all the expedition of joy, and it was filled with
a^l the expedition of fear. -- "(...) ull away! -- make h^ste, for Heaven's
sake!" said the voice from without, the gardener will come from dinner else,
and we shall be caught. He mounted g^^rd all yesterday at the ventilator; and,
though I watched, and watched, till it was darker than pitch, I could not get
near you. -- I don't know what has taken him out of the way now -- make haste,
pull away!"

The heavy bag was soon pulied up -- "Have you any more?" said Archer.

"Yes, plenty -- let down quick! I'v^ got the Taylor's bag full, which is three
times ^s large as yours, and I Have changed clothes with the taylor's boy, so
nobody took notice of me as I came down the street."

"There Is my own cousin!" exclaimed Archer -- "there is a noble fellow! --
there is my own cousin, I acknowledge. -- Fill the bag then."

Several times the bag descended and ascended; and at every unlading of the
crane, fresh acclamations were heard. -- "I have no more!" at length, the boy
with the taylor's bag cried.

"Off with you then; we have enough, and thank you."

A delightful review was now made of their treasure; busy hands arranged and
sorted the heterogeneous mass. Archer, in the height of his glory, looked on,
the acknowledged master of the whole. Townsend, who, in prosperity as in
adversity, saw and enjoyed the comic foibles of his friends, pushed De Gray,
who was looking on with a more good-natured and more thoughtful air. --
"Friend," said he, "you look like a great philosopher, and Archer like a great
hero."

"And you, Townsend," said Archer, "may look like a wit, if you will; but you
will never be a hero."

"No, no," replied Townsend, "wits are never heroes, because they are wits --
you are out of your wits, and therefore may set up for a hero."

"Laugh, and welcome. -- I Am not a tyrant -- I don't want to restrain any
body's wit; but I cannot say I admire puns."

"Nor I neither," said the time-serving Fisher, sidling up to the Manager, and
picking the ice off a piece of plumb-cake, "nor I neither -- I hate puns. I can
never understand Townsend's puns; besides, any body can make puns; and one
does not want wit either at all times; for instance, when one is going to settle
about dinner, or business of consequence. -- Bless us all, Archer!" continued
he, with sudden familiarity, " What a sight of good things are here! -- I Am
sure we are much obliged to you and your cousin -- I never thought he would have
come. -- Why, now we can hold out as long as you please. -- Let us see," said
he, dividing the provisions upon the table, "we can hold out today, and all
tomorrow, and part of next day, may be. -- Why, now, we may defy the doctor
and the Greybeards -- and the doctor will surely give up to us, for, you see,
he knows nothing of all this, and he will think we are starving all this while;
and he would be afraid, you see, to let us starve quite, in reality, for three
whole days, because of what would be said in the town. My aunt Barbara, for
one, would be at him, long before that time was out; and besides, you know, in
that there case, he would be hanged for murder, which is quite another thing, in
law, from a Barring out, you know."

Archer had not given to this harangue all the attention which it deserved; for
his eye was fixed upon De Gray. -- "What is De Gray thinking of?" he asked
impatiently.

"I am thinking," said De Gray, "that Dr. Middleton must believe that I have
betrayed his confidence in me. The gardener was ordered away from his
watch-post for one half-hour when I was admitted. This halfhour the gardener
has made nearly an hour. I never would have come amongst you if I had foreseen
all this. Dr. Middleton trusted me, and now he will repent of his confidence in
me."

"De Gray!" cried Archer, with energy, "he shall not repent of his confidence
in you; nor shall you repent of coming amongst us; you shall find that we have
some honor as well as yourself; and I will take care of your honor as if it
were my own!

"Hey-day!" interrupted Townsend, "are heroes allowed to change sides, pray?
And does the chief of the Archers stand talking sentiment to the chief of the
Greybeards? -- In the middle of his own party too!"

"Party!" repeated Archer, disdainfully, "I have done with parties! -- I see
what parties are have done with parties! -- I see what parties are made of! --
I have felt the want of a friend, and I am determined to make one if I can."

"That you may do," said De Gray, stretching out his hand.

"Unbar the doors! -- Unbar the windows! -- Away with all these things! -- I
give up for De Grey's sake; he shall not lose his credit on my account."

"No," said De Gray, "you shall not give up for my sake."

"Well then, I Will give up to do what is honorable," said Archer.

"Why not to do what is reasonable?" said De Gray.

" Reasonable! -- Oh, the first thing that a man of spirit should think of is,
what is honorable."

"But how will he find out what is honorable, unless he can reason?"

"Oh," said Archer, "his own feelings always tell him what is honorable."

"Have not your feelings changed within these few hours?"

"Yes, with circumstances; but right or wrong, as long as I think it honorable
to do so and so, I Am satisfied."

"But you cannot think any thing honorable, or the contrary, without
reasoning; and as to what you call feeling, it is only a quick sort of
reasoning."

"The quicker the better," said Archer.

"Perhaps not," said De Gray, "we are apt to reason best, when we are not in
quite so great a burry."

"But," said Archer, "we have not always time enought to reason at first."

"You must, however, acknowledge," repli^d De Gray smiling, "that no man but a
fool thinks it honorable to be in the wrong at last. Is it not therefore best
to begin by reasoning to find out the right at first?"

"To be sure."

"And did you reason with yourself at first? And did you find out that it was
right to bar Dr. Middleton out of his own school-room, because he desired you
not to go into one of his own houses?"

"No; but I should never have thought of heading a Barring out, if he had not
shown partiality; and if you had flown into a passion with me openly, at once,
for pulling down your scenery, which would have been quite natural, and not
have gone slily and forbid us the house, out of revenge, there would have been
none of this work."

"Why," said De Gray, "should you suspect me of such a mean action, when you
have never seen or known me do any thing mean, and when in this instance you
have no proofs."

"Will you give me your word and honor now, De Gray, before every body here,
that you did not do what I suspected?"

"I do assure you, upon my honor, I never, directly or indirectly, spoke to
Dr. Middleton about the playhouse."

"Then," said Archer, "I Am as glad as if I had found a thousand pounds! -- Now
you are my friend indeed."

"And Dr. Middleton -- why should you suspect him without reason, any more than
me?"

"As to that," said Archer, "he is your friend, and you are right to defend
him; and I will not say another word against him -- will that satisfy you?"

"Not quite."

"Not quite! -- Then, indeed, you are unreasonable!"

"No; for I don't wish you to yield out of friendship to me, any more than to
honor. -- If you yield to reason, you will be governed by reason another time."

"Well; but then don't triumph over me, because you have the best side of the
argument."

"Not I! -- How can I?" said De Gray; "for now you are on the best side as well
as myself, are not you? So we may triumph together."

"You are a good friend!" said Archer, and with great eagerness be pulled down
the fortifications, whilst every hand assisted. The room was restored to order
in a few minutes; the shutters were thrown open, the cheerful light let in. The
windows were thrown up, and the first feeling of the fresh air was delightful.
The green play-ground appeared before them, and the hopes of exercise and
liberty brightened the countenances of these voluntary prisoners.

But alas! they were not yet at liberty! The idea of Dr. Middleton, and the
dread of his vengeance, smote their hearts! When the rebels had sent an
ambassador with their surrender, they stood in pale and silent suspense,
waiting for their doom. -- "Ah!" said Fisher, looking up at the broken panes in
the windows, "the doctor will think the most of that -- he will never forgive us
for that."

"Hush! here he comes!" -- His steady step was heard approaching nearer and
nearer! -- Archer threw open the door, and Dr. Middleton entered. -- Fisher
instantly fell on his knees.

"It is no delight to me to see people on their knees; stand up, Mr. Fisher. --
I hope you are all conscious that you have done wrong?"

"Sir," said Archer, "they are conscious that they have done wrong, and so am
I. I am the ringleader -- punish me as you think proper -- I submit. Your
punishments -- your vengeance ought to fall on me alone!"

"Sir," said Dr. Middleton calmly, "I perceive, that whatever else you may have
learned in the course of your education, you have not been taught the meaning
of the word Punishment. Punishment and vengeance do not, with us, mean the same
thing. Punishment is pain given, with the reasonable hope of preventing those
on whom it is inflicted from doing, in future, what will hurt themselves or
others. Ve^g^ance never looks to the future; but is the ex^^^^ion of anger for
an injury that is past. I ^e^i^n^ anger -- you have done me no injury."

Here many of the little boys looked timidly up to the windows.

"Yes; I s^e that you have broken my windows: that is a small evil."

"Oh Sir! How good! How merciful!" exclaimed those who had been most
panic-s^ruck -- "He forgives us!"

"Stay," resumed Dr. Middleton, "I cannot forgive you -- I shall never reveng^,
but it is my duty to punish. -- You have r^b^ned against the just authority,
w^ien is necessary to con^^uct and govern you, whilst you have not sufficient
reason to govern and conduct yourselves. -- Without obedience to your master,
as children, you cannot be educate^. -- (...) ^^^out obedience to the laws,"
added he, turning to Archer, "as men, you cannot be suffered in society. --
You, Sir, think yourself a man, I observe, and you think it the part of a man
not to submit to the will of another. I have no pleasure in making others,
whether men or children, submit to my will; but my reason and experience are
superior to yours -- your parents at least think so, or they would not have
entrusted me with the care of your education. As long as they do entrust you to
my care, and as long as I have any hop^s or ma^ing you wiser and better by
punishment, I shall steadily inflict it, whenever I judge it to be^n cessary,
and I judge it to be necessary now. This is a long sermon, Mr. Archer, not
preached to show my own eloquence, but to convince your understanding. -- Now,
as to your punishment! -- "

"Name it, Sir," said Archer, "whatever it is* I will cheerfully submit to it."

"Name it yourselt," said Dr. Middleton, "and show me that you now understand
the nature of punishment."

Archer, proud to be tre^ted like a reasonable creature, and sorry that he had
behaved like a foolish schoolboy, was silent for some time, but at length
replied, "That he would rather ^^^ot name his own punishment." He repeated,
however, that he "trusted he should bear it well, whatever it might be."

"I shall then," said Dr. Middleton, "deprive you, for two months, of pocket
money, as you have had too much, and have made a bad use of it."

"Sir," said Archer, "I brought five guineas with me to school -- this guinea
is all that I have left."

Dr. Middleton received the guinea which Archer offered him, with a look of
approbation; and told him that it should be applied to the repairs of the
school-room. The rest of the boys waited in silence for the doctor's sentence
against them; but not with those looks of abject fear, with which boys usually
expect the sentence of a schoolmaster.

"You shall return from the play-ground, all of you," said Dr. Middieton, "one
quarter of an hour sooner, for two months to come, than the rest of your
companions. A bell shall ring at the appointed time. I give you an opportunity
of recovering my confidence by your punctuality."

"Oh, Sir, we will come the instant, the very instant the bell rings -- you
shall have confidence in us," cried they eagerly.

"I deserve your confidence, I hope," said Dr. Middleton, "for it is my first
wish to make you all happy. -- You do not know the pain that it has cost me to
deprive you of food for so many hours."

Here the boys, with one accord, ran to the place where they had deposited
their last supplies. -- Archer delivered them up to the doctor, proud to show,
that they were not reduced to obedience merely by necessity.

"The reason," resumed Dr. Middleton, ^^ving now returned to the usual
benignity of his manner, -- "The reason why I desired, that ^^ne of you should
go to that building," (pointing out of the window), was this: I had been
informed, that a gang of Gypsies had slept there the night before I spoke to
you, one of whom was dangerously ill of a putrid sever. I did not choose to
mention my reason to you at that time, for fear of alarming you or your
friends. I have had the place cleaned, and you may return to it when you
please. The Gypsies were yesterday removed from the town."

"De Gray you were in the right," whispered Archer, "and it was I that was
unjust."

"The old woman," continued the doctor, "whom you employed to buy food, has
escaped the fever, but she has not escaped a gaol, whither she was sent
yesterday, for having defrauded you of your money."

"Mr. Fisher," said Dr. Middleton, as to you, I shall not punish you! -- I have
no hope of making you either wiser or better. -- Do you know this paper?"

The paper appeared to be a bill for candles and a tinder-box.

"I desired him to buy those things, Sir," said Archer, coloring.

"And did you desire him not to pay for them?"

"No," said Archer, "he had half a crown on purpose to pay for them."

"I know he had; but he chose to apply it to his own private use, and gave it
to the Gypsey to buy twelve buns for his own eating. To obtain credit for the
tinder-box and candles, he made use of this name," said he, turning to the
other ^^de of the bill, and pointing to De Grey's name, which was written at
the end of a copy of one of De Grey's exercises.

"I assure you, Sir," cried Archer --

"You need not assure me, Sir," said Dr. Middleton, "I cannot suspect a boy of
your temper of having any part in so base an action. -- When the people in the
shop refused to let Mr. Fisher have the things without paying for them, he made
use of De Grey's name, who was known there. Suspecting some mischief, however,
from the purchase of the tinder-box, the shopkeeper informed me of the
circumstance. Nothing in this whole business gave me half so much pain as I
felt for a moment, when I suspected that De Gray was concerned in it."

A loud cry, in which Archer's voice was heard most distinctly, declared De
Grey's innocence. Dr. Middleton looked round at their eager, honest faces, with
benevolent approbation.

"Archer," said he, taking him by the hand, "I am heartily glad to see that you
have got the better of your party-spirit -- I wish you may keep such a friend
as you have now beside you. -- One such friend is worth two such parties."

"As for you, Mr. Fisher -- depart -- you must never return hither again."

"In vain he solicited Archer and De Gray to intercede for him. Every body
turned away with contempt, and he speaked out, whimpering in a doleful voice --
"What shall I say to my aunt Barbara?"

END OF PART THE FIRST.

