THE YOUNGER BROTHER.

THE YOUNGER BROTHER: A NOVEL, IN THREE VOLUMES,

WRITTEN BY Mr. DIBDIN.

THUS RUNS THE WORLD AWAY. Shakespeare. VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD AT HIS WAREHOUSE, NO. 411, STRAND,
OPPOSITE THE ADELPHI.

THE YOUNGER BROTHER
BOOK III.
BEING AT LEAST A MATCH FOR THOSE WHICH ARE GONE BEFORE.
CHAPTER I.
WHICH WILL SHOW THAT THE SNAKE WAS SCOTCHED -- NOT KILLED.

As I intimated at the end of the first volume, that the pranks of the mad
musician, extraneous as at first sight they must appear, had relation, and very
strongly too, to the main and most material part of my design, so I shall now
proceed to show in what way.

The reader will allow me that, according to the letter of my description,
which really did not outgo the fact, the bustle at the inn must, to strangers,
and particularly ladies, have been alarming to a great degree; and when it is
considered that Lady Hazard was seven months gone with child, it will not
appear very extraordinary that, terrified in so unexpected and particular a
manner, it should have such an effect upon her tender and delicate frame, as to
throw her into labor, which it actually did.

Mr. Standfast, upon this news, undertook to produce a gentleman of the faculty
from London, whither he went as fast as a chaise and four horses could convey
him, accompanied by Charles, whose anxiety for his mother was strongly
manifested in his heartening and encouraging the postillions. My Lord however
was not idle. There were several towns near at hand, and each of them boasted
its man-midwife; so fashionable was it even then, to adopt a custom which the
landlord swore -- as he stirred the kitchen fire to prepare for the necessary
potations upon this occasion -- was a disgrace to the English nation; a custom
to which our ancestors, who had nerves that, like their bows, twanged with
strength, were utter strangers. He said it was a custom originating from sloth
and effiminacy; that it was one of those blessed improvements toward the
annihilation of manliness and becoming decency that our natural enemies did us
the favor to introduce every day; that it was unmanly and scandalous as well
as ignorant and ridiculous, for that the most experienced practitioner could
not possibly, from the nature of the circumstance, arrive to any thing
comparable to the knowledge of a woman upon such an occasion, to whom every
possible symptom must be practically known, and who -- which with our landlord
was nine-tenths of his argument -- could alone conduct such a particular
business with proper decorum.

In this temper he sent for a good old lady, who, he said, had been obstetric
gentlewoman usher to half the town, and never had met with an accident, unless
from such a combination of natural causes as would have baffled the utmost
perfection of art.

The old lady, who resided in the neighborhood, arrived first, and Lord
Hazard, extremely anxious to procure assistance, made no scruple of introducing
her to his wife.

'Ay, ay,' cried the landlord, as he poured her out a glass of usquebaugh,
'this is as it should be; here, my lord, is an operator, and please you, worth
a thousand of your men-midwives; fellows that I believe would rather have the
reputation of getting children than of bringing them into the world. I once
asked a chap of this stamp what made all the children he produced so cursed
rickety? -- and he answered me, with great archness, that a man had a right to
mar what he made.'

Notwithstanding the landlord's rhetoric, he was obliged to pull in his horns
when he understood that Lady Hazard's case was of so particular a kind that the
good old gentlewoman, his friend, could not venture to proceed in it upon her
single judgment. Being asked what he said to this, he replied he was still
right: -- it happened to be one of those difficult cases which required
assistance; but yet the gentleman, whoever he was, would reap great benefit
from the old woman, who would be able to explain to him all he had to do, and
from a conviction, being a woman, that he could not have the smallest
conception of.

Before morning, arrived three gentlemen, who had been sent for from different
towns, and presently afterward Standfast, Charles, and an eminent man-midwife
from London, who, upon all such occasions, attended her ladyship. A number of
corks were heard to report their liberty, and hot wine, possets, and other
comfortable drinks smoked all over the house; yet, though the landlord was
greatly pleased at what went forward, when he cast his eyes upon the medical
tribe, he could not help remarking that he did not believe there was half so
much fuss when king ARTHUR was born.

To the last gentleman who arrived, the rest of course gave way. He immediately
visited Lady Hazard, and shortly afterward found it necessary to have a
private conversation with his lordship: -- nor will the reader be greatly
astonished, though very much shocked, to hear that, in the course of this
conference, it came out that the peculiarity of Lady Hazard's case originated
with Miss Snaffle!

Lord Hazard's feeling on this occasion was not simply wretchedness, it was
horror. Standfast was called in, that the whole might be explained to him; in
doing which, my lord used such forcible language, so execrated himself, and so
extolled the high, the transcendent friendship of the tutor, that the surgeon,
who was both a sensible man and a valuable member of society, declared he was
charmed at the circumstance, and should be very happy to cultivate Mr.
Standfast's friendship.

The surgeon being now particularly informed of the case, declared that a very
disagreeable operation must be performed; but he hoped the life of Lady Hazard
was not in danger. He said he could easily give the matter a turn to the other
physical gentlemen, who, he could plainly see, were ignorant pretenders to a
profession in which they had neither right nor ability to practice; and this,
he said, he conceived materially necessary for the sake of Lady Hazard's peace
of mind, which it would be impossible to preserve if the matter were known to
any but himself: -- it being a practice with these gentry, at which indeed they
are very expert, to injure the domestic, as well as the corporeal, constitution.

Lord Hazard, finding that every thing might be managed without confiding to
his lady the real cause of her present danger, declared he would wait the event
with patience and resignation, which turned out as the surgeon had predicted,
the child was destroyed, but the lady survived the operation. As to the old
woman, she was sent home as soon as possible, for the surgeon agreed so far
with the landlord, that he feared much more a discovery through her, than
through his brother professors.

It was nearly six weeks before Lady Hazard could be with safety removed;
during which time, her kind friend Lady Roebuck scarcely stirred from her. Nor
was the baronet less attentive to my lord. He had set his heart upon
stimulating that nobleman to an emulation of his own conduct, when they should
arrive in Warwickshire, and doubted not, as he knew Lady Hazard longed for the
accomplishment of so desirable an end, when he should explain to his friend how
practicable such a task was, and how sure and immense the reward, he would
readily join him in so meritorious an exercise of that liberality which Lord
Hazard, whatever were his foibles, certainly possessed.

Pleased with these ideas, the time rolled insensibly on; for as soon as Lady
Hazard could be removed, she was, for the present, conveyed to a house in the
neighborhood, which her lord had hired for that purpose; and as the company
Sir Sidney expected for the summer called, of necessity, at the John of Gaunt's
Head, in a few days the poet, painter, and musician made their appearance, as
well as Sir Sidney's attorney, and a clergyman, all of whom, by invitation,
were to pass the summer at Roebuck hall.

The assembly having now so largely increased, parties of pleasure were
planned; and as Lady Hazard's health seemed every day to be more confirmed, the
general tranquillity was restored.

As to my lord, his resolution was made, and certainly irrevocably. Therefore,
as no worse consequences had happened from his former conduct, he rejoiced at
the present moment in the same degree as a patient who, by a trifling and
immaterial mutilation, is restored to health and vigor from the morbid effects
of a gangrene.

The great difficulty with Sir Sidney and Lady Roebuck was how to proceed as to
Standfast. It was impossible to begin their attack on Lady Hazard, as it would
ruffle her mind in her present weak condition; and as to my lord, he was so
wrapped up in his amiable friend, that it would be impracticable, as well as
highly absurd, to attempt at undeceiving him.

In this state were matters situated when the clergyman lately mentioned
arrived at the inn. This gentleman, whose name was Friend, had been known to
Sir Sidney for many years, and was not the less esteemed by him for having
incurred the displeasure of a bishop, because he would not vote against his
conscience. He was a very learned, and, what is a great deal better, a very
sensible man; for though he had little of that understanding by which men rise
in the world, and which, according to nine-tenths of mankind, is the only
mental coin that ought to pass current, yet he had a number of old fashioned
virtues, of no great use but to the owner; but to him valuable indeed: -- such
as piety, an unsullied conscience, a benevolent heart, with the addition of a
clear judgment, an inventive genius, and a critical and accurate knowledge of
ancient and modern literature.

As Sir Sidney's was a kind of house of call to good characters out of employ,
no wonder this gentleman was sometimes with him. His visit at present, however,
was on another account; for the baronet, to tell the reader the truth, was not
without hopes of seeing him rector of Little Hockley. He had been some time
nominated curate; and, at the death of the present incumbent, the living would
be in the gift of Lord Hazard. That this circumstance, which has not been
mentioned before, may not appear extraordinary, I shall now explain how it came
about.

When Sir Sidney wrote to Lord Hazard, as we have seen, relative to Little
Hockley, he little dreamt that his application would have produced all the
cordiality that now subsisted between them. -- On the contrary, there was more
of delicacy than hopes of success in consulting him at all.

To Mr. Standfast, however, he did not conceive he owed any such delicacy; and
therefore, as the right of nominating a curate reverted to the rector, at the
death of Major Malplaquet, disliking the bargain and sale manner in which it
had been transacted before, he applied, in the strongest possible way, to the
good pastor, for the appointment of Mr. Friend to that situation: namely, by
making an offer to commute with him for the entire profits of the living, at a
very handsome price, and to pay the curate's salary out of his own pocket.

The rector, who could calculate much better than he could preach, entered into
the whole spirit of the argument, and Mr. Friend became to Sir Sidney, what Mr.
Standfast had been formerly to Major Malplaquet. This was the reason why Mr.
Figgins removed to his vicarage, who, officiating for some short time at Little
Hockley, while the negotiation was pending between Sir Sidney and the rector,
became known to the baronet and Mr. Friend, both of whom believed him to be a
very valuable young man, and Sir Sidney, in particular, assured him that if he
could in future be of any service to him, it would give him pleasure.

In a few days after the arrival of Mr. Friend, Standfast had so ingratiated
himself into his good opinion, that the worthy man was charmed with him. Indeed
Standfast saw plainly that this was a good medium of recommendation to Sir
Sidney, whose friendship, for some reason or other, he was strenuously desirous
to cultivate. Perhaps, as providence appeared to have rescued Lord Hazard from
his immediate gripe, he had some similar favor in contemplation for the
baronet.

Certain it is that the damning proof which Sir Sidney and his lady imagined
they had against Mr. Standfast, which was only presumptive, began to sink
before those positive proofs which seemed every day to announce his reformation
from a number of crimes which he made no scruple to say he had formerly
committed; and this, added to the transport he apparently felt at the
restoration of that happiness which now began to gild the moments of Lord and
Lady Hazard, gave this fortunate gentleman such a favorable place in the
hearts of all about him, that really an accusation to his prejudice, though
ever so plausibly urged, would probably have gained but little faith, unless
backed by very weighty, and indeed undeniable proof against him.

These Sir Sidney really had not. The utmost he could allege was that
dissipation and those irregularities which Standfast confessed and disclaimed,
except indeed a strong suspicion of his being concerned in all the business of
Miss Snaffle, which, if this recent behavior was not hypocrisy, amounted to
nothing, and which was corroborated only by an intercepted letter, and even
that -- the rest not proved -- would also fall to the ground.

The proof alluded to was the very letter which Standfast fancied had not been
sent, but, upon further enquiry he found himself mistaken; yet, as it had made
no alteration in Lady Hazard, he was convinced it had not been properly
delivered, and was afterward confirmed in that opinion, when he found it had
been given to Lady Roebuck's footman.

In fact, Lady Roebuck's servant, on that very fatal afternoon, delivered her a
letter at Lady Hazard's, where she happened to be waiting for Sir Sidney, who
promised to meet her there at tea time. Lady Hazard was luckily writing letters
in her own room, and her friend had just taken up a favorite author, from
which employ being interrupted by 'a letter for your ladyship,' she, without
further ceremony, opened it, and read these words: MADAM,
I cannot refrain from acquainting you that your husband has an intrigue with
an infamous woman, and you will be assured that I tell you truth, when my
intelligence is proved to you by his staying out the greatest part of this
night. Probably you may guess the quarter from whence you receive this, and as
revenge is completely in your power, why not obey its dictates in favor of one
who will not be ungrateful to your incomparable charms?




Sir Sidney, who came in while she was yet reading it, cried out, 'So, so, I
have caught you in the fact, have I? What tender epistle have you there?' 'Only
a discovery of your tricks, my love,' said she. 'Read that; but, before you see
a word, remember I tell you it originates with Mr. Standfast.'

As this conduct was no less handsome than usual in Lady Roebuck, her husband
was neither surprised at that nor at the contents of the letter. Indeed they
laughed so heartily at it, that their mirth served only to double their concern
when, upon looking at the direction, which neither of them had noticed before,
they saw it was addressed to Lady Hazard.

They were now indeed strongly confirmed it came through Mr. Standfast, and
after having insinuated away Lady Hazard's time till the lateness of the
evening convinced them there was too much truth in the letter, they retired,
and, when alone, formed that determination which we have seen so resolutely
made at the end of the first volume, and now almost abandoned at the very
beginning of the second.

The latter end of the letter Lady Roebuck thought could allude to no other
than Standfast; for though she had heard of the business of Dogbolt, yet she
could not avoid looking upon that to be overstrained, and that the tutor at the
bottom was the object who wanted to recommend himself; and indeed Lady Hazard,
who wished to disguise nothing from her friend, did not scruple to say there
were times when she had similar suspicions, though always, upon reflection, she
was convinced she did him wrong.

Mr. Standfast, being as conseious of all these matters as if he had known
their thoughts, combatted the effects of those resolutions they had taken in
the manner we have seen; and thus, though continually on the brink of a
discovry, he traversed the verge of the precipice on which he was placed as
securely, though not so harmlessly, as SHAKESPEARE's peasant upon Dover cliff;
for the peasant is described as gathering a purifier of the blood, while the
parson was searching for whatever could inflame and corrupt it.

CHAPTER II.
A KIND OF WHITE CROW -- THREE OTHER CURIOSITIES, AND A SAFE ARRIVAL IN
WARWICKSHIRE.

As we shall have something to do with all those characters which I have lately
introduced to the reader's notice, it may not be amiss if I mention a word or
two of each in this place.

The attorney, whose name was Balance, had long been a great favorite of Sir
Sidney; not because he had a remarkable number of enemies -- though that was
very often a sufficient reason for the baronet to espouse a man's interest --
but because he had great professional integrity and private worth. I shall in a
moment explain how this gentleman conjured up such a host of foes, by saying
that he mortally hated roguery, though a lawyer. Indeed it had been doubted, by
many of his brother professors, whether his odd notions and strange practice
did not so decidedly operate against that strongest of all laws, custom, to the
detriment of the general interest, that a point might be made to strike him off
the rolls. For, said they, very learnedly, 'as usage has, time out of mind,
regulated laws; as usage has established that it shall be lawful for attorneys
to appropriate to themselves not only the money, goods, and chattles, lands and
tenements, wives and children, consciences, peace of mind, nay even the liberty
and lives of their clients; and as this said lawyer Balance absolutely rejects
in toto, all such general power over his clients, shamefully contenting himself
with moderate and reasonable recompense from those in whose behalf he has
succeeded, and scandalously declining to prosecute and pursue to their ruin,
such as he plainly sees have been already plucked and pillaged, till they
totter under the weight of their accumulated misfortunes: -- quere, whether, by
trampling upon custom, which is paramount to law, and explaining justice and
equity to be the same thing, which, for the better promotion of cavils and
arguments, have been considered, time immemorial, to have distinct and
different meanings, and looked upon as things that ought to be for ever kept
separate and apart, the said lawyer Balance ought not to undergo a heavy
censure of the court for the first offense, to be suspended during pleasure for
the second, and if, upon returning to practice, he should be found infringing
this custom, this usage, this law, this justice, this equity, a third time,
then, and in that case, to be considered as incorrigible, and rendered
incapable to practice in his majesty's courts of justice!'

No one of these gentlemen, however, being patriot enough to rise up and rescue
the laws from the gripe of so bold an innovator, he went on with this illicit
practice to the great terror of the pettifogging tribe -- many of whom he had
caused to be struck off the rolls -- and to the admiration of all good men,
and, among the foremost, his particular friend Sir Sidney.

We come now to the artists. These were the same who had visited Roebuck hall
for the last three years; for though the baronet had formerly made a point of
having a new set every season, he at last gave up that plan, finding, upon
taking them indiscriminately, that he brought home with him little more than a
cargo of vanity, ignorance, and affectation. Having searched, therefore, with
great care, and met with three a little more to his mind, though they certainly
were strange kind of oddities, he stuck to them, and being now accustomed to
their singularities, and finding nothing in them that exceeded folly, they
really furnished him with a fund of amusement, independent of their
professional abilities.

The poet, Mr. Ego by name, was, at least in his own opinion, as much any thing
else as a writer. He knew every thing, and, what is very extraordinary, better
than any body.

The painter was a professed satirist; his talent lay in caricature; and he
blended the ideas which were conveyed by his pencil with his conversation.

The musician was a striking contrast to the painter; for he was as remarkably
civil, if not servile, as the other was severe.

I cannot do better than introduce the reader to them as they are sitting over
a bottle at the John of Gaunt.

'You are a devilish severe fellow, Mr. Musquito,' said the poet to the
painter. 'I?' said Musquito; 'not at all: -- only a sort of a HORACE upon
canvass, that is all: -- a bit of a teazer, or so: -- to be sure I can bite as
hard as JUVENAL: -- but why should one torture flies?' 'And why not?' cried the
poet. 'I would not give threepence for a satirist who could not make any body
miserable.' 'I'll try my hand upon him,' said the painter, speaking low to the
musician. Then turning to the poet, he went on. 'Well said Ego! Well said ipse
dixit! Well said I b' itself I! Well said proof positive! Well said
infallibility!! Upon my soul Ego you would have made an admirable pope. Sir, he
possesses every personal and mental qualification in the same proportion of
excellence compared to others -- ' 'as you do shameless effrontery,' retorted
the poet; 'so you see I excel you at your own trade; for I have said as severe
a thing as ever you did in your life, which has the advantage, unlike yours, of
being truth. I will appeal to Mr. Toogood?' 'To him!' said the painter; 'a
credulous, easy, foolish, good natured -- ' 'Ay, ay,' cried the musician,
'abuse my credulity as much as you please, but give me credit for my good
intentions at least.' 'I do, I do,' said Musquito: -- 'You intend very well, I
dare say, when you praise a man's wisdom, and so you do when you praise his
folly. In short, in you human nature has such an advocate, that there is
scarcely a vice or a virtue that you have not a commendation for!'

'Poor Musquito,' cried Toogood, 'now upon my soul thy shafts must be terribly
blunt when thou can find nothing better to aim them at than me. I own my
services are devoted to all who think proper to make use of them.' 'If they are
rich,' answered Musquito drily; 'for you know Toogood why should the poor be
flattered?' -- 'Plague take you,' said the musician, 'I was going to say that I
wish to be civil to all mankind, and if I have, in a few trifling instances,
been mistaken, blame nature, who thought fit to sow in the garden of life,
among a plentiful crop of valuable plants, a slight sprinkling of rascals and
scoundrels. In short, Mr. Musquito, I would not give up the luxury of thinking
well of mankind, to have Mexico for my real estate, Peru for my personal, and
the mines of Golconda for my menu plaisirs. What the devil would you have me
think, as you do, that every eye is divine into my heart, and every hand into
my pocket?' 'Neither would be worth while, Master Toogood' -- cried Musquito.
'Come, come,' said Ego, 'I will finish the dispute. This is the fact: you, Mr.
Musquito, are over suspicious; and you, Mr. Toogood, are over credulous. I am
the man for this world: I steer the middle course.'

This company, upon Lady Hazard's recovery, separated into two parties; one of
which set off for the seat of my lord, and the other for that of the baronet;
till at length, by the ringing of bells and the acclamations of all the
inhabitants, they were welcomed to Little Hockley and Castlewick.

Sir Sidney threw his eyes complacently around him, which sparkled with the
satisfaction of beholding so many sincere adherents; and he did not at that
moment a little plume himself upon the hope of seeing his friend in possession
of the same solid enjoyment.

The meeting between Sir Sidney's friends and Annette was tender beyond
expression. My lord declared he never saw so sweet a creature. Charles thought
her handsome, but babyish. His mind indeed ran upon riper charms, for he had so
little of the delicacy of love in his composition, that he conceived himself a
perfect Caesar, and having made so many first sight conquests, he was yet to
learn the pleasure of solicitation.

It is a shame to talk thus of a boy of eighteen, but really Mr. Standfast had
so well remembered the conversation that passed between him and Viney, previous
to his introduction to Lord Hazard, that the young gentleman had already
experienced the secresy of the very same surgeon whose cautious conduct we were
witnesses of in the last chapter. This gentleman, to say the truth, was a
perfect HIPPOCRATES. As well as the medical skill of that ancient, he possessed
his prudence; for he seemed to adhere to the famous oath of his predecessor, in
which he enjoined himself to make his patient's good his principal aim, and
that whatever he saw or heard in the course of his practice, or otherwise,
relative to the affairs of life, nobody should ever know, if it ought to remain
a secret.

The country and its amusements had infused such pleasure and satisfaction into
every member of this society, that nothing was seen but cheerfulness. -- They
mustered up a tolerable concert at Sir Sidney's, a thousand good humoured
sallies circulated in the way of impromptues and epigrams, and sketches of each
others singularities were handed about, to the no small diversion of all but
those immediately caricatured. Charles was pretty adroit in each way, and
having a greater license, his strokes were bolder, and, in every other respect,
at least a match for the rest. In short, there was no part of their time
unfilled by some pleasure to every person's taste; for it was a maxim with Sir
Sidney that all was fair in which there was no premeditated mischief. As for
the rest, Mr. Friend began to experience very agreeable effects from his
efforts at Little Hockley, especially as they were seconded by the exhortations
of Standfast, who they knew had been a great sinner, and who now assured them
that he was become a great penitent.

Thus, possessed of every pleasure a smiling country, profuse liberality,
joyful hearts, and ingenious heads could produce, their happiness would have
been complete had it not been damped by the indisposition of Lady Hazard, who,
a short time after their arrival in the country, evidently fell into a gradual
decline.

This, in a great measure, prevented Lord Hazard from a participation in the
general happiness, and gave occasionally no little uneasiness to Sir Sidney and
Lady Roebuck. My lord, however, in proportion as he shunned the general
hilarity, courted the charms which he found in private meditation, and the
exercise of that benevolence to which he was so forcibly stimulated by Sir
Sidney.

CHAPTER III.
THE ARRIVAL OF A NEW GUEST -- AND THE DEPARTURE OF AN OLD ONE.

MATTERS wore this face when Charles, who had been in continual anxiety
relative to the situation of Miss Figgins, saw her brother one morning ride
into the park. It was about the time when the young gentleman flattered himself
he should become a father, and having accosted Mr. Figgins, who returned his
salutation with bare civility, he was convinced this manly achievement of his
had been crowned with the expected success. Relying however on the friendship
of Mr. Standfast, he felt rather satisfied than otherwise on the subject, and
immediately appeared as coldly civil as the young clergyman.

Mr. Figgins was shown to Mr. Standfast, with whom he held a long conference,
the result of which our hero waited for with impatience; and he was not a
little astonished when the two gentlemen came toward him in terms of very high
altercation.

Charles could distinctly hear Standfast say 'Come come, this is a little too
rascally.' 'Rascally!' cried the other. 'Yes,' replied Standfast, 'for it is
impossible that you can be ignorant of her character:' -- and then, seeing
Charles, said 'Here is the young gentleman, and I confess his conduct was
imprudent enough, but sir, I tell you once again it was a trap for him, and if
it had not been for my positive injunction, so honorable are his sentiments,
he would have disgraced his family for ever by marrying your sister, whom I can
prove to be a woman void of reputation. To tell you the truth sir, this was the
cause of my silence, and as I am convinced you must have been privy to the
whole business, you need not expect any further countenance from my lord, the
bishop, or any other of my friends.'

Mr. Figgins declared that if Mr. Standfast could in the smallest degree prove
what he asserted, he should abandon his sister as a wretch unworthy his
protection. He protested his total ignorance of her character, and solemnly
assured Mr. Standfast he knew nothing of the intrigue between her and our hero,
till -- seeing her palpably in a condition that would shortly bring disgrace on
him, particularly because of his profession and connections -- he taxed her
with the fact, and she, with great unwillingness, discovered to him what had
passed. He uttered a very florid speech on the subject of ingratitude, and
declared he should detest himself if he could be capable, even was his
benefactor -- meaning Mr. Standfast -- to withdraw his countenance and
protection for ever from him, to meditate any return that could militate
against those honorable sentiments of pure and grateful acknowledgment which
were eminently his due.

Mr. Standfast confessed, till this business, he had always considered him as a
very thankful, proper, decent, grateful young man: -- nay he might recollect he
had given hints that there would be no objection to count upon his future
favor; and really, if he could acquit himself -- 'Will you suffer me to
speak?' said Charles. 'As to Mr. Figgins, I most sincerely beg his pardon for
the irregularity I was guilty of in his house. That he should know any thing of
it is morally impossible; because his sister told me that she sincerely
believed he would be the death of her, if he found it out; and, I assure you,
this has at times given me so much anxiety, that if I had not promised you, Mr.
Standfast, upon my honor -- which I hope will ever be a sacred pledge with me
-- to leave the whole to your discretion, I certainly should, long ago, have
written to Mr. Figgins, and laid all the blame on myself, where it certainly
ought to fall: I am very happy to have this opportunity of coming to so proper
an explanation, and will readily abide by the determination of Mr. Standfast in
relation to my future conduct.'

'My dear Charles,' said Standfast, 'your conduct in this, as in every thing
else, is perfectly handsome. Perhaps my zeal for your honor and that of your
noble father has hurried me too far, and induced me to treat Mr. Figgins with
more harshness than he merited. I will take his word for what he asserts,
because really, as I said before, there has always been something about him
like ingenuousness, gratitude, and a proper sense of obligation.' -- Here
Figgins bowed -- 'If therefore matters go in the old train as to him, I beg
that it may extend to his sister.'

'This is the point I wanted to come to,' said Charles. 'I assure you we were
both betrayed into what we did, for neither of us originally meant more than a
very harmless gratification.'

'Oh yes,' said Standfast. 'Come, come, Charles, you might be a Lubin, but she
was no Annette I assure you. No, no, Figgins,' added Standfast, taking Charles
by the hand, 'my pupil here, whom I hope to see a duke, is no match for your
sister, even were there not that bar which I will hereafter convince you
subsists. In the mean time, let the bantling come forth, and be brought up: --
we will find a provision for it.'

Mr. Figgins was now invited to spend a few days in the family, to which he
consented. Indeed the time passed so agreeably, that a fortnight had elapsed
before he ever dreamt of taking his leave. Charles, during this interval,
became very intimate with him, and Mr. Friend and the good Mildman -- which
last declared he began to have hopes of Little Hockley the moment the young
gentleman had appeared among them -- were charmed with his society.

Nor must the reader, who knows his origin, too hastily credit that I am
advancing any thing unnatural or unlikely. Art does not require brilliant
talents, and no people in the world are so easily imposed upon as good men. Pay
but a modest deference to your own opinion, that you may not seem too servile;
struggle a little with conviction before you appear to yield to it; and, though
you give up points with reluctance, never fail in the end to crown your
adversary with the palm of victory: -- and be assured of friends wherever you
choose to make them.

Standfast knew mankind surely. This young man was bred up under him; and as he
had strong intellects, rather an engaging figure, a retentive memory, a
wonderful natural penetration, a collected and shrewd sagacity, with a
fortunate knack of chequering his conversation with bits and scraps of
philosophy and morality, which he had studied, it is not at all astonishing
that he should be mistaken for a sensible and good man by such as, could they
have discovered any defects in him, would rather have excused than exposed them.

Mr. Standfast, one day, having received some letters from London, came to my
lord, and informed him that his uncle was at the point of death. Of this uncle
Lord Hazard had heard him speak, and always understood he had great
expectations from him. He therefore begged that no time might be lost, but that
the tutor should instantly set out to see his relation. This was the more
readily agreed to because Mr. Figgins could stay to superintend his pupil's
studies, which indeed now consisted of nothing more than reading and comparing
different authors, a part of which exercise he pleasures of the country took
off; not to reckon nis attention to painting and music, in both of which he was
a great proficient.

These preliminaries adjusted, Mr. Standfast took his leave of his good friends
in Warwickshire, and repaired to London; from whence, in a short time
afterward, he informed Lord Hazard that, his uncle being dead, he was left
independent; but that he should still consider him as his benefactor, and
would, as soon as he should have settled his affairs, wait on him. He anxiously
enquired after Lady Hazard, whom he had left in a very declining state of
health; hoped his pupil was pleased with Figgins, whom he took the liberty to
recommend as his tutor, while he should need a person in that capacity, and
offered to relinquish in his favor that annuity which his lordship had settled
on him for life.

My lord replied in a suitable manner to this letter. He wished his friend joy
of his good fortune; drew a melancholy picture of Lady Hazard's situation;
enlarged most pathetically on his own treatment of her; solemnly declared if he
should lose her all his happiness would be at an end; consented with pleasure
to his proposal concerning Figgins, but positively refused -- though he was
determined to take care of the young man -- to suffer the smallest restitution
of that which he, Standfast, had infinitely more than deserved: -- winding up
the whole with a strong contrast between the great and exalted merit of his
friend, and his own unworthiness.

In the mean time the summer was gliding away, during which scarcely a day
passed that did not bring with it some new pleasure; but yet Lady Hazard's
indisposition was a cloud that dimmed this serene sky. As most of these
amusements however were calculated for the alleviation of her pain, especially
those which Charles conducted -- for he doated on his mother -- their
enjoyments suffered but little diminution on her account. In the mean time our
hero's sentiments changed insensibly every day in favor of Annette, though
really his heart was yet a perfect stranger to the delicious sensations of
delicate love; and those he did feel, young as he was, upon so proper an
occasion he well knew how to suppress. He had some warm thoughts certainly as
to Emma, and knowing as much of books as herself, he very archly conceived a
design of conquering her with her own weapons; but, finding her virtue too well
fortified to yield to his solicitations, he made an honorable retreat, greatly
to her satisfaction, who was not in the least angry; for virtue, with her, was
slender indeed that could not withstand every trial. On the contrary, she
ventured to predict that Annette was his destined wife, but foresaw his
imprudence would cost many a mutual heart ach before the accomplishment of
their destiny.

Charles certainly had not the smallest objection to consider Annette in the
light of an intended wife, nor was he by any means, as I have already said,
insensible to either her beauty or accomplishments; and therefore -- especially
as he had the sanction of both his and her parents -- he paid her the exactest
attention, and lost no method nor opportunity of inspiring her with sentiments
highly to his advantage. But he had ever set his heart on seeing the world, and
that not superficially, before he should sink into a domestic character, which
he always conceived would be a clog to the exertions of a volatile mind, like
his; unless he could be assured, by repeated experience, that his partner for
life was possessed of those many and scarce attractions which would so bind his
inclinations as to make him prefer bondage to liberty.

The attention he paid Annette had, however, a different effect on that young
lady. Their little pleasures were, it is true, not more than the sports of
children; but there was such an unaffected ease, such sweetness of temper, such
an engaging and so insinuating an address in our hero, without the smallest
tincture of art, or illiberality, that, without her own knowledge, she imbibed
the seeds of that poison which, according to Emma's prediction, was destined to
give her many a bitter pang.

Little Hockley was now improving very fast. -- Mr. Balance had routed the two
attorneys I formerly spoke of, who, upon examination, were found to have
practiced without the smallest qualification. The painter had completed a
picture of the return of the prodigal son, which was placed in a conspicuous
part of the church, and the musician had opened a fine organ, the gift of Sir
Sidney, under which the poet affixed a very elegant latin inscription, which
Emma said ought to have been in English.

It had been an invariable custom to celebrate the baronet's birthday by
throwing open the doors of the mansion house, and feasting all comers. In the
afternoon several sports were performed on the green, and, in the evening, the
company retired to a very large rustic assembly-room, where Sir Sidney always
opened the ball; and after he had seen that his tenants and neighbors had
every thing they could wish for, to give their pleasure free scope, he retired
with their warm and unfeigned good wishes for a continuance of his health and
happiness.

Since Sir Sidney's marriage, however, this festival had been kept on his
wedding day, and this was called the grand feast: -- for there were three
others to celebrate, the birthday of himself, that of Lady Sidney, and that of
Annette. But these happening near each other, and Sir Sidney not choosing to
fill his tenants heads with too profuse an inclination for pleasure, he held
these festivals on the four quarter days, when he never failed to lighten the
hearts of those who, from unavoidable necessity, could not be punctual with
their rent.

There was something so remarkable in the conduct of the day which united the
two villages, that I shall take a fresh chapter to describe it: flattering
myself that no one will blame me for dwelling upon a subject the fittest that
can be to produce benevolent ideas.

CHAPTER IV.
A JUBILEE OF HEARTS.

CARDS of invitation, containing the following words, were in due time
circulated at the houses of the neighboring gentry.

Sir Sidney Roebuck's grand feast will be celebrated on Monday next, the 21st
of June, at which the presence of (...) is cordially requested.

Stewards Rt. Hon. Lord Hazard, Charles Hazard, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Friend.


The company is expected to arrive on Sunday evening, and not to depart till
Tuesday morning.

The combined assistance of all who could be useful was solicited upon this
occasion. The poet, painter, and musician produced a masque in conjunction, and
Charles wrote and set an ode, as well as painted the decorations for it; and it
was allowed -- though that might be the company's partiality -- to be the
completest performance of the day.

Lord Hazard's department was to receive the company, and accommodate such as
could not find room at Sir Sidney's. Charles had the management of the
amusements, and Mr. Friend, assisted by Mildman and Figgins, undertook to
preserve decency and decorum. The company which arrived on the Sunday evening
were served in the apartments provided for them, and permitted to sup and
retire at their own time.

At six o'clock on the Monday morning, the two villages were awoke by ringing
of bells, a discharge of cannon, and other demonstrations of joy. This done,
several messengers were dispatched to request their attendance at a rural
amphitheatre fitted up for the purpose, in the front of the rookery. There, by
eight o'clock, the company assembled; and, after a short but pathetic hymn to
the deity, had breakfast served up to them by children, in white and
flesh-colors dresses, ornamented with flowers, who drew the most delicious
beverages from a variety of urns, distributed about in niches.

Coffee, tea, and chocolate, were relieved by capilaire, orgeat, lemonade, and
sherbet; while the most odoriferous perfumes mingled their artificial sweets
with the roses and jessamine, that shed their emanations as they interlaced the
surrounding treillage. Cakes, comfits, and liqueurs, were seen in great variety
and abundance; and after the company had amply refreshed themselves, during a
performance of the most touching and melting airs, each Ganemede and Hebe moved
a spring, and instantly played in the center of every alcove a fountain of rose
water, for the use of ablution; which ceremony was succeeded by a proclamation,
that every one was at liberty to take separate diversion till eleven o'clock,
when they were expected on the lawn, in order to go to church in procession.

This procession, though simple, was striking. It was preceded by twenty-four
wool-combers, each of whom carried some ornament of their profession. Twelve
others followed, with banners, on which were displayed a variety of ingenious
devices. -- Twenty-five inhabitants of Castlewick, and as many of Little
Hockley, succeeded, one of each place linked arm in arm, in token of brotherly
love. To these succeeded a band of music: -- then came the stewards with golden
wands, who were followed by their assistants with silver ones. Lady Roebuck,
Lady Hazard, and Annette came next, in an open carriage: these were succeeded
by a large number of other carriages, and these again by about two thousand
spectators.

Being orderly seated at church, the service was performed, and an excellent
sermon preached by Mr. Mildman, from the text 'There is more joy in heaven over
one sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just persons, who need no
repentance.'

The service over, they returned in the same order -- with this difference: --
twelve morris dancers met them on their way, and conducted them in a mazy
round to the lawn, where all dispersed, and, after promiscuous ambulations
about the garden, retired to dress for dinner, which, at three o'clock, smoaked
in the grand saloon, for the company within doors, and on the lawn for all who
chose to partake of it.

In the saloon Lady Roebuck held her state, and Sir Sidney played the humble
host. Annette, on one side, sat with all the blooming freshness of a new blown
rose; and, on the other, poor Lady Hazard, pallid as a drooping lily. On the
table was elegantly distributed a most sumptuous feast, admirably contrasted,
and delicately served up. Nor did their pleasure receive a small addition from
the hearty vacant mirth that assailed them from the lawn -- which the saloon
overlooked -- where sat as many happy guests as could surround an ox, two
bucks, and four sheep, all roasted whole; at which Emma sat in imitation of
Lady Roebuck, and the butler -- who was the very servant so faithful to Sir
Sidney in France -- attended, like his master, to supply the wants of the
company.

Many loyal toasts were proclaimed by a discharge of cannon, and pledged by the
company without. At length the lawn was cleared, coffee introduced into the
saloon, and, in a short time after, notice given that the ode written by our
hero was going to be performed in the rustic amphitheatre, where the company
had breakfasted.

The saloon was now prepared for the masque, to which the company were desired
to repair in fancy dresses, but without vizors. Previous however to the
performance, as soon as it became sufficiently dark, they were led by the
morris dancers through a serpentine walk to the canal, where, on the opposite
bank, was discharged a most superb firework, in which the painter had exerted
himself in ornamental transparencies, and the poet in apt devices.

The masque over, it is impossible to express the universal astonishment when,
upon returning to the lawn, they found it converted into beautiful alcoves,
tents, booths, and other receptacles for different parties, where boys and
girls, in the most picturesque fancy dresses, ran before them, ready to
anticipate their very wishes. Nothing could exceed the beauty proportion, and
disposition of this city of the pleasures, reared as it were by enchantment.
Those who were not disposed, however, to resort to it for refreshment, were
attended and served in a manner equally desirable in a suite of rooms in the
house; and as to Emma's company, in addition to a review of all these pleasures
at a becoming distance, they had their own rural assembly room for their supper
and ball, where I am well informed not one, within some hours, guessed what it
was o'clock, till the sun sent forth those streaks of crimson which put an end
to their harmless merriment on the Tuesday morning.

Nor did their superiors separate one whit sooner, and not then without
regretting that their pleasures were at an end, and declaring that they never
witnessed such taste, nor experienced such hospitality.

It may not be improper to notice some of the principal remarks made on this
occasion.

Annette remarked that Charles looked, spoke, and did every thing divinely. He
remarked that she was a lovely little creature; and all the company remarked
that they seemed born for each other. -- Emma remarked she had made a conquest
of the poet, the musician, and the butler; and well knowing the fidelity of
this last to his master, and affection to his young mistress, declared, as she
undressed Annette, that she should have no objection, at a proper season, to be
the author of his happiness.

The poet remarked Emma was a smart wench, and should be his; for he was the
man in the world for her purpose. The musician agreed to the first remark, but
thought they neither of them stood any chance; and the painter, overhearing
them, swore she was a caricature of mother Shipton, and they were damned fools
for talking such nonsense.

Lord Hazard remarked that he had now but one wish in the world; and Sir Sidney
remarked -- but not to my lord, that this was the first time their grand feast
had been graced with the presence of Lady Hazard, and he greatly feared it
would be the last. Indeed that amiable and charming lady, lest she should
diminish the general hilarity, exerted herself on that day beyond her strength,
and though probably the utmost human care -- for she had every assistance that
money or influence could procure -- could not have wholly restored her, yet,
certainly, her now rapid decline was accelerated by the various shocks, though
of temporary pleasure, which she received in assisting to promote the happiness
of her friends.

CHAPTER V.
A DISPUTE BETWEEN EMMA AND THE POET.

As this is the only entire summer the reader and I are to pass in
Warwickshire, I shall explain pretty fully how the time jogged on. So far it is
pretty evident every man's leisure had been taken up to prepare for the
festival, which some may think I have a little too particularly described. It
has, however, brought about something, according to my usual custom; for it
made Lady Hazard worse, which, but for the sake of moral truth, I sincerely
wish had not happened; it lost Emma's heart; and it did two or three other
things, which will be divulged in proper time.

This grand affair being over, the spare time was filled up with lighter and
less regular pleasures; among which Charles, in particular, found the contrary
dispositions of Sir Sidney's scientific triumvirate excellent food for his
frolicksome temper, which, though it had not the smallest tincture of mischief
in it, loved to indulge itself with exposing absurdity. To this Master Figgins
egged him on with all his persuasion, with no view, however, as he said, but to
oblige the young gentleman; nor, to say the truth, did Sir Sidney want a relish
for such fun, when every thing was kept within proper decorum.

It did not signify what the joke was, their argument upon it produced all the
amusement. Charles very often set the poet down to a literary contention with
Emma, who, being skilled in authorities, generally conquered him; for really
dates and facts are very good materials for criticism, and method will very
often be too hard for genius. Upon these occasions the poet was thrust further
into a corner by the satiric painter, and consoled by the accommodating
musician. One afternoon, however, she gained so complete a triumph, that he was
obliged, for a long time, to own himself conquered.

The reader remembers that Emma had a very great predelection for Dr. JOHNSON,
and Charles entreated the poet to attack the lexicographer. This he did not
fail to do, but kept, for a long time, to general accusations. Emma desired he
would give her some opportunity of answering him. 'Any man,' said she, 'may be
made to look contemptible. ARISTOPHANES contrived this of SOCRATES, who,
because he was a man of inoffensive manners, and therefore naturally decried
the licentious writings and conduct of the comic poets, provoked the fury of
this satirist: -- but even though this is true, and though Madame DACIER was so
charmed with this author that she translated -- and, not content with that,
read two hundred times, and every time with fresh pleasure, the very piece that
was written to render this great philosopher ridiculous -- yet it proved
nothing, because general assertion is a blunt arrow that falls without
inflicting a wound.'

'Well, what do you say to this?' cried Figgins, who stood by. 'Say!' cried the
poet, 'If she wants proofs of what I have asserted, she shall have them; I am
the man for adducing proofs. And first of all, has he not written a severe
satire on himself, when he says of SWIFT "that on all common occasions he
habitually affects a style of arrogance, and dictates rather than persuades?"
In another place, "he predominated over his companions with a very high
ascendency, and probably would bear none over whom he could not so
predominate." Now does not Mrs. THRALE, after a confession that she had
surfeited herself with an abject and indefatigable attention to him for a
number of years, such as no man who did not in a most insolent degree
predominate over his companions could exact, does she not declare she could no
longer bear him, and that she went to Bath because she knew he would not follow
her? Is not Mr. BOSWELL every moment frightened to death lest there should be a
total breach between them? Does not the Doctor meditate an entire separation
only because Mr. BOSWELL had the imprudence to leave him for a few minutes,
with truly the shameful intention of contributing to his ease and convenience?
What do you say to all this? Does not this convince you that my assertions are
truth?'

'No, no, sir,' answered Emma, 'we were to talk of a poet, you are speaking of
a man.'

'A good evasion,' said Ego, 'and in the Doctor's own way. I am the man for
seeing what people are about: -- but come, you shall have him as a poet. And
pray, does he not wish to destroy the very being of poetry, by insisting on
annihilating mythology? Does he not find it very reprehensible in Mr. GAY to
introduce Cloacina and the nightman in his Trivia? and does he not abuse poor
PRIOR most unmercifully for fabling that Chloe was mistaken one day by Cupid
for Venus, and another for Diana? In short, mythology is, with him, puerility.
He says of Collins that he loved faries, genii, giants, and monsters! and that
while he pursued these objects, he did not sufficiently cultivate sentiment:
when all the world knows that there is an end of poetry if sentiment is no
longer to be conveyed through so rich and beautiful a vehicle. What do you say
to this abuse of the gods and goddesses? Is not it shameful?'

'No sir,' said Emma, 'not at all, for a man may abuse such imaginary beings
without injuring any body's moral feelings.'

'Another evasion,' cried the poet, 'I will be judged by any body. But I will
go a plainer way to work. Here is a criticism of his that is stark nonsense. In
speaking of Mr. GRAY's lines on the death of a cat that was drowned as she
attempted to catch a gold fish, the last line says, that all that glitters is
not gold; nor if it were, says the doctor, would the cat have been the better
for it, for a cat does not know the value of gold. Now I say she does, in the
sense it is here meant, which is nothing more than that we are not to trust to
appearances; and a cat knows that, as far as her understanding goes, as well as
a man. Can you controvert this, Mrs. Emma? No, no, I am the man for close
reasoning. All that glitters is not gold sure enough. What do you say to my
argument?' 'That it is not sterling, sir,' said Emma. 'Your learned principal
would have given the same vague answer,' said the poet. 'Come, come, why does
he take no more notice of COLLINS's ode than if no such poem had ever been
written? Can you answer me that? 'Easily, sir,' said Emma; 'it was written for
music, which he did not understand.' 'It is a pity then,' said the poet, 'that
he did not understand it; for he cannot show such harmony in his own poetry,
which is the heaviest -- ' 'Sir,' said Emma, 'he was profound.' 'Verbose,' said
the poet. 'He compiled a dictionary of the English language,' answered Emma.
'Zounds,' cried the poet, 'you would make a man mad; I am a man that is never
in a passion, but damme madam -- '

Here every body interfered, and it was universally allowed that Emma had
gained a complete victory. 'Yes,' said Emma, still imitating Dr. JOHNSON, 'my
triumph is complete; for if Mr Ego has nothing to say for himself, the logical
conclusion is, that all he can say of himself must be against himself, for
these are the three distinctions of egotism.'

This witty warfare stuck hard with the poet for a good while: he got off,
however, as well as he could; for when the painter, with his usual acrimony,
told him that he ought to hide his head for ever, after being conquered by a
woman, and the musician, in his old accommodating manner, said he plainly saw
Mr. Ego had yielded the palm from the abundance of his natural complaisance,
Ego cried out, you are right, my dear friend Toogood, I am the man that knows
how to behave polite to a lady.

CHAPTER VI.
CONSISTING OF SHAM GHOSTS, AND A VALIANT TAILOR.

NOTWITHSTANDING this repulse which the poet sustained from Emma, he had really
a penchant for her, and as she loved reading, he flattered himself he should
succeed by acknowledging her victory over him in the dispute already mentioned,
and submitting tacitly to her opinion in all literary matters.

This amorous intercourse, at least that which appeared so to the musician,
began to make him a little uneasy, for he flattered himself with pretty near
the same hopes as the poet. Seeing this, Charles and his associates hit upon a
plan which they thought would afford them some amusement.

Charles very archly intimated to Toogood that Emma, in her own mind, gave him
the preference, but, added he, you will lose her owing to your absurd
diffidence. In short, after proper preparation he proposed to him a scheme
which he said would evince his love for Emma, even without wounding his modesty
by declaring it, would bring out her real sentiments toward him, and would
finally frighten Ego into a relinquishment of his pretensions to her.

The kind Mr. Toogood agreed to the proposal with but little hesitation. It was
this: the associates were to report that the musician had hanged himself for
love, and, to give it a color, while he hid himself in a garret -- where, by
the way, they almost starved him, under a pretense that nobody could come to
him for fear of a discovery -- his fiannel powdering gown was put upon a
stuffed figure, and hung as it were artfully by the neck to a staple in his bed
chamber; and this was shown to the poet, in the dusk of the evening, in a way
so well managed, that he really took it for the musician.

The poet, willingly enough, ran, as he was desired, for help, and, in the
interim, the powdering gown was shifted from the figure to Toogood himself,
whose face had previously been smeared by the painter with a composition of a
cadaverous hue; therefore, when he returned, and found Toogood stretched upon
the bed, he had not the smallest doubt but that he had made his final exit.
Presently afterward Emma came into the room, and being properly instructed for
the purpose, began to lament her hard fate, and to utter so many tender things
in favor of the musician -- calling him her Orpheus, her Amphion! -- In short
she flew into such apparent rapture, that Charles and Figgins feared the
crotchet-monger would have jumped up, and appeased her upon the spot. She said
this country was now deprived of a second PURCEL, but where could they find
another DRYDEN to record his praise?

Ego answered briskly, that DRYDEN to be sure was a very pretty poet, but there
was one yet in the world, he flattered himself, as capable of singing the
virtues of a deceased friend as most people.

Emma took him at his word, saying she feared she should never be able to bring
herself to love him -- though she would try what she could do -- yet her
friendship he might always command, if he would, as a last tribute to his
friend's memory, write his epitaph.

This settled, the company dispersed. Charles lifted up his hands, Figgins
blessed himself, the poet in profound meditation, Musquito swearing it served
the fool right, and Emma quite in a tragedy rant: The poet desired he might
have a slight supper in his apartment, and pen, ink, and paper. -- The
musician, who had acted his part very well, was locked up, and every body
retired.

Ego was heard for some time to walk about his room in great agitation, and
afterward to draw his chair and sit down very still to work. In short, he had
finished the task just at that moment 'When church yards yawn,
'And hell itself breaths forth contagion to the world!'


Being charmed with his production, he began to read it aloud, and afterward
was heard to exclaim, 'I never was so successful in my life! Once more -- 'and
then reading -- 'Here Toogood lies, by desperate passion drove,
'Who, great musician, hanged himself for love!'


He scarcely had uttered these words, when open flew the door, and the musician
appeared in his powdering gown, with a halter round his neck, exclaiming in a
hollow voice 'And so I did, perfidious poet.' The bard, like Pierrot -- though
the musician looked that character more than he did -- now began to stare, to
tremble, and, without quiting either the paper or the candle, blundered to the
further side of the bed, where the ghost, with a most ghastly grin, glided
after him. Seeing himself followed, he sprang across the bed at the expense of
his shins, and out of the door, the ghost hard at his heels, when hurrying down
the stairs -- which were strewed with peace, unknown to either of them, they
rolled over each other till they lighted on a feather bed, purposely laid at
the landing place, where all the company in the house burst in at once, and
found them cuffing one another almost as unmercifully as Mr. POPE makes the two
eagles in HOMER.

The musician began now to perceive that he had been duped as well as the poet.
Sir Sidney said he was sorry to find the musician had played upon so ridiculous
a chord; to which Charles answered, his performance was perfectly in the
amoroso style. -- Emma said that to be sure he had given a dying proof of his
love, but not knowing that he would recover, she, out of despair, had chosen
another. -- The painter said it was not the first time Mr. Too-good had made
himself ridiculous. The poor musician, getting up, laughed the matter off as
well as he could. He said his known character was to accommodate himself, as
much as possible, to the pleasure of the company; and as to the poet, he said
he suspected it was a trick from the beginning, for he was the man at
discoveries! He swore he would have acted a dead man ten times better; and as
for a ghost! 'Damme,' said he, 'if I had personated a ghost, I would have
scared you all out of your wits!'

After a hearty laugh, Emma finished the business by a few serious words,
saying, that they had both hung themselves up as marks of ingratitude, in
return for Sir Sidney's hospitality; yet, if the ghost of remorse did but haunt
them a little, for entertaining a wish to injure a poor girl, who had nothing
to depend upon but her character, she should, for her own part, think them
sufficiently punished.

A truce was struck, and good humor restored, or rather prolonged; for none of
the parties entertained the least rancour: on the contrary, the musician was
the first to confess he had been justly reproved for his error, and Ego said he
was an admirer of poetical justice, which he flattered himself he had
exemplified pretty strongly in his writings.

About this time a matter happened which had very nearly undone some of Sir
Sidney's pious work at Little Hockley. One John Swash, a miller, who was at the
head of a large family, and one of the first who repented of his former idle
tricks, had been set up by Sir Sidney, and had lived for some time in comfort
and credit. This man, at the instigation of some litigious persons, who envied
his present good fortune, had been taken up for sheep-stealing: a crime which
he certainly had committed some years before. He was to be tried at Warwick, at
the summer assizes, and Sir Sidney greatly feared the fact would be fully
proved; in which case, it would be difficult to save the man.

But this was not the worst, for a number of the Hockleyites, having been
guilty of crimes equally enormous, might, on his conviction, emigrate from the
village, where they began to live peaceable and decent lives; and thus he
should lose the fruits of that benevolent harvest which he had been so long and
so carefully bringing to perfection.

There was but one man who could swear to his identity; except indeed a
companion, who having been formerly discharged by a magistrate, on account of
this fact, now appeared as king's evidence, to curry favor with the farmer,
whose sheep had been lost, as well as to screen himself from future
prosecutions.

This man, who, as I said, could swear to him, was a tailor, and lived, at this
time, in pretty good credit at Wellingborough, but had formerly worked as
journeyman at a small town not far from Little Hockley, and when business was
not very stiring there, was glad enough to job about at other places, and
return to his wife and family with the earnings.

He had been three days getting ready some mourning for a family in the
neighborhood, when, being upon the point of returning on a very dark night, he
was reminded, by some officious friend, that he must go seven miles about, for
that over the common, which was but little more than three, he would certainly
meet with the ghost.

It must be understood that on this common was erected a gibbet, where were
hung in chains two smugglers, who had murdered an exciseman; and under this
gibbet every evening were seen -- for a great number of the inhabitants within
some distance round were ready to swear it -- two men in white marching with
much deliberation, and carrying a coffin.

The tailor had frequently heard all this, but as it rained a little, and the
way over the common lay so much nearer than the other, he could not think or
going round: -- besides he was perfectly, at this time, pot valiant, and one
more glass put the finishing stroke to his resolution.

Away went the tailor with his wages in his pocket, and his goose suspended on
a stick, which he held over his shoulder. When he came near the gibbet, sure
enough he saw two men carrying a coffin. His sensations may be easily guessed
at. He was seized with so strong a fit of horror, that his teeth chattered, his
legs shook, he trembled from head to foot, and sweat at every pore. He made an
effort to run away, but his limbs refused their office. At length, as the
spectre approached, with one frantic struggle, between fear and desperation,
his well-poised goose flew from the staff that supported it like lightning, and
hitting the head of the ghost that was nearest to him, brought him to the
ground -- when lo! open flew the coffin, and out jumped two sheep!

The other spirit, unconscious that he had only one-ninth of an adversary to
encounter, took to his heels, and soon disappeared. The first, however, stunned
by the blow he had received, could not so easily get out of the taylor's
clutches, who being convinced of the fact by the information of the two sheep,
pursued his victory, and actually tied the culprits hands with a large piece of
list, in order to carry him before a magistrate.

The sheepstealer pleaded very hard for his liberty as soon as he came to
himself, when the tailor, knowing his voice, presently recognized him for the
very same John Swash, who now, at the distance of almost three years, was
confined in Warwick jail for this individual offense.

The general opinion was that the tailor had compassionated the situation of
John for a valuable consideration, which was, in the nature of a fine, to be
paid by installments, but had not been regularly discharged. Finding however
that the offender began to be pretty well off in the world, the subject was
revived, and the matter carried by the farmer, at the instigation of the
tailor, to the length we have seen.

These were the circumstances which made Sir Sidney uneasy. He plainly saw that
Swash was picked out not with a view to offer a public sacrifice at the shrine
of offended justice, but merely to be used as an instrument by way of
experiment, to see how much money could, upon similar occasions, be extorted in
future: -- for knowing the baronet to be very warm in whatever he espoused, the
two pettisoggers who were driven from Little Hockley, and a few others who
accompanied them, counted upon a comfortable subsistence, which they had no
doubt they could procure by raising contributions, in like manner, upon the
generosity of Sir Sidney.

CHAPTER VII.
THE SEQUEL OF SWASH AND THE TAILOR.

The difficulty seemed to be how to suppress the evidence of the tailor without
Sir Sidney's apparent concurrence; for it was not enough that he should not
seem to take any active part in the business, but it was necessary to regard it
as a matter of perfect indifference to him.

On this account, it was necessary to be very wary in their measures. Charles
and Figgins, however, undertook, after a very little reflection, to remove all
difficulties.

The plan was explained, and greatly approved; and now came the time to put it
in execution.

A house was taken about three miles from Warwick, whither Charles, Figgins,
and the body of arts repaired; which last were informed that the removal was
only temporary, to take views, and attend the assemblies at the assizes.

About a month before the assizes, Charles and Figgins rode to Wellingborough.
The latter having previously rolled his coat in the road, and splashed his
horse on one side, they went to the first inn they saw, where they enquired if
there was a clever tailor in town, who could make a coat at a short warning.
The landlord recommended one, but not the man they wanted; but, rather than
make objections, they determined to see him, and when he came found fault with
every thing he produced: which indeed they were determined to do with fifty,
till they should see the object of their present business. At length he came,
and there never was such a tailor! They were struck with his taste, his manner,
his price: -- In short, the poor devil was in raptures, though a man must have
been very ingenious to find language for this lavish praise in favor of a card
of buttons, and some snips of cloth. So it was however, that the tailor never
found out half so much merit in himself as at that moment. He made his men sit
up all night, and a very awkward coat was produced in the morning for Figgins,
which, nevertheless, was the pink of taste, and the extreme of the new fashion;
and Charles pretended to be so much in love with it, that he ordered a frock
for himself, with the addition of a new Birmingham button, with which he
declared himself enchanted. This frock however he could not stay for. It was
therefore ordered to be sent to the house of the Rev. Mr. Figgins, near
Warwick, where it would be paid for on delivery.

The tailor said he should be at Warwick at the assizes, for he was subpoened
there upon a trial, and he would then, if the gentleman pleased, take the
liberty of calling, to see if he was satisfied with his coat.

Figgins said he should be very glad to see him, for that he knew no character
so respectable as a tradesman. This was said as they took horse, and the
tailor, making a very low bow, retired. The circumstance was however so
singular, that the landlord, as well as the taylor's wife, set down Charles and
Figgins for two cheats, and cautioned the tailor not to be taken in.

The tailor had himself some suspicions akin to theirs, though the flattery
that had been lavished on him almost overcame his wariness. However, to make
all sure, as he had some business at Warwick, -- indeed no other than to con
his lesson as to his evidence against Swash -- he took that opportunity of
carrying home the coat himself.

Being arrived at Mr. Figgins's, he was very kindly welcomed, detained all
night, paid his bill, and informed that more clothes would be sent for, to be
got ready against the assize ball; to which our hero added, 'I wish we could
prevail on you, sir, to settle here, for there is not one of your profession
within twenty miles who knows even how to set on a button with taste.'

The tailor acceeded to the fact, took a comfortable portion of merit to
himself, and went home in high spirits.

Swash was to be tried on the last day of the assizes, on the motion of the
counsel, and three days previous to the trial an order was sent to the tailor
from our hero for some clothes for the assize ball. The tailor could not refuse
to execute the order, but, nevertheless, very anxious to be in time for the
trial, was determined he would be at Warwick the night before.

A servant being dispatched to suggest alterations and delays, till he should
be detained very late that evening, he at length arrived, clothes and all, at
Mr. Figgins's, about half an hour past eleven o'clock, most exceedingly
fatigued.

Figgins took him very cordially by the hand, and led him into a parlour,
where, at near one -- the clocks being put back almost an hour -- supper
appeared. The tailor protesting he never was so disposed to make a good meal in
his life, fell to very heartily. Thus the time passed on till within a quarter
of an hour of day light, though by the clocks -- being once more put back --
the tailor did not believe it so late by two hours. At length he was led to bed
completely drunk. Having slept till two o'clock in the afternoon -- which will
not appear extraordinary if we consider his drunkenness and fatigue -- he
awoke, without recollecting for some moments where he was. When he felt,
however, a fine, soft, stately bed, he began to have some faint idea how he
came there; but, as every thing appeared as dark as pitch, he concluded it was
in the middle of the night, and turned to go to sleep again; this, after
tumbling and tossing for half an hour, he effected, and taking another pretty
good nap, waked about half an hour past six.

Feeling a violent headache, and finding himself intolerably hungry, he could
not help thinking the night remarkably long. He got out of the bed, and groped
about for the windows, and having drawn one of the curtains, opened the
shutters, but it was all the same. He could not throw up the sash indeed,
owing, as he supposed, to a mode of fastening it, which he did not understand.
He was yet convinced, however, that it was not near day light, and therefore
determined to go to bed again.

In groping out his way, he caught hold of the tossel of a bell, whieh
immediately tingled very forcibly. This frightened him out of his wits. -- How
could he apologize in a gentleman's house for making such a disturbance? After
he had been in bed about a quarter of an hour, in anxious hope that nobody had
heard the bell, a servant came into his room, with a candle, yawning,
stretching, and rubbing his eyes, who asked him what he would be pleased to
have.

The tailor begged his pardon a hundred times, for disturbing him, though it
was nearly seven in the evening, and asked what o'clock it was, and how long it
would be till day light?

'O'clock, sir!' said the servant, why we have not a been in bed above a quarter
of an hour; I believe there will be a good three hours yet before the cock
crows.'

'Three hours!' cried the tailor, 'why I never passed such a night in my life!
Three hours! -- why I seem as if I had lain twenty; and then I am so cursed
hungry.' 'Ay, that is your long journey, sir,' said John. 'I don't know what
the devil it is,' said the tailor, 'but could not you, my dear Mr. John, get me
a bit of something for the tooth?' 'Lord love you, no such thing,' said John;
'you must even stay till morning.' 'Morning!' cried the tailor, 'why I shall be
famished in three hours; I never had such a craving in my life.' 'Well, well,'
said John, 'then I will see what I can do; but I must get the keys of old
Mother Search, the housekeeper, and she is a devil of a crusty toad, I can
tell you.'

The tailor implored him to see what he could do, and John said he would return
directly. He did not, however, make his appearance for another half hour, when
he brought word that there was nothing to be had.

This news the tailor was obliged to swallow instead of the repast he had
expected, and wishing John a good night, endeavored once more to get to sleep.
This however was impossible; he kicked about, turned, twisted, got up, lay
down, and between whiles, fell into a kind of dose, till night actually came.
His patience was now entirely exhausted, and, for the first time, he suspected
that some trick had been played him. The whole conduct of this family had been
so extraordinary, that he began now to reflect on his neighbors suspicions;
but then, how could that apply to him? -- he had nothing to be robbed of. They
might murder him, however, but what harm had he done to any body? Perhaps it
was all a drunken frolic: -- perhaps it was daylight all this time. Whatever
it was, he might be sure no servant would set him right; he was therefore
determined to sally forth, and know the truth of every thing.

So resolved, he immediately put on his clothes, and groping out the door, met
with no impediment all the way to the garden, where, by feeling about, he soon
found himself. Here he gave that credit to the stars which he denied to John,
and being now convinced his brain was affected, he thought he could not do
better than return, without giving any further disturbance to the family. This,
however, was not so easily practicable as he imagined. The door had shut after
him in such a manner, that he found it out of his power to open it.

His situation was now truly deplorable. He durst not knock, for fear of making
more disturbance in the house. In the mean time he was devoured with hunger,
and being in a strange place, in the night, his fancy transformed every bush,
not into an officer, but a ghost.

These apprehensions were not a little heightened by a variety of noises, which
now assailed his ears. Clanking of chains, groans, and howls fixed him
petrified to the spot, while strange lights, which came and disappeared, added
not a little to the horrid workings of his teeming fancy. At length something
tapped him upon the shoulder, when turning round in an agony of fear, he saw,
as plain as ever he did any thing in his life, John Swash staring him in the
face. What at this moment were the poor taylor's sensations! He squeaked,
kicked, plunged, without being able to take his eyes from this dreadful object,
till presently his sight failed him, his muscles were all relaxed, and he
measured his length on the ground.

A few tweaks by the nose and some cold water brought him a little to himself,
when he found John and another servant lifting him up. This circumstance did
not a little facilitate his recovery. The moment he got the use of his speech,
he cried out, 'For the love of God, dear christian gentlemen, speak to me! Oh
Lord, is he gone? Did you see him? Oh dear, dear, dear, dear -- there he comes
again! Hold me fast! -- don't let him fly away with me!'

John and his fellow servant had some difficulty to comply with his request, he
struggled so hard, for fear gave him the strength of a giant.

The spectre approaching, the taylor's fear, or rather horror, was beyond
description 'There,' cried he, 'Don't you see it?' 'See what?' said John, 'I
see nothing but the trees and the stars, do you Thomas?' 'Not I,' said Thomas.
'Come come, sir, do ey goo to bed -- you han not a slept to night. When the
woine a be got out of your head, yowl be in your right wits, like a sober
parson.'

The ghost now began to speak. 'Hush, hush,' cried the tailor. 'Oh Lord have
mercy upon me, save and deliver me. It speaks! Oh John Swash, John Swash, how
have I offended thee?'

'Oh miserable tailor, listen to me,' said the ghost. 'I will John indeed,'
said the poor terror-struck wretch, and now the ghost went on.

'For the lucre of gain thou did try to hang me. though well thou know I
never did thee harm; but I have escaped thy malice, for rather than bring
disgrace upon my poor wife and family, I made away with myself. Now if thou
wishest to sleep peaceably in thy bed, make a full confession of thy wickedness
to Sir Sidney Roebuck, and through him restore to my unhappy family that money
which thou have at different times frightened me out of. Remember, and let not
my angry spirit visit thee a second time.' So saying, the ghost disappeared.

'Lord have mercy, save, deliver, and forgive my sins,' said the tailor. 'What
do you toak about?' said Thomas. 'Pardon a poor, wretched, miserable sinner,'
exclaimed the tailor. 'Come come,' said John, 'it will be time enough to say
your prayers when you are up in your room.' 'How can you be so blasphemous?'
said the tailor, 'did not you hear what he said?' 'Who? Who?' cried John. 'Why
the man's out of his wits.' -- 'Who!' exclaimed Snip, 'why poor John Swash; I
have killed, I have murdered him, and his blood will be on my hands.' 'Odds
wounds,' cried Thomas, 'these be odd sort of speeches; I do not wonder you be
troubled in mind, if you a done such wicked things as these: -- but coom, you
be only a sleep, and a dreaming.'

In short, the trembling tailor was at last conveyed to his room, where he lay
sweating and shivering, and almost suffocated under the clothes, till daylight.

He now got up, and saying his prayers longer and louder than ever he had done
in his life, he began, though still in bodily fear, to consider how he should
prevent a second visit from the ghost. As however the family was not yet
stirring, and he thought he had made pretty sufficient disturbance in it
already, he returned once more to bed, where, having undergone so much mental
and corporeal fatigue, he fell into a sound sleep, which probably saved him
from a severe fit of sickness.

The reader has seen that the windows had been purposely blocked up, on the
first night, on the out side, to cheat the tailor, through the whole of that
day, into a belief that it was not yet light; by which means the trial of Swash
came on, and he was acquitted for want of evidence; for as to the confederate,
Figgins had seen, and so completely intimidated him, with threatening to lay a
detainer against him on another score, that he purposely prevaricated on the
trial, and the whole business was dismissed as frivolous and vexatious. The
noise which the tailor heard when he was in the garden, and which his fears had
so greatly magnified, was nothing more than the taking down the blinds, which,
as I have said, on the outside were affixed to the windows. -- But the ghost
was no other than the individual John Swash, who had been released in the
afternoon, and properly tutored for the purpose.

The tailor, at the proper time, was summoned to breakfast in the parlour,
where he was kindly received by Mr. Figgins and Charles, as well as the poet
and the musician: -- the painter being gone to take a walk. They informed him
they were extremely sorry to hear he had been so ill in the night, and the
poet, pretending to know something of physic, felt his pulse, which having done
very gravely, he declared that the gentleman was not so ill in body as that he
was troubled with thick-coming fancies that disturbed his rest.

'That's very true, sir,' said the tailor, 'you have found out my disorder at
once.' 'Well but cannot you cure him of that?' said Figgins. 'No,' answered the
poet gravely, 'in that case the patient must administer unto himself.' 'Thank
you sir,' said the tailor; 'it is very true -- he must indeed -- and so I will,
if it shall please God, before I am many hours older.'

'You see, you see,' said the poet, 'I know all the symptoms of this disorder.
You are very hungry sir, are you not?' 'Yes sir,' said the tailor, 'I dare say
I could eat a shoulder of mutton, and look round me.' 'A bad symptom, sir,'
said the poet. 'Pooh, pooh,' cried Charles, 'I will never believe that a hungry
sick man is in much danger. Come John, let us have the breakfast, the gentleman
will be too late for the trial.' Then addressing himself to the tailor: 'When
do you expect it to come on sir? I hope you will convict the rascal; for really
times are come to such a pass that an honest man cannot keep his property in
safety.'

The taylor's countenance underwent several alterations, and he faultered out,
'why sir I don't think it will come on at all.' Here John came in with a
smoking plate of toast. 'Zounds, let us fall to,' said Charles. 'Come sir,
help yourself.'

The tailor began to put a piece to his mouth, when in came the painter. 'Your
servant,' said Figgins, 'where have you been this morning?' -- 'Faith,' said
Musquito, 'I have been to see a very unpleasant spectacle, I assure you. A poor
fellow, one Swash, who was to have been tried this morning for sheep-stealing,
poisoned himself last night in his cell, and, through the interest of Sir
Sidney Roebuck, the coroner's verdict was returned lunacy, and they are now
carrying the body to his wife and children.'

Here the tea and toast dropped out of the taylor's hand, and he entreated, for
the love of God, that he might be conducted to that very Sir Sidney Roebuck,
for he could not eat nor sleep before he disburthened his conscience of
something that lay very heavy on it.

Every one affected extraordinary surprise at this declaration; after which,
Mr. Figgins said 'Sir, I am a clergyman, and if I can do you any service by
hearing your confession, and giving you salutary advice, I will do it with
pleasure.' To which the terrified tailor -- looking about him -- said, 'No sir,
that will not do; I am afraid he will appear again if I tell it to any body but
Sir Sidney.' -- 'Appear!' said Charles, 'Who? Who will appear?' 'The ghost sir,
the ghost!' said the tailor; 'John Swash's ghost!'

A gentleman now desired to speak with Mr. Figgins, who being ushered in,
proved to be Sir Sidney.

The moment the tailor saw him, he fell upon his knees, and cried out 'Oh dear
sir forgive me.' -- 'Forgive you!' said Sir Sidney, 'why who are you?' 'Sir,'
said he, 'I am the tailor, the wicked tailor that tried to hang John Swash.'

The baronet was then informed of all the ghost enjoined Snip, and at length,
on his earnest entreaty, went apart with him to make an ample confession. This
indeed amounted to nothing criminal in the tailor, except the extortion of the
money; but it laid up such a body of evidence against the emigrants from Little
Hockley, as the baronet had no doubt would put a stop to their nefarious
attempts for the future.

The taylor's confession being signed and sworn to, he was permitted to eat a
voracious breakfast with John, for nothing after this could prevail on him to
come into the parlour.

A large cavalcade now appeared in the road, which poor Snip, as well as every
body else, knew to be the judges, who were leaving Warwick to open the assizes
at Worcester.

The tailor, though no great conjuror, saw plainly he had been tricked. He now
neither wondered at his restlessness nor his hunger, and lest he should any
longer remain in doubt, John Swash himself -- who softly entered the kitchen --
tapped him upon the shoulder once more, saying, 'Master Cabbage, you have twice
taken me for a ghost, beware of the third time.'

The tailor received a very wholesome admonition from Sir Sidney, who explained
to him in very pathetic terms, the cruelty and wanton maliciousness of
disturbing the quiet of a man and his family, who, he said, were objects of
great compassion, as well as praise; for there were very few instances of those
who had so given themselves up to bad example, as to have been guilty of every
wickedness and depravity, and afterward desirous of returning from their
vicious courses. He said there was no encouragement to which such objects were
not entitled. How reprehensible then was it in those who waited for the moment
when such should return to virtue, and, in consequence of their honest
industry, become in tolerable circumstances, to seek for opportunities to
distress and harrass them, and so prevent the happy effects of their laudable
and honest endeavors.

As for the tailor, he told him he was well convinced he had been set on by
others, and as he had now made a candid and fair confession relative to all
those dark conspiracies which he plainly saw were levelled against these poor
repentant sinners, if he would go on a little further, and join with him in
detecting this knot of villains, he might rely upon his favor; and he would
enjoy a much higher satisfaction -- that of discharging his duty as an honest
man.

The tailor was suffered to depart, after faithfully promising all that had
been enjoined him, and Sir Sidney was, for the first time, let into the whole
of the mystery by which the tailor had been prevented from appearing at the
trial; for it must be understood that Sir Sidney knew the tailor was to be kept
away, but he did not know in what manner.

CHAPTER VIII.
A NEW CURE FOR AN AMOROUS FEVER.

THE housekeeping of Mr. Figgins, near Warwick, being now broken up, Charles
and his friend returned to Hazard house, and Musquito, Ego, and Toogood to
Roebuck hall.

Charles had noticed that Musquito, in consequence of his satiric vein, had
conceived himself a kind of superior to his two companions; for whenever it
came up in conversation that they had been ridiculed in the business of the
ghost, he took care sagaciously to hint that no one dared play him such a trick.

Our hero was therefore determined to leave him no room for exultation,
especially as by the mode through which he intended to show him off, as well as
the rest, he should do even a more meritorious act than he had done in saving
Emma from the persecutions of the poet and the musician. This method of
studying mischief, only by way of inflicting merited punishment, was a species
of amusement in which it has been seen our hero delighted. It certainly was
highly praiseworthy in one sense, for it turned every thing off with a laugh
only against the offender, whereas, had it been shaped into a complaint, and
preferred against him to Sir Sidney, it might have endangered the hopes which
he built on his patronage.

John Swash had a daughter, who must have had an uncommon mind for her
situation in life; for, from her earliest infancy, she was remarked to have had
a detestation to that vice which surrounded her. She profitted by avoiding bad
examples as much as others by imitating good ones. In short -- which is the
strongest proof that can be given of the excellence of her heart, and the
incorruptibility of her honor, she, at eighteen, was as spotless a character
at Little Hockley, as the most innocent inhabitant of her age and sex could be
at Castlewick.

The painter had long laid siege to this young creature, who had all that
beauty which regular features, rosy health, and a perfect symmetry of form can
give. He drew her likeness, and took care it should be a flattering one. He
took a sketch of the mill, and made it a present to Swash, whose professional
pride was thus tickled. He painted a favorite tortoiseshell cat for the
mother, and, in a variety of other instances, made his talents subservient to
his wishes; but, in particular, he vaunted that he had been the principal
instrument in detaining the tailor from appearing at the trial.

I know not if the girl's gratitude on the side of her duty pleaded in his
favor, or whether nature began to whisper to her that, good as she was, love
-- as somebody has expressed it -- is the sovereign end of our being; but
certainly she began to listen to the painter's conversation with pleasure, and
as she had never in her life been controlled, scrupled not to walk with him in
an evening. She soon, however, repented of her complaisance, and was almost
fatally convinced on what terms these opportunities were requested. She
resented his insolence, which was manuel as well as verbal, and without
ceremony informed her mother of all that had passed, who, good woman, I am
sorry to say it, did not make such forcible objections to it as the daughter
did. To say the truth, she had a large family, and looked upon her daughters as
much in the light of traffic, as her barley meal. In short, won by a handsome
sum, a promise of painting her picture in the attitude of milking a favorite
cow, and a half anchor of genuine nantz -- with shame I write it -- after but
little hesitation, she agreed to this method of providing for her girl as she
called it.

This good woman, in her youth, had been tolerably handsome herself. Master
Flush had been heard to intimate that he fancied the governor -- meaning
Standfast -- had taken care to provide a birth in heaven for Master Swash, in
the month of April; but I am afraid nobody had so strong a claim to that favor
as Lord Hazard.

Charles had eyed this girl with pleasure, but would not for the universe have
given way to the shadow of an impulse to her dishonor. And here it may not be
amiss to beg the reader will stop with me, and admire how greatly to our own
advantage we take resolutions which are in favor of virtue; for it is within
possibility that, had our hero given way to an inclination natural enough for a
youth of warm blood to entertain, and I hope full as natural if there were any
thing like honor in his disposition, to conquer -- hear it ye seducers of
virtue! Ye merciless triumphant despoilers of innocence! who are cruel because
you have power! -- insolent because victorious! -- hear it, and reflect with
horror on the miseries that to often result from your vices, -- he might have
contaminated a sister!!

From so deplorable a crime, however unintentional, did Charles, by his
perseverance in his honorable resolutions, very probably escape; for he, by
his frequent chat with this girl, had taught her bosom to glow with tenderness,
but having put the curb, as we have seen, upon his wishes, and ceased to be
particular from the moment he was apprehensive of danger -- during which
interval the painter stepped in -- she found some pleasure, which the reader may
be assured is not unnatural, in listening to language of the same kind from
another, even though it was not so eloquently worded, or so gracefully
delivered.

As Charles withdrew his attention from this girl upon a ground for which she
loved him still more -- for he made no scruple of confessing the truth -- the
poor girl having been repulsed by her mother, as we have seen, or rather
encouraged to make her fortune, according to the old gentlewoman, by that
which, according to any body else, would have been her ruin, was walking
solitary and unhappy by the side of her father's mill-stream, when Figgins and
our hero passed by. Charles saw the pearly tear standing on her cheek, and very
good naturedly enquired the cause. After a little reluctance she informed him,
and concluded her artlessly pathetic story with saying 'Indeed it is a sad
thing when a poor girl's mother bids her to be wicked; but I will not be wicked,
if I am ever so undutiful I will not.'

Both Charles and Figgins commended her laudable resolution, and now occurred
an admirable opportunity of punishing the painter in his own way. He
immediately told the girl of his intention; to forward which, she was desired
to acquaint her mother that she would be a good girl, and behave civil to the
gentleman, and, when he came, she should make him an appointment in the dusk of
the evening in the bed chamber; that he would let her father privately into the
secret, who should, in concert with them, so revenge himself upon her audacious
lover, as to leave him very little relish for such amusement in future.

The girl was charmed to find her cause taken up so warmly by our hero, for she
knew, let what would happen, the painter must not dare to complain.

The assignation was made, and Swash apprized of the whole business. The
painter, as may naturally be supposed, attended punctually, and the husband
being, as it was imagined, safe at the ale house, the amorous Appelles was
conducted to the young lady's bed chamber, by her accommodating mamma, and
desired to go to bed, where he should be made as happy as he could wish.

He had not lain long in this situation, before he heard a foot upon the
stairs, when immediately his heart beat high, his fancy anticipated the
expected pleasure, and all his senses were in an alarm; but, however, all these
were nothing to the alarm that presently followed. In rushed -- at least his
fears made him believe so -- half a dozen myrmidons; pop half a dozen times
went half a dozen pistols; the first of which was a sufficient intimation that
the salute had very little of love in it. Indeed he wondered how it came that
he was not a dead man, for his fears had wounded him in twenty places.

The very first of these hints he took, and darting out of the foot of the bed,
he presently cleared the landing place, and gained the bottom of the stairs; by
which time he received a few more compliments of the same kind. These, however,
though they were unnecessary to refresh his memory, hastened his departure,
which he took without paying the smallest compliment to any of the family, but
rushing out at the street door, made his way across a paddock, which led to the
road; his pursuers still popping at such a rate, that he verily believed he was
flying from a whole platoon.

Being come to a bank, he collected his whole might to jump over the hedge,
into the road, but the distance being greater than he imagined, he plunged,
with all his force, naked as he was, into a bramble bush, which clinging in a
hundred places to his shirt, and in as many to his flesh, pinned him down so
firmly, that he was obliged to make several excruciating efforts to free
himself. He did so however at last, but finding himself surrounded with
enemies, who were still popping at him, he doubled as artfully as any Jack
hare, and was followed as closely, with this difference, that the game opened
instead of the pack; for he yelped, howled, swore, ejaculated, cursed, and
prayed, in such a strange collection of hysterical tones, that the musician,
who was then present, had as much reason to be enraged as Hogarth's, for all
the complicated din there described, seemed to be centured in one person.

This discordance however did not last long, for trying to cross the mill
stream by a bridge, which to be sure had been laid down an hour before, but was
now drawn up, poor Musquito came souse over head and ears into the water, which
being in that part pretty deep, would have cooled him for intriguing, and every
thing else in this world, had not a large fishing net been previously placed to
receive him.

The net was immediately drawn up, which, with all the haste they could make
however, was not effected before the poor painter had totally lost his senses.

He was now put into a shell, and the church being near, carried to the bone
house, where being held up by the heels, a quantity of water ran out of his
mouth, and he presently exhibited signs of life. The moment this event took
place, they hurried off with the lanthorn -- the only light they had -- and the
sexton, who, being a friend to the miller, connived at the trick, immediately
returned with his mattock and shovel on his shoulder.

'There,' said he, as if to himself, 'that job's done.' 'Oh d d d d dear,'
cried the painter, 'It is odd there should be nobody to own the man,' cried the
sexton, putting down his things. 'B b b oh -- ah -- oh -- ' cried the painter.
'I have made him a good grave, however,' cried the sexton, 'and as soon as the
coroner's quest has sat upon him -- '

The painter now mustered strength enough to sit up, and cried, 'Oh d d d d
dear -- f f f f friend.' -- 'Lord, what is that!' said the sexton. 'Oh f f f f
for the love of God help me,' cried Musquito. 'Why lookee now,' said the
sexton, 'here's my man come to life. Lie down now doey; lie down, I ha been
just making your grave.' 'Oh Lord,' exclaimed the painter, 'my g g g g grave!'
'Ay ay, nobody will own you, you see, and so we shall bury you tomorrow
morning.'

'Bury me!' cried the painter, who had by this time got out of the shell. 'Oh
Christ, where am I brought to?' -- then looking round him -- 'Oh, dear friend
have pity upon me.' 'Odds wounds,' cried the sexton, 'don't come nigh me; I
never could abide a dead body in my life, unless in the way of business, and
when it was screwed up, as a body may say: so don't come nigh me.'

The painter told him he was alive, the sexton said he was a damned liar, and
took up the lanthorn to be gone: the painter followed: the sexton holhowing out
'the devil take the hindmost.' At length, turning round a corner of the church,
he blew out the candle, slipped away, and the painter found himself alone, sore
from head to foot, wet and naked, in the middle of a church yard, above two
miles from Sir Sidney's, at half an hour past ten o'clock at night.

In this condition he posted to the alehouse, where he intended to have trumped
up a story of his being robbed, but his old friend the sexton being the first
man he saw in the room, he only desired the use of some clothes, for which he
said he would satisfy them handsomely.

The man of the house agreed to accommodate him, and fetched some things for
that purpose, which Musquito put on before the fire; for the landlady was gone
to bed. In the mean time the guests were not sparing of their jokes. 'Bless
me,' said one, 'the gentleman has been sadly mauled with zummet! He looks as if
he had tumbled into a hornet's nest.' 'Icod,' said another, 'I think its more
like being scratched with cats.' 'Very loikely,' said another, 'two legged cats
may hap.' 'Lord love you,' cried the sexton, 'you noas nothing about it. The
gentleman was tooked up in the mill-dam. They mistooken for a vish. -- Dam maw,
I thoughten the biggest Jack I ever sawed. And so as I was a telling you, when
the gentleman coomed in, we took un to the boane-house. Adds waunds measter,
you do ought to give maw zummet to drink your health, after making your grave.'

The painter did not reply a single word to all this wit; but, having hurried
on the landlord's clothes, and said he would return them in the morning, and
satisfy him for his trouble, he sneaked to Sir Sidney's, and skulked up stairs
to bed.

Charles and Figgins came in the morning to breakfast. Every body was very
inquisitive to know how it happened that the painter had not supped at home.
One said significantly he was perhaps better engaged; another, that whatever
his amusement was, he hoped it was to his liking. In short, the poor painter
was handsomely played off. At last it came to Sir Sidney's turn, who said
honest Swash had been with him that morning about an affair something in the
style of the soldier and the king of France: -- the soldier craved pardon for
having thrown a man's hat out of window, and, having obtained it, said he had
thrown his head out too.

Here Sir Sidney related the whole business of the preceding evening, as indeed
he had heard it from Charles, not from Swash. He concealed his knowledge of the
gallant, who, he said, was rightly served, and he only wished the next time the
gentleman, whoever he was, took it into his head to corrupt innocence and
destroy domestic peace, he would never after having done so presume to come
into his presence. He concluded with reprobating the conduct of the mother, and
heartily recommending the girl to Lady Roebuck's notice, who declared, as Emma
was in want of an assistant, she should be immediately placed about the person
of Annette.

CHAPTER IX.
IN WHICH THE READER IS ATTACKED ON THE SIDE OF HIS SENSIBILITY.

IT never, for a single moment, occurred to Charles that he had wrought an
event most wonderfully in his own favor by thus punishing the painter; for
Jude -- so was the miller's daughter called -- rang the changes in his praise
so continually, that, as her voice was the voice of nature, and her sentiments
strong genuine gratitude, his cause could not even in Emma have had half so
powerful an advocate: nay with Emma herself: -- for though she was well enough
pleased that the youth had conceived favorable thoughts of her, though she
admired the ready willingness with which he had corrected his error, yet there
was, with her, a distinct difference in the two cases. As to herself, she was a
host alone; she defied temptation; and, to such a youth as Charles, she was
rather pleased than concerned that she had had an opportunity of showing upon
what erroneous ground he began his career, and what certain misery would be the
consequence of his persuting in indiscriminate pursuits, in which he might be
assured, though he would often dupe others, he would oftener be duped himself.

Emma represented to him that the sensations of a tender and susceptible heart,
which had given a single pang to suffering virtue, must be intolerable; and
therefore conjured him to cease from a conduct which was foolish as well as
wicked, impolitic as well as unworthy; for it was a barter of virtue for
infamy, transient pleasure for lasting pain: and however consonant to the
boisterous and turbulent passions of youth, would, throughout his life, be
overshadowed by a cloud of wretchedness, which the splendor of rank and
distinction would vainly struggle to dissipate.

To say the truth, this incident had touched Emma in the right key; for if she
gave Charles credit for his delicate and honorable treatment of Jude, how much
then was due to her admonitions which produced it?

If Emma had a weak side, certainly this was it. She was perfectly a schemer on
the side of virtue, and thought the passions might be bottled up, like the
winds of Aeolus; forgetting that there never wants curious and turbulent
spirits to let them out, not only to excite fresh dangers, but make the case
worse, by leaving no remedy.

Nevertheless, nothing could be purer than poor Emma's intentions, which,
though they were not always infallible, hit nine times out of ten as she wished
they should. Here it was impossible they should miss. Standfast indeed, had he
so far condescended, would have at pleasure changed the form of every one of
them; and, spite of Emma's penetration, have shown them, even to her, so
deformed that she should scarcely have known them for her own.

This gentleman, however, seems to be meditating at a distance; and, as the
course is left free for youth, sweetness, good nature, and ingenuity to pay
their open court to beauty, modesty, and delicate sensibility, no wonder if,
sanctioned by parents, strongly supported by irresistible advocates, and their
mutual wishes being in their essence eminently congenial, a strong, and, one
would think, indissoluble compact must naturally be formed between Charles and
Annette.

To speak plain, which I, as well as Emma, think the best way, so many were the
desirable ends an union between this amiable couple promised to aecomplish,
that, had it not been for their youth -- though probably they would not have
found that an objection -- neither themselves, the fathers and mothers,
connections and dependants, the two villages of Castlewick and Little Hockley
-- for Little Hockley was really now rising into same, in spite of Mrs. Swash
and her unworthy propensities, for which, between the reader and I, she got
well thrashed by her husband -- not one of these I say but would have blessed
the day which united this lovely pair, and, what to some of them would not have
been an unwelcome object, have produced an extraordinary grand feast.

But whether fortune thought with Emma that virtues and passions are given us
to be exercised and controlled, or whether the mind, like the constitution, is
soberer in its age for having been taken down in its youth, I shall not pretend
to decide here: -- certain it is that the blind and varying goddess did not
altogether take part with the friends of our hero and heroine; the reason why,
and the manner how, she thought proper to dissent from this otherwise unanimous
opinion, will hereafter be gradually developed. In the mean time, I am really
concerned that, just when we find Charles and Annette in the full enjoyment of
their friends' admiration, and that of one another, I should be under the
unpleasant necessity of throwing as complete a damp over all their spirits --
such a scene of light and darkness is this life -- as I had before presented to
them of joy and exultation.

I am sure the very name of poor Lady Hazard will anticipate every word of the
sad tale it is my unwilling duty to relate. This amiable lady, this lovely,
this fatal sacrifice to complicated villainy, whose fall was doomed to tear the
heart of him who in early life had departed from the paths of honor: This
charming victim, who it should seem by an error of fate received the blow that
was meant for her lord: -- But it was no error; it is blindness to suppose fate
can err; he was to live, that in the expiation of his original guilt, his pangs
might torture him with accumulated keenness: --

Sweet Lady Hazard, who had seemed to decline with the summer, had been for
some weeks evidently hastening to her dissolution, when at length the solemn
sentence of the physicians precluded all hope. Indeed she felt that a few hours
would put a period to her sufferings, and desired, with calm resignation, that
she might, for the last time, see her friends about her.

This affecting request was soon complied with, for Lady Roebuck had been
almost continually with her from the moment she was in actual danger, and
though our hero and his companions had, at different opportunities, employed
their time as we have seen, yet the most thoughtless of them would at any
moment have flown to have contributed in the slightest degree to her ease or
comfort. In fact, she was gliding out of the world by such imperceptible
degrees, that, as she supported her melancholy situation with wonderful
fortitude, there had ever been, till very lately, some slight hope of her
recovery.

Lord Hazard had some time, by her own particular desire, been left alone with
his lady. Before however I relate what passed at this affecting interview, that
I may not improperly interrupt the reader's banquet of grief -- which by some
is thought to be a very delicious luxury -- I shall notice, in order, if
possible, to heighten the loveliness of Lady Hazard, and the wretchedness of
her Lord, that, owing to some expressions which fell from the surgeon, during
the operation at the John of Gaunt -- which I have described as particular as
was necessary or delicate -- she became acquainted with that secret which seems
to be set up as a beacon in this history to warn the reader that a very small
deviation from prudence may plunge a family into irretrievable misery.

The interview between Lord and Lady Hazard was of that affecting kind that at
once excites pity and terror. It was one of those moments when the tongue
denies relief to the heart, when nature would sink but for the assistance of
madness, and when the pressure of calamity numbs the keenness of its torture.

Lord Hazard, overwhelmed with the recollection of his unworthiness, and loaded
with the self-reproaching consciousness of his guilt, lay in a torpid stupor.
His angel wife, though every sigh hastened her departure, pitied his pangs, and
sorrowed for his sufferings. He, burning to disclose what shame forbid him to
utter, and she dreading a horrid tale she had long and silently anticipated!

In this state -- that hand of death extended over her brow which he would have
given the world to have been directed to his -- no merciful tear to relieve his
swolen heart, he must have expired with excessive sensibility, had not a few
inarticulate sounds, accompanied by a piteous sigh, burst from his tortured
bosom.

'Be calm, my sweet love,' cried Lady Hazard: 'Calm!' returned he -- her
celestial voice penetrating his torn heart, and the tears gushing in torrents
from his eyes -- 'Yes, calm as the pitiless butcher that kills the innocent
lamb! When thy spotless soul shall look down with just horror and kind
commiseration on thy polluted husband, and thy cruel murderer, then tell me to
be calm! Infuse thy incomparable innocence into my culpable heart, inspire me
with virtue, and teach me to be happy. See! Oh heavenly God! -- she hears me
with sorrow, but not with astonishment! She knew it! -- it is plain she knew it!
-- and my foul crimes have, like the influence of a malignant poison, slowly
consumed her life! Pity, pardon, immaculate angel! -- But my thoughtless frenzy
is too much for her tender frame. How are you, my love? She answers wildly!' --
And so indeed she did. Lord Hazard's violence had thrown her into a delirium,
in which she remained a few minutes, and then expired!

The incoherent expressions she uttered during this melancholy interval,
sufficiently confimed Lord Hazard that his lady was but too well acquainted
with the fatal secret; and, lest he should not be wretched enough at her loss,
he had now the additional reflection that his crime had first sapped the
foundation of her peace, and afterward gradually destroyed her life.
Regardless however of any discovery, or its consequences, he summoned every
possible assistance to her aid; but no syllable that escaped Lady Hazard
reached any ear, except that Charles, who first entered the room, heard his
mother fervently exclaim, which were the last words she uttered, 'If any
blessings were in store for me, of which I have been untimely deprived, shower
them, merciful heaven, upon the head of my dear boy.'

CHAPTER X.
NEW MATTER.

Having so completely thrown the two families in the country into the vapors,
as to make it impossible they should play any of their whimsical tricks in our
absence, the reader and I will take a look at Mr. Standfast and his associates;
and, as much as any thing, because it is now high time that we should rescue
that gentleman's fame from such an opprobrious stain as that of having
compassed the death of Lady Hazard, and brought about that scene of distress
described in the last chapter, solely for the purpose of doing mischief.

I am ready to grant that no man upon earth had more satisfaction in
contemplating the wretchedness which was produced by any one of his
contrivances, but then I do insist that it was not so much for the pleasure of
the thing, as the collateral consideration; and I sincerely believe, ill as I
think of him, that could he have had the smallest chance of doubling his
advantage, be it in profit or pleasure, by sacrificing his whole party, he
would not have made a single scruple.

But, to argue this matter fairly. What had Mr. Standfast gained by heaping all
this complicated mischief on the head of his friend and benefactor, but an
addition to the salary which he had honestly earned by being tutor to Charles?
Why nothing literally, to be sure, as to himself. As to whom then? This is an
article that remains to be accounted for. Again, if Mr. Standfast, on his own
account, received no other satisfaction -- which surely was a small reward for
such eminent villainy -- what other motive stimulated him? Revenge. -- Revenge!
Yes: -- and now let me get rid of these two articles. And first, as to whom he
seemed to be working for.

Know then reader that Mr. Standfast, the consummately artful Mr. Standfast,
whose superior talents in the craft of inflicting unmerited calamity none ever
attained, whose truly diabolical spirit never conceived mischief complete
unless the shaft with which it wounded struck at virtue, who could cajole and
cozen all the world, and dupe every one else, was himself a dupe to -- Mrs.
O'Shocknesy!

Here is the collateral consideration, but whence the revenge? From the same
quarter. Mr. Standfast, who held all women as his slaves, who treated serious,
reasonable, honorable love as a banter; who mocked at the very idea of a
solemn and sacred obligation to a woman; this very Mr. Standfast, -- pity him,
oh pity him, villain as he is -- was a slave to Mrs. O'Shocknesy. Hence his
revenge. He was her first love; was the friend of him who killed her husband in
a duel; she had a child by him before she saw Lord Hazard, and would have
married him, but that his lordship stepped in and carried her: -- nay, let me
whisper to the reader, that it was not impossible but Zekiel was his son.

A number of doubts which the reader had before formed, are now dissipated; nor
will it be necessary to go again over the minutiae of Mr. Standfast's conduct,
which was dictated by her, though carried into effect by him; and, as she dared
join ostensible acts to his covert ones, what wonder if the unsuspecting virtue
of Lord Hazard was surprised.

Her views and her ambition were obvious. -- Lady Hazard was to be put out of
the way by a diabolical contrivance, which, had it been avowed, could have
fastened nothing on its perpetrators. His lordship would naturally be
inconsolable for her loss, and who knew if he would survive it, when he came to
consider that it originated in his guilt. Should this imaginary blessing be
realized, her son would come into possession of the title and estate; if not,
she would at least have the triumphant consolation that she had imbittered his
future felicity.

This conduct was natural and common, infamous as it was. But how shall we
account for that of her paramour, who could not, fond soul, rest in the country
absent from her he loved. Charles, as to Miss Figgins, was a stoic to him. The
lady had promised, on the death of Lady Hazard, to honor him with her hand,
and instead of going to receive the last benediction of an expiring uncle, his
business in town was to keep from expiring the valuable love of the amiable
Mrs. O'Shocknesy.

Thus, while friendship, obligation, and all other ties that naturally induce
gratitude, only stimulated Mr. Standfast to every atrocious and rascally
measure that could sap the foundation, and lay a train for the destruction, of
that love and harmony that were exemplary in the family of his patron and
benefactor. The mere whim and caprice of a woman, whom he knew to be worthless,
and completely the reverse of every thing for which she could expect
admiration, made him -- expert as he was at every thing artful, proof as he was
against every thing but self -- undertake the most wicked, as well as the most
silly, things in nature. Here is a Hercules, not contented with wielding the
club -- not quite so worthily, by the bye -- he buckles to the distaff.

It will be unnecessary for me to mention that Figgins was sent for and fixed
with Charles by Mr. Standfast's participation; nor will it very probably have
escaped the reader's sagacity that the whole affair of Miss Figgins, who had
not been with child, was nothing more than to hold out a pretended secret over
the head of that young gentleman; for both Standfast and Figgins well knew that
there is not a stronger hold of a grateful and generous heart than the
knowledge of obligation: and this is the sort of credulity I have described as
a part of our hero's composition, which, throughout his life, induced him to be
thankful to others for lending him imaginary benefits, that they might receive
from him real ones.

But why should Charles be devoted to the same ruin with others? He could not
possibly hinder any one of their schemes. He had nothing that could give them
the smallest uneasiness. Was it then nothing to be the darling child, the
hopeful cherished favorite, while Mrs. O'Shocknesy and her son were turned
into the world, the sport of malicious tongues, and the vestiges of fallen
greatness? Charles -- though were the records of the human heart searched for
every thing good and great that ever made up an amiable character, the same
marks of worth would be found in his: -- Charles must be traduced, must be
vilified, it was necessary, it was material; he must be sunk that his elder
brother might rise. Besides, Mr. Standfast had a husband in his eye for
Annette; a better husband; since who can deny but a rich, sensible, thinking
youth, as one will appear, answers that description more perfectly than a poor,
vicious, dissipated, inconstant wretch, as will be the character of the other.

Reader, it was not Zekiel that our friend Standfast had found out for Annette.
I know not if such an attempt would not have been a touch even above his art;
but, however, that young gentleman will probably show, by and by, that he would
choose to be consulted before any material step should be taken that concerned
him.

Master Zekiel had, at the time I am speaking, pretty decided opinions, and one
of them was to appear, however he might really be, satisfied with all his
mother and Mr. Standfast should determine, unless they should ask him to sign
any paper, which he was fully resolved never to do.

As the reader has not yet heard the upshot of the business relative to those
letters wherein an application was made for the grant of the estate in
Warwickshire, I may as well inform him here that Sir Sidney's application
rendered that of Mrs. O'Shocknesy and her son fruitless; therefore, through
Standfast's advice, an addition was made to the annual stipend of the son, who
immediately left Eaton, and went to France, with Snaffle for his companion, and
Flush for his valet; while Dogbolt, who had long ago dropped his title, being a
handsome fellow, occasionally comforted Mrs. O'Shocknesy, when Mr. Standfast,
who as yet dared not see her, except by stealth, was out of the way.

Mr. Kiddy had taken good care to make himself particularly useful to Zekiel,
who swore there was so much fun and gig about the rum dog, that he would rather
have him for a companion than all the black-jacket codgers in England.

Whether Kiddy had any latent meaning in the singular pains he took to
ingratiate himself with his young master, I will not here enquire; but
certainly Standfast one day told him to take care how he came on, to which
Kiddy archly replied, 'Oh, as for that, master governor, don't you go for to be
uneasy: honor you know among thieves.'

Thus have I shown, when all things are considered, that Standfast was the
worst actor in his own farce. Nay I know not, upon all great occasions, whether
to the subordinate objects the whole praise is not attributable. Trim says,
while he is mustering his tattered troop, fifty thousand such ragged rascals as
these would make an ALEXANDER, and who can deny but the tailor and the
mantua-maker tell truth when they say that the splendor of the birth night is
owing to them.

CHAPTER XI.
A RECEIPT FOR BUILDING, BY BEGINNING AT THE SUPERSTRUCTURE.

FOR want of leisure, or perhaps inclination, or for some other wise reason, no
less cogent, I did not mention to the reader that, at the last grand feast, a
young stranger appeared, and indeed attracted a great deal of notice. He was
then just arrived from Madeira, and brought letters to Sir Sidney from a
merchant there, with whom the baronet dealt for wines, and transacted other
business. Coming so opportunely, he was invited to the feast, and cut, as I
have said, no inconsiderable figure.

Charles took great pleasure in accommodating this gentleman, whose name was
Gloss; studying his ease and convenience while he remained in Warwickshire. He
requested the pleasure of corresponding with him, and begged his intimate
friendship when he should return to England, with a view of settling, which he
talked of doing after he should have taken a trip to the Cape of Good Hope,
where his father had died immensely rich, on his return from India.

The winter had now began so to perriwig the trees, as somebody has called it
-- by the way, somebody and nobody are very useful figures in rhetoric -- that
the semicircle of evergreens before Sir Sidney's saloon, with the clusters near
it, looked like a vegetable court of judges and counselors, in powdered ties
and full-bottoms.

This hint, and a call of the house of commons -- for Sir Sidney had stayed in
the country beyond his usual time, roused the baronet, and made him begin to
think of putting on his boots. Yet not even his duty, dearly as he loved it,
could induce him to stir a step without Lord Hazard, who was become what
SHAKESPEARE says of life, 'a walking shadow.'

Lord Hazard looked upon himself as the executioner of his wife, and though his
grief was inward, yet it did not escape such vigilant friendship as Sir
Sidney's. His lordship declared he would devote himself to retirement. His
friends, however, at length prevailed; and, to make the satisfaction complete
and universal, Annette was, for the first time, to see London, accompanied by
Emma.

It was the continual study of every one to make Lord Hazard's time pass
agreeably, in which pleasurable task Mr. Standfast now assisted, whose presence
his lordship confessed contributed greatly to relieve his care, though heaven
knows he had no such intention; for his visits were for no other purpose than
to warn him of certain snares which Mrs. O'Shocknesy was not preparing for him,
in order, if possible, to entangle him in others that she was.

About Christmas arrived Charles's friend Gloss, from the Cape of Good Hope,
where he had, he said, settled his affairs greatly to his satisfaction. -- He
brought answers to some letters with which Sir Sidney entrusted him for Madeira.

As Mr. Gloss will hereafter cut no inconsiderable figure in this history, it
may not be improper to give some account of him. He was the son of a clergyman,
who, probably, knowing that the advancement in the learned professions was a
thing that depended less upon merit than interest, had bred him up to trade:
not sparing, however, to give him a complete education, which he very properly
thought could do him no harm in any situation.

One thing, however, was very romantic in this scheme. All these bricks were to
be made without straw; for the old gentleman either could not, or would not,
give his son a shilling, toward laying a foundation for that fortune he was
nevertheless sure he would one day or other make. But having added the living
languages to the dead ones, and procured a recommendation for him to a
countinghouse at Lisbon, they parted: the father furnishing him with some
excellent rules for the regulation of his future conduct, and forbidding him to
draw for any thing but advice.

The young gentleman's temper happened luckily to fall in with his father's. He
undertook, if he were eligibly set out, to make his fortune. His maxims were,
from early youth, that if a man chose to fix his eye upon a spot, let it be
ever so out of his present reach, or surrounded by ever such difficulties,
through perseverance it might be come at. In little, he had proved this
doctrine to be founded; for he never in his life possessed, in his own right, a
single sixpence, and yet he had cut a figure with the best.

It is curious to remark, that though no man upon earth knew better the value
of substance than Mr. Gloss, yet he seem constantly to live upon shadow. The
appearance, and not the thing itself, seemed to be what he most delighted in.
He so completely turned round all his employers in their own business, that the
tide of their fortune soon ran in a larger channel, and they were astonished at
the riches which originated from plans of his advising. They however little
considered what a yoke they were forming for themselves; for it was not long
before the young gentleman stipulated for a participation of their profits, in
consequence of which he took the earliest opportunity to involve the affairs of
the partnership, and was the only one able to save any thing from the wreck of
a bankruptcy, in which the whole concern was soon involved.

After this stroke he went to Madeira, where he drew a picture of the folly of
his partners, and showed very clearly -- for it is certainly true that people
are to be reasoned into, as well as out of, any thing -- how unwisely they had
acted, and how foolishly he had thrown away his time.

Being, through a house with which he had been connected, very soon taken in an
active partner, for a slight share of the profits, and with liberty to trade
privately on his own account, he entered into the spirit of the Madeira trade
in such a style as astonished every merchant on the island. He had the address
to tie the Dunkirk dealers down to give him and his connections a preference in
brandies, provided they dealt to such an amount; in consequence of which he
soon had it in his power to stagnate the Dunkirk trade in Madeira, by being
able to undersell the brandy merchants themselves, who, eager to catch at the
bait he held out for them, had supplied him largely, little suspecting he would
hold back what he had bought, with a view of forestalling their next market.

I give this as one among a variety of instances in which he saw further into
people's affairs than they did themselves. By this means he had resources for
them which they never dreamt of, and of course was able to stipulate for better
terms for himself.

In the mean time it was, one would think, this man's pride never to have a
shilling he could call his own. Nothing was expensive enough for him, and when
it was his turn to treat at Bachelor's-hall, -- a place at Madeira built by the
unmarried men, and remarkable for hospitality -- it was in a style that
astonished every body: for his taste was equal to his ingenuity.

At length Madeira became too barren a spot for the fecundity of his genius. He
left it after giving it many real advantages, and was universally regretted, as
a man wonderfully calculated for business, and yet a most agreeable companion.

He got a considerable sum for his concern in the house he left, which he took
care, in a few months, to get rid of in England.

The reader remembers that this gentleman brought letters from his connections
in Madeira to Sir Sidney. These were of course greatly in his favor. Indeed
the baronet was very well disposed to show him any kindness; but it was among
the maxims of Mr. Gloss never to make use of a friend except to carry a
material point, and a man must be very shallow indeed if he could not pretty
well guess beforehand whether that point could be carried.

The plan upon which this young gentleman proceeded was very simple, but it
required consummate talents. It was nothing more than to administer to every
man's foibles, and reprobate his vices. It is imppossible to describe how a man
is infallibly taken hold of by a conduct of this kind. Very few are uniformly
good, or uniformly wicked; therefore, all who are not have both follies and
vices mixed with some good qualities, Our follies are always agreeable to us,
but though all vices are the consequence of them, we detest the vice itself,
while we hug the folly that may have caused it. Close however as we may take
folly to our hearts, we never fail to be privately ashamed of ourselves for it,
nor to attribute, in the face of the world, our actions to any thing else
rather than this hidden cause. What power then must that man have over you,
who, by encouraging you in your foibles, not only has discovered this
pleasurable deformity you are so studious to hide, but, by glossing it over,
contrives to make you believe it appears as agreeable to him as to yourself.
This man has your heart fully and wholly, and there is nothing you can deny him.

This was Mr. Gloss, who, however he came by it, had this art in the highest
perfection, and knew so well how and upon whom to play his game, that he was
ever sure of coming off winner.

Nor are the talents which form this character of necessity required to be very
brilliant, though various and perspicuous. They are of the minor kind: a
quickness of conception, a close observation on men and manners, some
shrewdness, and a good memory comprising them all: to which indeed -- but that
would be a deduction in worthy matters -- must be indispensibly added,
frontless impudence and a total want of feeling.

Any man with these in his possession, if he employ himself in nothing but this
pursuit, will arrive to as great perfection in the noble art of playing upon
mankind, as will raise him to that degree of consequence he may think proper.

These qualifications stood with Mr. Gloss in the place of Fortune, and with
these he turned that fickle lady's wheel as he thought proper.

Will not the reader begin to feel uncomfortable when, in conformity to that
veracity which all historians should critically keep in view, I am obliged to
declare that this was the gentleman Mr. Standfast had in his eye as a husband
for Annette.

Charles, Figgins, and Mr. Gloss were inseparable. The latter cut a prodigious
figure. He had an elegant chariot, half a dozen footmen, and might have been
taken for a newly arrived nabob. It was an extraordinary thing, however, that
go where they would, though he was sure to run up a most expensive reckoning,
he, by some carelessness or other, constantly left his purse at home, so that
he presently became indebted to Charles more than two hundred pounds in odds
and ends of this kind.

This passed off as eccentricity, and as he had a most agreeable apparent
indolence of mind, which, by the way, was what Kiddy would have called a copy
of his countenance, he appeared to our hero the most delightful companion he
had ever met with.

It was agreed that Charles, with Figgins as a companion, should, early in the
spring, set out to make a tour of Europe, in which he ventured to express a
very strong wish that Mr. Gloss would accompany him.

This however could not be. That gentleman was in treaty for a borough, which a
member was expected every day to vacate in his favor. Besides, he had
requested Sir Sidney to cheapen an estate for him in Warwickshire, and he was
cursedly afraid that a certain woman of condition, that he said should be
nameless -- and so she well might, for she was not in existence -- would insist
upon a kind of a half promise he had made, and noose him; which matter, he
said, were it really serious, he verily believed would drive him abroad; for he
did not think the possession of the finest and richest woman in the kingdom a
compensation for the loss of any man's liberty of his figure and consequence.

CHAPTER XII.
CONSISTING OF ADVICE AND AN ADIEU TO ENGLAND.

THE spring put an end to those town enjoyments which had employed the leisure
hours of our hero and his connections, and now Charles and his friend Figgins
began to prepare for an excursion to those parts of the world where true
politeness is thought to be native, so heartily do Englishmen reprobate the
manners of their own country, though they so dearly love its principles.

It was settled that our hero should go on to Italy, by the borders of
Flanders, and not see Paris till on his return to England, through the heart of
France; as it was thought, by that means, he would the better taste the
pleasures of that capital.

Charles's heart was fully set on this tour, and, for several days, it was the
general topic of all the friends. He received the good wishes and advice of all
with great thankfulness. Sir Sidney, with the heartiest friendship, entreated
him not to engraft French manners upon an English cion. He begged of him to
hear, see, and consider; to approve and adopt whatever mended the heart, but to
reject with contempt all that merely went to decorate the person. He said a
flattering exterior was a dangerous thing, and there were sometimes more art
and design under a feather, than any graver decoration of the head. He said the
whole character of the French was comprehended in minutiae; that this rendered
them at first sight agreeable, afterward necessary, and at length, to
credulous men, endearing, but to the penetrating trifling and tiresome.

Sir Sidney said he would not wish for a better authority for pronouncing a man
weak and ignorant than his having a strong attachment, upon repeated trials, to
the French in general. They were, he said, polite without good manners;
acquainted with every thing, though perfect in nothing; praying one moment and
cheating the next; holding you in their arms, and laughing over your shoulder;
gay with design; accommodating with arrogance; apparently open, but really
hypocritical; assuming with meanness. In short, he said their lives were a
mixture of pride and servility; self-consequence and adulation; stateliness and
cringing; protestation and insincerity; and though their sports were the sports
of children, their mischief was the mischief of monkies.

'Happy the man then, sir,' said Charles, 'who, like you, can sensibly
discriminate between the extremes of this motley character, and retain so much
of it for his own use as shall make him wary in his dealings with the world,
without being dishonorable.'

'I know not,' said Sir Sidney, 'whether I deserve your compliment, but this is
the very effect I would wish the French manners to have upon you, who, however
cautioned, will, I fear, from the openness of your heart, and your strong
desire to find men what they ought to be, take, without examination, that dross
which the French so very easily contrive to pass for sterling. As to Italy, see
every valuable picture, statue, and structure; hear all that is excellent in
music, admire the country, and come away, lest, exclusive of the danger to your
own morals, you are obliged to confess that the most beautiful, and once the
most glorious, place in the world, is now the most infamous.'

Lady Roebuck, who truly regarded Charles as her son, as much from inclination
as from a promise made to Lady Hazard on her death bed, gave him only general
advice as to his youth and inexperience, relying however on his strong good
sense, and that rectitude of heart which, as we have already noticed, was
remarkable in so young a man. She promised to keep Annette firmly to her
sentiments of esteem for him, and doubted not but his conduct would warrant all
her exertions in the promotion of his happiness; and finally, that Annette
improved at home, and he abroad, there could be no doubt of their making one of
the most happy, as well as elegant couples in the world.

Emma warned him against the jays of France and the nightingales of Italy. She
said she foresaw that, if his heart was not steel and adamant, he would be
ruined; that she had read his mind thoroughly, and plainly saw that the only
vice he had in the world was want of deceit. It was, to be sure, a strange
declaration, but it was very true. That she should not wonder at any thing he
became in the hands of the French and Italians; for he was such pliable wax
that any man, with a plausible story, the argument of which could be deduced
from a good motive, might shape him into any form. She begged of him, in
particular, to beware of holy hypocrites. What she had read, she told him, of
their cruelty and dissoluteness, was yet worse, if possible, than all the
gambols with which the forms of their facetious religion seemed to burlesque
its author: or rather, the author of that which they daringly ventured to
innovate, and which involved a system of morality mild as mercy, and benignant
as his holy name who established it. Above all she cautioned him against
convents, and an intercourse with those drones of society the inmates of them,
who, from leisure to plan, and inclination to execute, were the perpetrators of
every species of profligacy and mischief. Her reading, she said, had induced
her to believe that there were more than three hundred thousand cloystered
clergy in France, and a proportionable number of females; that the wickedness,
the attrocious wickedness carried on within those walls, which were supposed to
immure saints, was shockto humanity.

Emma further observed that it could not be supposed that any thing like the
licentious infamy of France and Italy could ever have been practiced here,
because England had, properly speaking, never been the seat of that dangerous
religion; but let it be recollected, in the reign of Henry the Eighth, what
barbarous, what detestable vestiges of popish profligacy were discovered at the
demolishing Netley abbey, and many other convents. -- Subterraneous
communications for nightly visits from friars to nuns, and nuns to friars.
Hidden infants apparently murdered. If then the plant, which was here an
exotic, grew to such perfection, how must it flourish in its native soil. It
was horrible to think of it!

'But,' added Emma, if I may credit what I have read, this most unholy,
irreverent, indecent, ridiculous religion, is clearly where it exists a jest
with all but the superstitious ignorant. What is the mode of choosing a pope
but a blasphemous imposition, in which, one would think, to punish them for
presumptuously daring to give out that their election is from heaven, they
once, by inspiration no doubt, as well as upon all other occasions, chose a
woman, who betrayed her sex, their shame, and opened the eyes of every one who
chose to see. But vive la bagatelle in that, as in every thing else, soon got
the better of good sense and sound reason, and they went on electing popes, the
choice of heaven; not however without taking a precaution, lest heaven should
have again deceived them.'

Emma's precautions were applauded by a burst of laughter, and Charles
entreated her to make herself perfectly easy, giving her his word that he would
take particular care that his small plantation of understanding should not be
eaten up by these black locusts.

Annette took an innocent but tender leave of her lover; for Emma had ever
encouraged her not to be ashamed of a truly virtuous passion. Our hero felt
himself greatly charmed at the distinction, and exulted not a little at
reflecting that after time and experience should have prepared him with manly
and proper resolutions, and given him riper qualities of mind and person, the
possession of so charming an object would be within his reach. Many were their
mutual protestations: ardent, yet innocent; heartfelt, yet reasonable. At
length they separated, with a promise to write to each other, and with vows of
inviolable fidelity.

One audience now only stood with Lord Hazard, before the time when our hero
was to depart. This interview was without witness. My lord took his son
tenderly by the hand, saying, 'My dear Charles, lowered as I am by my grief,
wretched by calamity, and disordered by both, my merits are more than rewarded
by having you for my son. I never made you a stranger to my youthful excesses;
indeed it would perhaps be policy to paint them to you even in their strongest
colors, that you might shun the certain ruin that awaits such profligacy. Your
incomparable mother, now no more, was -- I cannot think of it but my soul is in
arms -- given me to bless my repentant heart with comfort more than such a
wretch deserved; yet did I, after the enjoyment of such bliss, such unexampled
delight, dash the cup of happiness from my lips, in the very moment that it
held for me all the blessings of life in one delicious draught.

'Wonder not at my words, Charles, it is very true; your mother owes her death
to me! -- to your father! -- to your wretched culpable father! He who should
from duty, from gratitude, from a sense of his own honor, her virtues, her
angelic virtues, have avoided like contagion the most distant means that could
wound her mind the thousandth part of a moment, much less join with wretches,
with infamous detestable wretches, to work the destruction of her peace, and
then her life! Oh look with pity,' cried he, in agony, injured, martyred saint,
and calm the woes that tear me! -- that destroy me! -- that feed me with such
torturing remorse as would make me think annihilation a blessing! My dear boy
thou art astonished.' --

'I am indeed sir,' said Charles; 'but it cannot be; I know sir it is
impossible. The fixed, the solemn melancholy with which my indeed incomparable
mother's death has shaded your brow, makes you see every thing through a sadly
deceitful medium, and you think the irregularities of your youth sat near her
heart. But cheer away this melancloly, my lord and father: let me forego my
intention of traveling, and stay to comfort you by my watchful and tender
duty. I will swear to have no joy, no employment, but the dear pleasing task of
exhausting all my little talents to divert and soften your anxiety.'

'My good, my noble boy,' said Lord Hazard, I cannot now enjoy a single glimpse
of happiness but that which results from reflecting how great, how illustrious
a figure you will one day make. My heart is set on your traveling, and the
letters I shall receive from you will be all my comfort. As for the rest, time
and reflection, sweeted by the friendship of Sir Sidney, may restore my health
-- which I will endeavor to preserve for thy sake -- but nothing can give me
back my peace of mind. This unhappy business, which was not a youthful folly,
but a relapse of honor: -- Poor boy, I little thought, when I was schooling
thee, how much I stood in need of a tutor myself. But my words, like my deeds,
want connection. I was going to say I would relate this damned business to you
by letter, with reflections; the whole of which together may serve you for an
excellent system of advice, for it will have both honest precept and dreadful
example in one.'

Charles acceeded to the terms, and pledged himself before hand, so well he
said he knew his father's excellent heart, that in discussing this business, be
it what it might, the guilt would vanish, though the cala^ity should remain.

My (...) thanking his son for this earnest of his tender ^ty, proceeded in
more tranquillity to tell him the state of his expectations.

'Heaven knows, my dear, my worthy boy,' said he, 'that it would be the pride
of my life could I leave you my her^ditary estate and honors, but they are so
rigidly tied up, that it is impossible. All you can have therefore is your
mother's jointure, amounting to about fifteen hundred a year, and what ready
money I may die possessed of, which I hope will realize for you an annuity
equal to that amount: and with this fortune I know Sir Sidney will be content
to take you for his son in (...). Your income till you are of age will be a
thousand a year: spend this freely; I give you leave; but do not spend a
shilling more. If I should die before you return -- '

'Far be that unhappy day,' said Charles. 'Come sir, take leave of melancholy
reflections; I shall not else have the heart to leave you. Indeed I can hardly
bear the thought at any rate. Warm as my youthful imagination paints the
various pleasures of different courts and nations, I should be wretched in the
midst of them all, and alone though in a throng, if I thought, in my absence,
my father indulged a single sigh that my presence could suppress.'

'Noble boy,' said Lord Hazard, 'charming youth, adieu: your kind words shall
serve me for consolation till I have your first letter; your first letter till
I have your second; and thus you see pleasure will accumulate with me -- and
every post too -- for by every post I hope you will write.' 'I will indeed, my
dear father,' said Charles, 'but let me not go while you are thus uneasy. I
feel a reluctance, an unspeakable reluctance to leave you. There is an
inquietude hangs over me that I cannot describe.' 'It is nothing, my kind boy,'
said his father, 'but the damp I have thrown on your spirits; my letters
however will dissipate it. I have ever wanted to open my heart to you, for I
wish to think you as much a friend as a son. -- Do then, by the most tender,
the most endearing expressions, in both qualities, hearten me to live to be
happy, to make thee so; thee, my good boy, my only remaining comfort!' 'Doubt
not my whole power, my whole devotion,' said Charles. 'Be assured there is no
pursuit upon earth that I shall not consider as secondary to my duty to the
best of fathers.' 'And now Charles,' said my lord, 'almost the happiestof
fathers, since I see I shall derive so much pleasure from thee.'

A servant now informed them the chaise was ready. A few more reciprocal
promises of attention passed, after which they joined the company, to every
individual of which Charles bid a tender adieu; till at length, having embraced
his father with uncommon emotion, he burst into a flood of tears, hurried with
Figgins to the chaise, and had got twenty miles before he once opened his mouth.

THE YOUNGER BROTHER
BOOK IV.
CONTAINING A STILL LARGER FIELD OF ACTION.
CHAPTER I.
CONSISTING OF POLITENESS, A TRIP TO CALAIS, AND A CURIOUS DISCOVERY.

EVERY thing Mr. Figgins had done hitherto was rather a partial rehearsal
behind the scenes than the actual performance of his part. He now comes forward
on the stage, where we dare trust him without a prompter, so well had he
perfected himself in those scenes where he was destined to make his appearance:
and indeed it were to be wished that other actors, whether on the theater or in
the pulpit, at the bar, at court, or any of those many playhouses in the
kingdom, were -- though but for the sake of consistency -- half so well
qualified to sustain their parts, or half so perfect in them.

Charles had not twice changed horses in his way to Dover before he had much
welcome cause to be charmed with the solicitude of his friend. Figgins well
knew that to treat a disorder in the mind, he must have recourse to a practice
the very reverse of that generally adopted with relation to the body;
therefore, instead of nauseous, unpalatable draughts, in which one would think
its professors imagined consist all the secrets of physic, he studiously went
about to prepare all that he conceived would charm the heart and expand the
liberal mind of our hero. He drew him from his silence by degrees; extolled in
the highest terms of admiration his filial piety; represented the condition of
his father as the workings of a truly amiable mind, formerly irregular indeed,
but now restored to the exercises of reason and benevolence; he drew a warm
picture of both the power and the will of Sir Sidney to sooth all his cares;
and finally, painted the extreme satisfaction that would result to him by a
contemplation that he had one son who would become so great an honor to him as
to make noble amends for the obloquy cast upon his name by the despicable
ignorance and contemptible conduct of the other.

After several similar preparations, he began to enter upon the grand subject,
and at length made his young friend perfectly sensible for what purpose they
were then in the post chaise. France and all its gaieties began insensibly to
blend in their conversation, and Figgins archly remarked that gravity was an
exotic which certainly would not flourish in so smiling a climate.

Charles was ever remarkably tenacious of not permitting his private feelings
to inconvenience his friends, and the less he conceived himself obliged to
restraint by a man's presence, the more forward he was to show that his
attention was voluntary. -- He felt Figgins's kindness, and began to unbend.
Besides, he had high health, and brilliant spirits; and however sincerely he
might grieve at heart when he reflected -- which he certainly very often did
for his time of life -- sorrow caught but little apparent hold on his volatile
mind.

Being arrived at Dover, they bespoke a passage boat to themselves for the next
morning, and while it was yet daylight took a walk to see that cliff which
Emma had convinced herself, by her reading, though now the boundary of the
channel, had certainly, in former times, made a part of the continent.

On their return to supper, the landlady informed them that a young lady,
attended by a footman and a female servant, had arrived since their departure,
and finding that our travelers had engaged the only passage boat on the Dover
side, expressed an anxious wish that she might be permitted to go half the
expense of the vessel, and sail with that opportunity, for that her affairs
called for expedition; and she had been also informed that as the wind blew
right into Calais harbor there would be no chance of any arrival from thence.

It will easily be conceived that the request was instantly complied with,
though not the terms of it. A genteel compliment was instantly returned to the
lady, with an earnest entreaty that she would suffer the gentlemen to wait on
her. The interview was permitted, the lady was complimented with the offer of a
passage for her and her servants, which it was delicately hinted to her must be
gratis, and, after as much hesitation as was due to good breeding, she accepted
the proposal.

What Figgins had so successfully began, this lady completed. She was young,
handsome, and lively, and though there appeared now and then a little levity in
her manner, yet Charles, upon Figgins's suggestion, was willing to attribute it
to her extraction and situation, the first of which they soon learnt from her
own mouth was French, and the latter that of a widow.

In the course of their conversation, it came out, to the great satisfaction of
our travelers, that this young lady, by name St. Vivier, was born in England,
and the daughter of a French refugee; that she married a French gentleman, who
was proscribed for some overt acts in which he stood up for the liberty of the
subject, but he now being dead, she was going to see what she could collect in
France of the scattered remains of his fortune; that her journey was to Lions,
and being obliged to make some stay at Sedan, for intelligence among her late
husband's relations, she should pursue her rout by the borders of Flanders.

As this was step for step the way that had been marked out for Charles, what
could be so fortunate as the above intelligence. This fact was communicated,
and a proposal suggested that they should make that tour together. It was not
however mentioned but with the most suitable propriety as to preparation and
manner. The lady found great difficulty to believe that her route was really
that which our travelers had intended to take, but saw, she said, that they
were so polite as to alter their intention in compliment to her.

Both Charles and Figgins vehemently protested the truth of their assertion,
and indeed used so many arguments to convince her that it would have been an
infringment of that politeness which she seemed to possess in a natural and
elegant degree to have ^urther doubted their veracity. The next difficulty was
that it would appear very odd if she should travel in the company of strangers.
Charles said she had her own servants with her, and Figgins noticed that they
were all alike strangers in France, where indeed no explanations were ever
required when people paid their way. This she said she should make a point of
doing to the utmost farthing, if she consented at all, but at any rate she must
entreat till the morning to consider of the propriety of their proposal, 'for,'
added she, 'a woman of honor cannot be too cautious, especially in such a
licentious country as France has been described to me.'

In this remark both our hero and his friend acquiesced, and now supper being
announced, the lady, after some little difficulty, was prevailed on to partake
of it; not however without remarking that matters must be put upon a different
footing when they should arrive on the other side of the water. To which our
hero replied, with a very penetrating glance, that he sincerely hoped it would
be so, and, upon the lady's looking grave, added, since it appeared to be her
wish.

A smart breeze the next day conducted them safely to Calais in something more
than three hours, where, after the customary ceremonies of entering their
names, paying a visit to the custom-house, giving something in charity, and
satisfying a few clamorous porters, they were glad to get hold of some soup
gras at Desseins, which, as well as the rest of their dinner, they found
excellent.

In the evening they went to the play, which was also performed in the same
inn, where there is a remarkable neat theater, and by no means small. During
the performance Charles was greatly pleased with the remarks of Madame St.
Vivire, who spoke French admirably well, and perfectly tasted the neat
nothingness of the French little operas, two of which were that night given.
Our hero, who knew also that language as well as reading could teach it him,
begged to be this lady's scholar for the practical part of it. She readily
agreed, by which means, as he feigned, whenever he found it convenient, to know
less than he did, he had a thousand opportunities of indulging himself in a
thousand witty sallies, by way of trying how a declaration of love would be
taken, which he the less hesitated to do, as a widow at her own disposal was
fairly out of his agreement.

He first tried his French eloquence to persuade her that the pleasure of her
charming company and the advantage of the rapid improvement he should make
under her tuition would amply overbalance the expenses of their journey. At
first however she could not think of consenting to this, but Charles being
strongly seconded by Figgins, she at length agreed.

This matter set Charles more at ease, for he was pretty well assured she could
not be a woman of very nice honor who would, in this instance, yield to the
solicitation of two strangers. He therefore determined to ply her with the
whole force of his amorous eloquence. At night he took notice she sipped the
burgundy pretty freely, which opportunity he seized to insinuate some bold
hints which were not ill received. Maintaining this ground, he had soon reason
to think the lady would, after a very short siege, surrender in form, which
hopes were confirmed the next morning by Figgins, who had already won the
lady's woman -- both a handsome and genteel girl -- and reaped the fruits of
his victory.

Charles redoubled his assiduity, and Madam St. Vivier, after holding out with
great apparent modesty, at length reluctantly promised to make him happy on
their arrival at Lisle, to which place, having seen every thing at Calais, not
forgetting the picture where the citizens are kneeling to King Edward, with
halters about their necks, which curiosity was recommended to his attention by
Emma, they now prepared to set out.

About an hour before the horses were to be ready, Mr. Dessein begged the
favor of an audience with Charles, which being granted him, after a proper
apology and preparation, he said he had a matter of great delicacy to
communicate, which concerned him nearly.

Charles expressed some surprise at this declaration, and having previously
promised at Dessein's entreaty, that he would in no wise take the matter ill,
he was informed that, some months before, a gentleman came to him one morning,
saying, 'Mr. Dessein I have been robbed of those eighty louis d'ors which I
yesterday received from you in a bag.' He replied it was impossible; that his
money might probably be mislaid, or found by the servants, but that in that
house nobody could be robbed. He would make enquiry, he said, and the money
would be restored to him.

The gentleman went out, and at his return Dessein had eighty louis d'ors ready
for him in a bag similar to the other, for money being in France often paid in
three livre and six livre pieces, the bankers have all bags on purpose.

The excuse made to the gentleman was, that, as the house was very full the
evening before, the servant, after he was asleep, seeing the bag lie on the
ground, had brought it to one of the clerks, who had put it in the counting
house; for it should be known that Dessein is a banker as well as an innkeeper.
The gentleman, not in the least suspecting the truth of what he heard, put the
money in his pocket, and went away.

The fact, however, which had been so artfully suppressed, was this: Dessein
said he saw in a moment that the gentleman had been really robbed, and upon
making his enquiries, as to the situation of the lodgers, he found to a
certainty by whom. In short, he said, this crime was committed by a young
English gentleman, heir to a high title, and a large estate; that it could not
be for want of money, as, no doubt, he might have had what he pleased of his
father; but finding himself in an immediate necessity, instead of applying to
him, in which case he might have been supplied, he took this sum without
considering the consequences.

Mr. Dessein said the resolution he took upon it was to say nothing upon the
subject to any person till he should see the young gentleman himself, for that
out of gratitude to the English, to whom he owed his all, he would rather lose
ten times that sum than make a stir about such a trifle, but that having seen
that young gentleman since, and been treated by him in a very en cavalier
style, though he was determined not to expose him, except to his own family, he
should now certainly make no scruple of applying for the money.

In short, he informed our hero, who began now to smell a rat, that Zekiel was
the thief.

What an opportunity is here to put an end to this history! Charles had nothing
to do but get his brother hanged, to be heir to the family, title, and estate,
his marriage with Annette would have followed of course, and when they had
produced half a dozen children, for Lord Hazard to dandle on his knee, and
comfort himself in his old age, he would have sunk peaceably to rest, and have
left his darling son and daughter in possession of his honors.

Whether Charles foresaw an uniform tranquillity in such a life, and was
determined to experience what sort of pleasures are generally produced by
variety, or whether -- which is full as probable -- he felt a strong wish to
hide his unnatural brother's frailty, we will not enquire. Certain it is, he,
without hesitation, repaid Mr. Dessein upon the spot, thanked him for his
prudence, and represented that he was sorry to see his brother possessed so
insolent a spirit, but begged he would consider the whole as an extravagant
tour de jeunesse, which had more of false wit in it than premeditated vice. He
desired that the whole might sink into oblivion, and in particular that it
might never come to his father's ears.

Mr. Dessein promised literally to follow the directions of our hero, with
whose manner and generosity he was very much struck; and could not help
remarking that he plainly saw, though the honor was vested in the elder
brother, the younger possessed the virtues which could alone enoble a family.

CHAPTER II.
STRANGE ADVENTURES AT AN INN -- BEING THE HALFWAY HOUSE THROUGH THIS LITERARY
JOURNEY.

CHARLES having finished this business greatly to his satisfaction, determined
that no hint should escape him concerning it, not even to Figgins; but, lest
future instances of his brother's nefarious conduct should multiply in a
strange country, where it would cost him dearly to extricate himself from such
difficulties, he lengthened a letter he had already written to his father, by
first very delicately apologizing for touching on such a subject, and then
entreating that his brother's allowance might be augmented, even though his own
should be curtailed; for that it was impossible for a man in any style to cut a
figure in France -- particularly a young and inexperienced man -- with a
slender income. He gave some general reasons for this request, and, though with
great deference, strongly submitted the matter to his father's consideration.

After entreating Mr. Dessein to send any letters forward for him to Lisle, he
took leave of Calais.

At Lisle they purposed staying a few days, and as Charles promised himself the
possession of Madame St. Vivier, he was determined to sport as grand a figure
as his circumstances would allow. -- He therefore hired a carriage, made
parties, and gave petits soupees at his inn, which were of course frequented by
as many guests, particularly officers and abbes, as could beg, borrow, or steal
cards of invitation.

One evening, about half an hour before supper, arrived un My Lor Anglois, with
a gentleman and lady, two footmen and a maid servant, who could not get so
elegant a repast as they wished, all the delicacies being taken up by our hero,
who had invited a large party by way of adieu to Lisle. -- Charles, when he
came to understand the inconvenience of the strangers, of which he had been
innocently the cause, upon consulting Figgins, sent his compliments and
requested as a favor that they would add sans facons to the number of those he
had invited.

The invitation was as freely accepted as given, the two gentlemen and the lady
presently appeared, and were received with all that freedom so common in
France. The lady was immediately surrounded by the officers, and the gentlemen,
who appeared to be true English sportsmen, were hunting out for any body who
could speak a word of English. Figgins and our hero relieved their distress as
much as possible. At length supper appeared, and presently one of our bucks
said to the other, 'I say, you Tadpole, if I can think how so many people
jabber so curse confoundedly with their jaws full.' 'Oh, my lord,' said his
friend, 'a Frenchman's jaws are like the tools of a trunk maker, they always
make more noise than work.'

Figgins gave them a hint that they had better be on their guard, lest any of
the company should understand English.

'Oh dam'me,' said my lord, 'the queer lantern jawed bitches of fellows know no
more about English than they do about roast beef: only see if they do.
Mounseer!' ' Monsieur,' answered a very polite abbe. 'I say,' said my lord,
'Mounseer, how much soup meeger and frogs do you hide away, when you can get
it, in your leather bags of cheeks, that look for all the world like the jaw
bags of a monkey?'

The abbe, after paying him the utmost attention, replied, ' Monsieur, je ne
comprend pas un mot.' -- 'Now what the devil,' faid my lord, 'is paws umo?' 'He
fays he does not understand what you say,' answered Figgins; 'but you see how
open you are yourself, for what he said might have been abuse for ought you
knew to the contrary.'

'Come sir,' said my lord, 'no offense to you, but I will bet you five hundred,
and I say done first, that if any French rascal in company dares for to offer
an affront to me, I twigs him a lick of the jaws.'

At this moment Madam St. Vivier said 'My Lord Hazard I have the pleasure of
drinking your health.' To which Charles answered, 'My dear Madam I thank you;
give me leave to drink with you, that our wishes may be mutual.'

The stranger, who was disputing with Figgins, here cried out, 'Hey! what is
this! Here you Tadpole, how is this? Here is a gentleman does me the honor to
take up my title before I am dead, ay and before my old put of a father is dead
too!'

Charles, penetrating in a moment the whole force of these few words, blushed
with indignation, which Zekiel perceiving -- for the reader sees it was he --
followed the blow he had given, by saying 'Ay, dam'me, fine work; fine times,
when every little whipper snapper can set up for a lord!' 'True,' said Figgins,
who had a mind to give our hero time for recollection, 'and one may see by your
own appearance how contemptible it is,' -- 'Nay,' said Mr. Tadpole, 'you must
now suffer me to speak sir. This gentleman is certainly the eldest son of Lord
Hazard, who has ridiculously discarded him under pretense of libertine conduct,
when there is scarcely such an old libertine as himself in existence.'

'Sir,' said Charles, 'your assertion is a falsity. I see this whole business.
I am by accident in the company of my elder brother, who shall not, nor shall
you sir, traduce the character of the most amiable father that ever had
existence.' 'Come, come,' said Figgins, 'let the matter, now it is explained,
be, as it ought, forgotton; or at least defer it all the company is gone, or
till tomorrow morning.'

'I defer it!' said the young lord; 'no such thing I assure you: -- who is
afraid of these grinning baboons here?' for the Frenchmen had by this time
began to shrug up their shoulders, and demonstrate other tokens of admiration.
'My brother Charles here, for that is the go I see, thinks, because he has got
a parcel of starve-gutted rips of mounseers about him, that a man of my
condition, dam'me, is to be grinned out of his title.'

'When the title comes to be yours,' retorted Charles, 'there will be more
likelihood of grinning than at present; but the matter, as Mr. Figgins has very
properly said, should drop, which you had better agree to yourself, at least
for the present, if it were only in consideration of your being my guest.'

'Your guest!' said Zekiel, 'why do you think as I would have come for to eat
any of your supper if I had been up to such fine gig as this?' -- 'As much,'
said Charles, as I would have invited you, had I known who you were: -- as the
invitation therefore was sent as from stranger to stranger, I am willing to
give it another turn to all those who have not understood the dispute, and I am
sure the whole company will join in laughing it off.'

'Yes, and a fine laugh it would be against me, hey Tadpole. No, no, dam'me, I
will tell them all about it. I say, Mounseer, no my lord he -- I my lord.' ' Ah
ha!' said an officer, without understanding him. 'Dam'me if I ever saw such a
set of fools in my life,' said Zekiel. 'That man no my lord at all; I am one
great, grand my lord myself!'

'Very great and very grand indeed,' said Charles; 'it is pity that nobody
knows it.'

'You are a puppy, Mr. Charles,' said Zekiel: why the devil don't you help me
out, Tadpole? you can jabber a little of their damned gibberish.'

Tadpole undertook to inform the company how the matter stood, in which account
he certainly behaved very scandalously, by representing Zekiel as a lord, and
Charles as an impostor, without explaining how innocently the matter had been
fallen into. Here Charles interfered with all the warmth he could. It was
however to no purpose. Cest affreux! Jesu Maria! Cest honteux! and half a dozen
other expressions of astonishment, were all uttered together, and the whole
company agreed that they had all along feared our hero was a low born fellow by
his prodigality. In short, a thousand marks of attention were immediately
lavished upon Zekiel, which being interpreted to him through the medium of
Tadpole, he swore he never liked French people so well in his life, while
Charles, fortified by indignation against the apostasy of his guests, did not
now think it worth his while to undeceive them, but contented himself with
taking this as a caution how he should summon together a promiscuous company in
France at his own expense for the future.

Figgins however was determined it should not go off so. He observed that not
one of the company, while they bestowed pretty liberally the most humiliating
epithets on Charles, grudged to eat or drink any thing they could lay their
hands on, he therefore moved that either nothing should be touched, or that
they would accompany every word, in the manner they had before this discovery,
with some well-turned compliment to him at whose expense they sat down; for as
nothing was expected for so sumptuous an entertainment but words -- a coin in
which they were very rich and very prodigal -- he must beg, in the name of his
friend, that they would fulfill the conditions of the feast, otherwise it would
induce him to wish for a bill, that every man might pay his reckoning in
another coin, with which he did not believe they were so well provided.

This sarcasm gave very high offense, notwithstanding which they eat and drank
on without offering to comply with either of Mr. Figgins's conditions, till at
last Zekiel, to whom they were explained through Tadpole, offered to pay his
share, and invited his new friends to follow his example.

His adherents began now to forsake him; no one came into his proposal, and all
eyes were immediately fixed again upon Charles, who seeing what sort of turn
matters were likely to take, got up, and said, 'Come gentlemen, I will end the
dispute: -- Is it not fair that he should be considered as the true Lord Hazard
who pays the bill?'

A general affirmative was instantly given, and Zekiel being asked if he would
pay the whole expense of the evening out of his pocket, answered he would see
such a set of mounseers and madames at the devil first. Charles then called the
waiter, who said there was nothing to pay, for that his honor had satisfied
every thing, as well for the supper as the dance and little opera that would
enter in a few minutes.

Zekiel now under went a thousand mortifications, which he contented himself
with returning by abuse, in a language the Frenchmen could not understand. At
length he sneaked off to bed, vowing revenge against his brother, which Mr.
Flush, who, as we have said, was a follower of his fortunes, assured him, as he
ascended the gallery, was easily practicable.

I have already said Charles had reason to believe that Madame St. Vivier would
at Lisle recompense his attention, by consenting to make him happy upon his own
terms. That very night show was to comply with his wishes, and this secret, by
a means I shall take an opportunity one time or other to explain, Mr. Flush had
discovered, and now imparted it to Zekiel, who getting instructions as to the
situation of all the different bed-chambers, determined to supplant his brother.

In pursuance of this determination, when all was silent in the inn, he went to
the room where he had been directed, and finding it invitingly open, fastened
the door on the inside, and groped about till he found the bed. Being accosted
by a female voice, in a whisper, he replied in the same manner. He then undrest
himself, and was welcomed into bed as warmly as he could wish. In about half an
hour after, another person knocked softly at the door, whom he of course
guessed to be his brother Charles; but, advising the lady not to take the
smallest notice of this intrusion, after a short time the importunate visitant
gave over knocking, and went away.

He began now to glory in his success, and had a great mind to stay and brazen
the whole matter out, but was so earnestly entreated by the lady to spare her
delicacy, and to leave her before the day dawned, that he at length complied.

Elated with this revenge, Zekiel, as he occasionally passed our hero in the
morning, could not help looking big, and half insulting him. Charles bore every
thing very patiently, till, being obliged to answer an impertinent question or
two, a very provoking altercation ensued, and Zekiel ventured a most invidious
and wanton invective against the memory of Charles's mother. Scarcely were the
words out of his mouth, when our hero fairly knocked him down, and indeed was
so transported with passion, that he swore he would not rest a moment till he
had sacrificed so infamous a rascal to the offended laws.

Zekiel being again upon his legs, came up and demanded what he meant by that.
Charles bid him ask Monsieur Dessein. At these words Zekiel was in a cold
sweat, and trembled from head to foot, and was actually upon the point of
confessing the robbery when Figgins and Mr. Tadpole came up-Seeing this,
Charles, in the language of Tamerlane, bade him keep his own wicked secret, and
be safe; and asking Mr. Tadpole which way they intended to go to England, and
being answered by the way of Ostend, he advised him, for the sake of his
friend, to keep that resolution.

Figgins plainly saw there was some hidden meaning in this expression, and had
indeed, though he had not betrayed it, thought a little mysteriously of the
tete a tete interview between Charles and Monsieur Dessein; to which another
circumstance that occurred at Lisle being added, he thought it necessary to tax
Charles with want of confidence, and pushing the matter while it was warm, he
obtained from our hero, who was the worst qualified in the world for a
hypocrite, the whole truth.

Figgins thanked him for his frankness, and said that in return he would give
him some intelligence relative to Master Zekiel that would not a little
surprise him.

He said, that being all well flushed the night before, every one seemed to
have his different appointment. For his part, he had made an assignation with
Kitty, Madame St. Vivier's maid, which he went to keep, but, by some accident
or other, mistaking the chamber, he had certainly introduced himself to Miss
Tadpole, who, it was plain, expected somebody; for, upon finding it impossible
to answer many of her questions, she was at first in manifest confusion, but
soon recovering herself, gave a turn to the unintelligible part of her
conversation, and, in direct terms, made him understand that she took him for
Zekiel, though what she said was so worded that he plainly saw this was the
first interview of that nature which had passed, and which she was evidently
surprised into, owing to her expectation of some other person.

Taking the hint, therefore, he passed himself on her for my lord, which indeed
spoilt all his scheme of pleasure for the remainder of the night, except so
much as gratified his curiosity; for having yielded to his embraces before
matters came to be explained, she took on strangely, and complained of being
ruined in her sleep, and all the old cant of those ladies who are well versed
in such arts as pass off their stale ware to inexperienced young gentlemen.

'I topped my part,' said Figgins, 'for learning from her all those vows and
promises which your precious brother has made her, I confirmed them with a
number of his quaint oaths, and at length left her apparently satisfied.

'I should not forget to mention that after I had been sometime in bed, a
knocking and a voice was heard at the chamber door, on which, in her fright,
she said "that is my brother, I know his voice" -- 'and so, by the way, did I.
She would have let him in, to have witnessed the protestations I had made her.
This however I overruled, and after a time the brother -- for I dare say it was
he -- went away; but, upon putting all considerations together, I am convinced
this Mr. Tadpole is the lady's gallant, and they are trying together to noose
your brother, which, upon my soul, I think, for the sake of the family, ought
to be prevented.'

Charles agreed to this, and said if Mr. Figgins would confront the lady on
their return -- for they were now on the ramparts -- he would, in spite of his
inward indignation for his brother, try to undeceive him, and so save him from
this infamy, that seemed to await him.

Figgins said he was an excellent young man, and he would second so laudable an
endeavor with all his heart. 'But,' said Figgins, 'now we are on the subject
of last night, you, I find, kept my appointment; for Kitty tells me this
morning that some person stole into her room, whom she mistook for me, but,
finding her error -- but not till she had yielded -- made the best of it, and
humoured the mistake.'

'This is singular enough,' said Charles, 'I assure you it was not I; I was
much better employed.' 'Are you sure of it?' said Figgins. -- 'Oh certain,'
said Charles. 'My assignation was no mysterious one; I had no occasion to
shroud my designs in darkness, for the joys I reaped were heightened by the
blushes of my mistress, which were revealed to my view by a wax taper, which I
dare say was bought for a very different ceremony.' 'Then by God,' said
Figgins, 'it was your brother, who dubbed me with my harlot, while J was
dubbing him by anticipation with his wife, and I am damnably mistaken if he has
not had such anticipaters in the lady's favors for any time this four years.'

This conversation brought them back to the inn, where they found their whole
benevolent design rendered abortive, for Zekiel and his company had in their
absence set out, and were now several miles on their journey toward Ostend.

'Let them go,' said Figgins, 'and since the fellow will run his nose into the
matrimonial gin, let him squeak for it; but I hope, while I reprobate his
folly, I am not glancing at any in you. Madame St. Vivier and you are evidently
upon very kind terms; I need not hint to your good sense that she is a mere
adventurer..' 'Oh,' said Charles, 'that one may plainly see: I should like
however to know her real story.' 'That, for your sake, I have discovered,' said
Figgins.

'Madame St. Vivier and her maid are neither more nor less than Aimwell and
Archer in the Beaux Stratagem. They are traveling to the south of France, by
the way of Lions, which route I believe they take simply because it is ours. On
their return, by the way of Paris, Mrs. Kitty is to be the mistress, and Madame
St. Vivier the maid, and whatever they pick up in their journey they are to go
snacks in. The girl acknowledges to me that the first idea was to trap you into
a marriage, but finding we were too knowing for them, and in facts better
calculated to administer to their pleasure than their convenience, like a
couple of generous girls as they are, every thing it seems is to be left to
ourselves.'

'Which generosity they must not repent,' said Charles. 'By no means,' said
Figgins; 'and if in our way we meet with any English booby, not your brother,
let them in God's name profit of their good fortune.'

This introduced some general remarks on English travelers, which Madame St.
Vivier interrupted. Figgins acquainted her with the discovery as to her scheme,
and both the gentlemen assured her they would assist it as far as they could,
without injuring their characters as men of honor.

Post horses were ordered to be ready the next morning. While they were
harnessing, Charles having occasion to pay the civility of an adieu to a person
in power, who had done him some kindness as to his business at the
custom-house, and other matters, had the curiosity to call himself at the post
office, for he had not yet received a single letter from his father, though he
had written several. -- He was there informed that there had been letters, but
they were fetched away by a footman, in a livery exactly like his own, the day
before. Charmed with these tidings, he flew back to the inn, think-that the
footman must have been John, who had forgot to give them to him; but how great
was his surprise when John assured him he had received no letters, and offered
to go back to the post office to rectify the mistake, whither they immediately
set out, Figgins begging them to be expeditious, for the horses were put to.
'But stay Charles,' added Figgins, 'I will tell you, as sure as you are alive,
how the case is. Your brother's livery is the same as yours; he has intercepted
your letters, and is now gone the devil knows where; and so the unnatural
wretch, while you were saving his reputation, and perhaps his life, by your
unparalleled liberality, in the affair of Dessein -- owing I dare say to the
cunning of the fellow who travels with him, for he has not head enough himself
-- has hit upon this treacherous plan to make a breach between you and your
father.'

'It must be so,' said Charles, 'but that we may be sure I will write to
Dessein, to know if he has sent any letters, and his answer shall be addressed
to Brussels.' 'Well thought,' said Figgins, 'we can do that from the next
post.' 'But stay sir,' said John, 'I wish I might go to the post office, though
I don't believe his honor thinks me guilty.' 'Guilty of what, you foolish
fellow?' said Figgins, 'your master knows your fidelity:' -- Nor will the
reader be at a loss how much to lay to the account of it, when he is told that
this was the very John who, upon a former occasion, rescued Lady Hazard, and
refused Dogbolt's half-guinea.

The last is not the only hint contained in this chapter to which I would have
the reader minutely attend. It may be necessary probably to revert to it in the
course of the work; but if it tend to any material circumstances that will more
powerfully display themselves by being developed in their place, I shall adhere
to that rule I have in general set down for myself, and only excite present
curiosity, to strengthen future gratification.

CHAPTER III.
ONE THEFT ACTUALLY COMMITTED, AND A PLAN FORMED FOR ANOTHER.

ALL these circumstances together having confirmed Charles in his opinion that
Figgins was a sincere friend, John a faithful servant, and Zekiel a great
rogue, our travelers took the road to Brussels, and at the first stage our
hero wrote to Mr. Dessein, as he had resolved.

As I am writing the history of Charles Hazard, and not a tour on the
continent, I shall trouble my readers with no more than such circumstances as
immediately concern that young gentleman, or lead to his affairs, together with
such minutiae as naturally produced them, and such remarks as may serve for
their elucidation.

In conformity to these rules, I shall only say that at Brussels nothing
happened of consequence enough for me to record except that Charles and Figgins
became intimate with a young Frenchman, named Combrie, who had stolen a nun,
and married her. This couple were glad enough to have escaped from France with
safety, without staying to accomplish a design which they had formed of getting
the lady's fortune out of the hands of a trustee, in which the church had
placed it. They were therefore little better off than in the possession of an
unbounded stock of love, and what money Mr. Combrie, who was the cadet of an
honorable family, had been able to procure from the fondness of a doting
mother.

Having however violated one of the most sacred laws of France, by carrying a
nun out of that kingdom, the mettled Frenchman conceived he could incur but
little more blame if he pushed his point so far as to take her fortune forcibly
out of the hands of a litigeous procureur, who had made use of the money to his
own advantage for two years, and eluded every attempt, even of the clergy, to
get it from him.

The man of the law was however too vigilant and circumspect for Combrie, who
being a novice in a matter which required so much wary caution and prudent
resolution, and besides too much transported with his expected happiness, he
managed his plan so bunglingly, that so far from succeeding with the procureur,
he had very nearly been defeated in his views concerning the lady.

Though this couple loved each other with perhaps more tenderness for being
without fortune, yet most people agree, and they could not but yield to the
general opinion, that money is a security for love, especially after reflection
takes place. Indeed, being in a strange country, from whence they must shortly,
for the sake of safety, recede further, they were not so blinded by their
affection, but they saw that their future prospects would be in a very doubtful
way, if some scheme was not hit upon to rescue the money before it could be
confiscated for the use of the church.

Combrie, who had been at Brussels but a short time, yet who was looked upon,
in consequence of his shyness, as a very equivocal character, saw plainly the
danger of making a confident in that place, and as an attempt at the recovery
of his wife's fortune would be impracticable, without a confederate or two,
taking a hint from the strong congeniality that appeared between the sentiments
of our travelers and his own, he fancied he should be safe at-least in their
confidence, even if they did not lend him assistance. Besides, his affairs were
very pressing, and he doubted, if his resolutions were not suddenly and
effectually taken, whether the all-grasping power of the church would not
deprive him of every possible hope.

Having no time to deliberate, and being emboldened by the engaging freedom and
true breeding of Charles and his friend, he ventured, without reserve, to
entrust them with his affairs, into which our friends gave so freely, that
Figgins, who the reader knows was no mean hand at a plot, concerted one that it
was agreed would infallibly succeed, even without rendering either him or his
friend liable to the smallest suspicion of being concerned in it.

Full of their project, the three friends set out, leaving Madame Combrie in
her apartments at Brussels, but first sending Madame St. Vivier before them to
Sedan, where she actually had business; for as to themselves, out of safety to
Combrie, they traveled to Nancy in Lorraine, where lay the scene of action, by
the way of Luxembourg, and, in fact, as much in Austria as possible till they
should come to Metz, where they were to hold their grand counsel of war. Madame
St. Vivier, however, was not at all apprized of their business, but only
instructed, after she had accomplished hers, to meet them at Nancy, to which
Sedan lies in the direct road.

Without stopping to look at a single prospect, building, or even crucifix, in
the way, I shall set down my travelers at Metz, where, by agreement, they
separated, Charles and Figgins taking post horses for Nancy, and Combrie
jogging after them at his leisure, upon his own horse: not however till they
had agreed whereabout they should find him in the suburbs, near which place
Combrie had a trusty friend, who he was sure would give him every necessary
assistance.

Being arrived at Nancy, they went to the convent of Chartreux, where
strangers, especially of condition, are for a short time treated gratis. The
members of this convent being all men of fortune, and, in general, such as have
retired from the world through disappointments at court, are always charmed at
the arrival of new guests, whether their visits be owing to curiosity or
necessity, but they are particularly pleased with the English. No wonder then
that the superior, when he understood that Charles was a young English
nobleman, and Figgins his governor; that they had unexpectedly been deceived as
to remittances from England, and therefore from actual necessity had intruded
on their generous institution, both for immediate succor and advice, instantly
signified -- especially as their pretensions were corroborated by the testimony
of letters of credit and recommendation, and many other authentic documents --
his warmest wishes to enter heartily into their interest. They paid him a
number of acknowledgments for his great civility to strangers, and said they
piqued themselves on their own sagacity, which had pointed out the propriety of
applying to a man of his piety, as well as consequence, upon such an occasion,
rather than run the risk of being imposed upon by an indiscriminate choice of a
person to supply their present wants, without an eligible recommendation.

After this preface our travelers acquainted the superior that they wished his
reference to some money negociator, for a present supply, who assuring them
that it would give him particular pleasure to recommend them to some person who
should treat them conscientiously, mentioned his near relation Monsieur Goufre,
le procureur: not however till he had expatiated on the wickedness of those
usurious wretches who take advantage of the necessitous, and oppress their
fellow creatures under the idea of relieving them.

Figgins said he had heard of one Monsieur Bancsec, but the superior assured
them they could not get into worse hands. Charles said certainly it would be
their interest to rely upon the superior's advice, and begged the favor of a
note to Monsieur Goufre. This request was immediately complied with, and our
friends went their ways to the gentleman's house in question, after thanking
the kind recluse in terms of the warmest gratitude.

Before however we introduce the reader to Monsieur Goufre, it will not be
inexpedient to say how Charles and his friend happened to get recommended to
the very man who retained Madame Combrie's fortune.

The reader has seen that he was a near relation to the superior of the
Chartreux, which was well known to Combrie, and it will not appear
extraordinary that this connection with the clergy should be the means of
Monsieur Goufre's being often employed in matters which concerned the church.
In fact, the frequent litigations by friends of the deceased to recover moneys
conditionally left for charitable uses, on one side, and the assertion of the
church's right on the other, had, upon many occasions, produced such a see-saw
of interested altercation between the procureur and the superieur, that matters
perfectly plain and clear in themselves, often wore an air of such mysterious
embarrassment under such delusion as frittered large legacies into bills of
expenses, which were cunningly snacked by the lawyer and the monk.

One of these lucrative bones, at which they had been a long time nibbling, was
Madame Combrie's fortune, the perfect situation of which, nay even the drawer
in which it was deposited, Figgins undertook to procure intelligence of; to do
which, properly, they had recourse to the superior, and through him were
resolved to attack the heart of his relation in that part where he was most
vulnerable -- for it was not true that they actually wanted money -- and to
give a color to this it was no bad plan to seize an opportunity of taking the
Chartreux by the outward symbol of his profession, and make his charity, which
was counterfeit, the instrument of his real confusion.

Combrie being arrived in the Fauxbourg, and informed of their resolves, the
moment came to put their design in execution. Charles and Figgins waited on the
procureur, who, after all the necessary difficulties, which, upon motion, was
to be removed by Monsieur Dessein, agreed to accommodate them with what they
should think necessary; for they had represented that they should change their
route so often, and probably from momentary inducements, that it would be
better to take up in specie as much as would serve for some months, and leave
in the hands of Monsieur Goufre traveling bills of Sir James Herries, and
other English bankers, to the amount of the sum and the discount.

Nothing retarded the payment of the money but waiting for a letter from
Monsieur Dessein, which at length arrived greatly to the satisfaction of all
parties. It spoke very handsomely of Charles and his friend, and it is proper
to mention that, over and above the business of assuring Monsieur Goufre, it
mentioned that letters had been sent to Charles at Lisle, on account of which
he had written to Brussels, and this confirmed Charles in his opinion of
Zekiel's treachery. Figgins however made a different use of this circumstance,
greatly turning it to their present account, for he proved very clearly that if
those letters sent to Lisle had been received, the application to Monsieur
Goufre would have been unnecessary.

During the interval between writing to Calais and receiving an answer, Charles
and Figgins had twice dined with the procureur, and the latter had so
insinuated himself into his good graces, that under pretense of enquiring into
the practice of the French laws, he wormed out of him almost all his affairs.
The endowments of the monasteries naturally came up in their conversation, in
which business he owned he was very much employed, and one morning, when they
were talking in the counting house upon this subject, the procureur said, as he
was locking up his bureau, 'here now is a pretty large fortune which has been
lessened almost one-fourth by litigation. It belonged to a nun, who has been
lately stolen from a neighboring monastry -- there it is labelled and sealed
up, in notes upon the Caisse d'accompte, payable au porteur -- and I have now a
supreme order, which I shall yield to next week, -- after I have made out my
bill against it -- to surrenderit to the Lady Abbess.'

Naturally guessing that nuns were not so frequently stolen but that her he had
heard of must be Madame Combrie, Figgins found his point so far gained, and now
the letter being arrived from Calais, nothing remained but to receive their
money.

On the evening appointed for this business, the procureur was invited by our
travelers to a sumptuous entertainment at the Hotel D'Angleterre. -- Before
supper the ceremony of signing and sealing was performed, and after supper all
was hilarity. Figgins made the procureur harrangue, Charles prevailed on him to
squall several chansons a boire, and Madame St. Vivier, who arrived at Nancy
that very afternoon, took him out to walk a minuet with her. In short, the
votary of chicane having made a good bargain, a good supper, and fallen
violently in love with Madame St. Vivier, did not notice how the hours wore,
and was at length, after a good finishing dose, carried to bed, in a condition
that laid him by the heels till ten o'clock the next morning.

CHAPTER IV.
IN WHICH THE LAITY PROVE TWO CUNNING FOR BOTH LAW AND GOSPEL.

IT was three hours after Monsieur Goufre went home before he discovered that
any trick had been played him, for I hope the reader does not suppose the
supper was given for nothing. He asked one of the clerks if any body had called
while he was engaged the evening before, and was answered nobody of any
consequence but Father Benedick. -- 'What Father Benedick?' said Goufre. 'Him,'
said the clerk, 'we sent to you at the Hotel D'Angleterre, and by whom you sent
your keys, with written orders to deliver the fortune belonging to the convent
of our lady of the ascension.' 'Written orders! Keys!' cried the astonished
procureur. 'But it is impossible; here are my keys.' 'Well sir, these are the
keys he brought,' said the clerk, 'and here is the order: surely we know your
hand writing.'

Upon this Monsieur Goupe read, in a faultering accent, and in a hand so like
his own that he could himself find no difference: 'Let Father Benedick have the
packet in the bureau labelled Money belonging to the convent of our lady of the
ascension.'

As all the French dance well, it is not wonderful that Monsieur Goufre had
scarcely read these words when he took a chassee to the bureau, where he
discovered the nest without the bird, caprioled back to the parlour for his hat
and cane, rigadooned to the door, briseed out of it, and in a new fashioned pas
courant presently made an enter at the house of the general of the police.
There being joined by a proper number of figurants, under the characters of
sergeants du ville, archets, and pouse culs, the procureur paraded at their
head to the Hotel D'Angleterre, where, to enrich the procession back again, he
entreated our hero, Figgins, and Madame St. Vivier to perform a pas de trois.

In plain English, he fairly believed his pocked had been picked while he was
asleep, and that our travelers, who were thieves, had taken this method to rob
him; and having imparted these suspicions to the general of the police, he
obtained an order to bring the delinquents before him.

A few words however served to convince that officer, and even the procureur
himself, that his suspicions were groundless. The clerk deposed that about
seven o'clock in the evening, a person in the garb of a friar, calling himself
Father Benedick, came to their house, and said he had particular business with
Monsieur Goufre, relative to a certain fortune belonging to the convent of our
lady of the ascension. He represented that upon various pretenses it had been
so long kept out of the church's hands, that it was in agitation to procure a
suspension of the procureur's employments, if he should refuse immediately to
deliver it. He said it was pity Monsieur Goufre was not within, for his
authority was so powerful and decisive, that if he returned it would be with
force, which he would willingly avoid. The clerk said, in consequence of these
menaces, he made no scruple of sending the supposed friar to his master, who,
about a quarter before eight, returned with Monsieur Goufre's keys, and a
written order to deliver the fortune which was locked up in the bureau, and
which had a label similar to that described in the said written order. The
clerk swore he believed it to be the hand writing of his master, and he was
sure the keys were those his master then held in his hand.

Mr. Figgins here entreated that he might have permission to ask the procureur
a few questions, which request being complied with, he said 'Pray sir in whose
company were you from half past six o'clock till nine, during which time this
fraud is said to have been committed?'

Monsieur Goufre answered in his company. -- 'Were you not,' said Figgins,
'during that whole time, in your sober senses?' 'Perfectly,' answered the man
of law. 'And now let me rouse your best recollection while I ask if in that
very interval of time, you were not talking of your extensive business, of your
property, and indeed of this very fortune you now say you have lost, but which
you then bragged you had safely locked up; as a proof of which you showed us
those very keys, and at the very time as it should seem, that your clerk was
using them -- which is a very likely story -- to deliver that fortune up to a
person he had never before seen.'

The poor procureur felt this unanswerable mode of reasoning most severely, and
the general of the police -- whether other cases had induced him to doubt the
veracity of Monsieur Goufre, or whether he was conscious that Englishmen are
constantly upon these occasions not those who dupe, but those who are duped --
seemed to pay great attention to Figgins's harrangue, who seeing his advantage,
thought he could not do better than follow it up: which he did in these words.

'Upon the whole, it appears to me, and so it shall to the English ambassador,
that Monsieur Goufre having found in us a pretty free-milch cow, as to some
money transactions we have had together, has fancied, notwithstanding the
documents we have produced, that we could not make good our pretensions to rank
and independency, and therefore imagined we might be awed, by the accusation of
a sham robbery, into a composition: and this appears from many circumstances.
-- What had we to do with this fortune? Why were we to know in what place it
lay? Why have we been repeatedly shown the key that locked it up? Besides, the
matter has been so bunglingly managed, that the clerk deposes that very key was
sent at the individual time he himself confesses to have had it in his pocket.
Then he does not pretend to say that the hand writing is not like his, but, on
the contrary, so like that he should have taken it for his own. But it was
necessary this should be said, because if the hand writing had not been exactly
like his, the clerk would have had no pretense whatever to have delivered the
fortune. Again, what was this same Father Benedick? -- and how had he got all
this intelligence? How insinuated himself into his pocket invisibly, and
conveyed away the keys, during an interval of perhaps the only five minutes in
an hour and a half that they had been trusted there without his hand upon them
for their security; but, at any rate, to make the story in the smallest degree
colorable, what connection had this supposed Father Benedick with them, to
lend the smallest probability to their being concerned in a transaction so very
derogatory to their honor as gentlemen, so totally unnecessary to their
circumstances, which Monsieur Goufre had taken care, with the most scrupulous
exactness, to make himself master of -- and so disgraceful to the name of
Englishmen? How had it been proved that they, so far from knowing the friar in
question, had a single associate, even of their own country? -- for both the
clerks gave very clear testimony that Father Benedick spoke with an accent so
pure and vernacular, that they were sure he was a Frenchman: and indeed so he
was. All these circumstances considered, it was impossible this affair should
be otherwise than a gross attempt -- an event which occurred too frequently --
to impose upon English credulity; which, however others might pass over, would
not, in the present instance, be regarded in any light either trifling or
pardonable; on the contrary, it would be found that men of character had been
tampered with, who were both able and willing to right themselves. He therefore
insisted, for the sake of general justice and the honor of the English nation,
that the matter should be fully and publicly investigated: to which and they
would be content to submit to a temporary imprisonment, provided Monsieur
Goufre should be laid under the same restriction.'

The general of the police, whou could not probably see that all this
intelligence had been, by the most subtle train of artful insinuation,
deliberately drawn from Goufre, by Figgins, with a view to forward the designs
of Combrie -- who the reader sees was father Benedick -- had no manner of doubt
but that every word he had heard was truth.

His own private opinion indeed was, that being in a short time to deliver up
the fortune, the procureur had conjured up the whole accusation to cover his
embezzlement of the money. As to the friar, he had not the least doubt but that
he was a real character, procured probably by his relation, the superior of the
Chartreux, who, as we have said was occasionally concerned with Mr. Goufre in
his law practices.

In short, he so well knew, as he thought, the trim of the business, that he
would not have hesitated to comply with the terms of Mr. Figgins, had he not
had some very material objections to get rid of.

In the first place, he well knew that their knowledge of each others illicit
conduct was mutual; they had trod together the paths of oppression; and it was
their constant custom when either was likely to get into a scrape, to call the
other to his assistance. In the present case, however, the procureur had
previously sworn to the general of the police that he had actually been robbed,
and this was indeed the truth; but matters -- thanks to Figgins's address --
wore now so different an aspect, that this seeming want of confidence quite
exasperated him, and nothing but his own actual safety made him hesitate a
moment to take part against the procureur.

Balancing thus between his conviction and his interest, he thought proper to
pursue a middle course. He said, as there had actually been nothing proved
which had been alleged, he could not answer sending to prison three persons,
one of them a lady, who had made so handsome a defense. Monsieur Goufre had
certainly, in the first transports of his resentment, done what he thought very
justifiable, but what, upon reflection, had neither certainty, nor even
probability, to support it; that it was plain he had been some way or other
tricked, how would very likely hereafter appear; and, if he had been too warm,
stung as he was at being deprived of a large deposite, which it would cut deep
into his fortune to make good, those very traits of liberality on which that
gentleman -- meaning Figgins -- had dwelt, would, he hoped, induce him and his
friend to overlook surely a very pardonable error.

Charles said, Monsieur Goufre's mad manner of rectifying a mistake, he
thought, deserved no lenity at their hands. For his part he should detest the
idea of patching up a matter that struck so hard in him at the honor of every
young nobleman on his travels. He should think, if he passed by such a glaring
impertinence, every one of his English acquaintance ought to resent it. He
should therefore acquaint the English ambassador, who was his father's
particular friend, of the whole business, without the smallest reserve; and if
he must endure to have a hated liberty forced upon him, he would at least, let
his inconvenience be what it might, stay in that town till not only himself and
his friend should be handsomely cleared, but till he who had the audacity to
scandalize their characters should meet with his merited punishment. So saying,
he gave the lady his hand, and said if their forms would admit it he should
choose to go from that place, but that he should be found at the Hotel
D'Angleterre till the matter was finally decided.

They were followed out by the general of the police, who whispered Figgins, in
the hall, that he plainly saw Monsieur Goufre had done a rash thing, but that
it need not hinder them from pursuing their tour, for if they would leave
twenty guineas in his hands, he would take care as much justice should be done
to their honor as if they were present.

In this I verily believe he spoke truth, but Figgins cut him short with this
reply:

'Sir, If the law has any power over us, use it now you have us in your
custody; if not, the best of you shall have reason to repent this outrage: and
as to leaving twenty guineas in your hands, I would do it with great pleasure,
were I not unluckily bound by a vow not to trust any Frenchman further than I
can see him.'

The general of the police said it was a great pity so good an opportunity
should be lost, and added that perhaps the young gentleman was not bound by the
vow.

Charles said he was always bound by the determinations of his governor,
especially when they went to a prevention of his being duped.

The general of the police not thinking fit to urge the matter any farther,
after many reverences, retired to the procureur; after which our travelers
departed, first giving the officers of justice something to drink.

Monsieur Goufre was found by his friend in a state of distraction. The latter
however believed it all put on, and began very severely to upbraid him with his
duplicity, and to blame him for having made such a fool of himself.

The procureur swore that he had been robbed, and was ruined, and confirmed the
oath with a hundred others. He was unfortunate enough however to gain no manner
of credit; on the contrary, the general of the police told him, in so many
words, that since he was above placing confidence in his friends, he sincerely
wished the Englishmen might trounce him.

This introduced a warm bout at alternate recrimination, till at length both
became cool, and they determined, in conjunction with the superior of the
Chartreux, to take an early opportunity of deliberating on the most expedient
means to get out of such a disagreeable scrape.

CHAPTER V.
AN EXPLANATORY LETTER -- A LITTLE VEXATION -- AND A JOURNEY TO LIONS.

MADAME St. Vivier had not the smallest idea that her companions really knew
any thing of the fraud. She had acted her part to perfection the night before,
as to making Monsieur Goufre drunk and ridiculous, but was ignorant that the
trick went any further than getting good terms from him as to the money that
was borrowed; neither had a syllable of the situation of Madame Combrie been
explained to her; for it is natural to suppose our travelers did not so sin
against good breeding as to introduce such a character into that lady's
company. She might be sent purposely to Dover, and probably was intended to be
played off as a corpse de reserve upon our hero, but when no direct outrage on
propriety was necessary, Mr. Figgins was too great a general to call in
assistance, when every thing went on even beyond his wishes. But how beyond his
wishes? Patience, dear reader: I would not have you know what is brewing, just
at present, for any consideration. Attend then, and let the fruit of your
curiosity ripen by degrees; nor -- that it may have the better relish -- wish
to gather it till it shall be ready to drop into your hand.

Four or five days after the affair of the general of the police, the procureur
waited on our travelers, with great deference and respect, and informed them
that he had received a letter which had satisfied him in every point relative
to the fraud. He therefore acquitted them so heartily of any concern in that
matter, that he appeared extremely shocked at his conduct, and said he would
publish their innocence coupled with any acknowledgment of his own, by way of
concession, that they should think proper to dictate. As to himself, he had the
pleasure to inform them that as it was now known he had not been to blame, at
the mediation of his relation the superior of the Chartreux, and his friend the
general of the police, the chapter of the convent to which the money was due
had remitted the payment of it till his death, provided he would then add the
interest of it, and an additional bequest of ten thousand crowns.

The letter to Monsieur Goufre was as follows: -- TO MONSIEUR GOUFRE.
SIR,
Lest your clerks, or any other innocent persons, should suffer under the
suspicion of having taken from your bureau that fortune which in justice and
equity is mine, in right of my wife, I write this to acquaint you that, on
Friday evening last, about seven o'clock, I called at your house, habited like
a friar, and, under the name of Father Benedick, demanded the fortune in your
hands belonging to the convent of our lady of the ascension; intimating that if
I did not see you, be where you might, I should return prepared to compel you
to resign it. Your clerks referred me to you at the Hotel D'Angleterre, from
whence I feigned to return at about a quarter before eight, bringing with me a
written order, as if from you -- a duplicate of which I have enclosed, to show
you how well I counterfeited your hand writing -- and a bunch of keys, one of
which opened your bureau. One of your clerks, so completely imposed upon,
naturally gave me what I wanted. I immediately departed, derobed myself of my
holy accoutrements, mounted my horse, and rode through bye-ways till I arrived
at Rouen -- first taking care to touch the 'Argent Comptant, which, as you
know, I was easily enable to do, as the whole fortune was in notes on the
Caisse d'accompte at Paris, payable au porteur -- from whence, when I shall
have put this letter in the post, a vessel will carry me to Guernsey, and,
before it can reach you, I shall be in England.

It may not be amiss to tell you that the key which opened your bureau I caused
to be made from your own, for which purpose I took care to be very much about
you, before I stole my dear Araminta from her hypocritical directress. I knew
it always accompanied four others, the size of which did not escape my notice:
two of them open chests, one a small cabinet, and the least a casket.

All these matters lent such strong probability to my story, with which my holy
garb so well agreed -- a garb which was never used to a worthier purpose --
that it was impossible for me not to succeed.

If this confession will do you any good with the church, you are welcome to
make what use of it you think proper. As to myself, I shall glory in its
publication, for I am sure the money that serves to maintain an honest pair,
whose views are honorable and their actions exemplary -- but more especially
as that money is their right -- is more worthily, nay more religiously applied
than in fattening and encouraging in licentiousness those slothful drones who,
as you and I know, shut themselves up from the world not to cherish holiness,
but to hide profligacy.

From Yours, etc. COMBRIE.




This letter, which speaks so plain, completes the account of Figgins's scheme,
which I have thus piecemeal explained to the reader. The circumstance of the
keys, which was a fact, together with the knack which Combrie had of imitating
Goufre's hand writing, -- which indeed is not difficult, for almost all
Frenchmen write alike -- gave a hint of it, and the idea of an application to
the superior of the Chartreux, and all those concurrent circumstances which we
have seen so well managed, could not fail to crown it with success.

This history then has so far acted in its customary province as to make one
couple happy already. How long they are to continue so, it is not impossible
but we may hereafter have occasion to notice.

It will easily be seen that this affair ended greatly to the honor of our
travelers, who, in consequence, attracted the notice of all the English who
then resided at Nancy. Among the rest they were visited by a gentleman, whose
company, as a plain straight-forward, well-meaning man, was very agreeable to
them. He served admirably well to make one at a party of whist, and for a
cursory acquaintance really was not without his merit.

A very short time however let them into the character of this new
acquaintance, whose name was Ireland; for one night, being at whist, with Mr.
Figgins for his partner, Charles was so tantalized into betting, and confused
off his guard, that he got up from the table an hundred and fifty pounds loser,
in spite of all the hints and expostulations of Figgins, who only played for
crowns.

The next day he heard, from undoubted authority, that Mr. Ireland was an
errant sharper, and had escaped from England after killing a gentleman in a
duel, who had dared to tax him publicly with a palpable fraud.

This loss however had one good effect upon our hero, for he made a most solemn
vow never again to lose five pounds at one sitting, which resolution he
inviolably kept to the day of his death.

I have said very little of Charles's continual disappointments, at not
receiving letters from his father, or indeed any body else, since his departure
from England. The truth is that it gave him inexpressible concern, and
occasioned from him many and various remonstrances, which were apparently very
little heeded.

Figgins testified as much uneasiness as our hero, but upon this, as well as
every other subject, he comforted him by a variety of arguments. He said it
very often occurred that people on a tour missed of their letters, though at
length they came safely to hand; that at Nancy, for example, it was sometimes
three weeks before a man could write a letter and receive an answer to it; and
this inconvenience would increase in proportion as they went farther. There was
no doubt, he said, but every thing would fall upon its legs, and the letters
would all come together in a lump, and he cheerfully agreed to wait at Lions
till every proper explanation could be mutually exchanged, not only as to
Charles and his father, but every other correspondent.

This kind accommodation in Figgins gave our hero great pleasure. He had
really, at times, felt very unpleasantly on this subject, and though he could
account for his disappointment at Lisle, yet more than two months had elapsed
since that time, during which interval he had repeatedly written in such a full
and satisfactory manner, that he could not bear to reflect on the parting
between him and his father, and, at the same time, hold in mind that all his
attempts to learn the state of that amiable parent's mind were continually
baffled. He knew not what might have happened in his absence: he had dreaded to
leave him: nay he would not think on the subject, it was dreadful to him! yet
he could not give a reason for it. Who knew but the letters received at Lisle,
since he had heard nothing afterward, might give an account of an unfavourable
alteration in his father's health: perhaps they contained a tender injunction
to come and close the dying eyes of an indulgent parent: perhaps he was then
dead, and the letters were from friends who gave him the melancholy news, which
his perfidious brother had received with a triumphant and cruel joy.

Reflections like these greatly embittered the enjoyments of our hero, and
though I have not thought it necessary to present the reader with any thing but
the agreeable side of the picture, yet it is certainly true that Charles had
his moments when he felt very severe and bitter unhappiness; nay he had once
very nearly determined to return to Calais, the better to investigate this
unpleasant business, though the natural gaiety, and I will say honesty, of his
disposition, prevented his particular griefs from interfering with pleasures in
which others were concerned. What wonder then if the kind consoling advice of
Figgins kept his mind in that tranquillity which made it impossible for an
unconcerned person to penetrate his chagrin.

I have conceived it necessary to say thus much, lest the reader should think
our hero had, in imitation of some other heroes, left his feeling in his own
country, and that his foreign freaks -- every one of which I undertake to
contend had a defensible motive -- were merely the common effect of that
fashionable conceit and supercilious levity which are the qualities the French
have, in general, a right to take as a sample of English manners.

All affairs at Nancy being properly settled, Charles began to be very
impatient for their departure to Lions. Before they set out, however, he drew
up a recapitulation of all his other letters, to which he added many earnest
entreaties; and, that it might be sure to go safe, entrusted it to the care of
Figgins himself, who insisted upon putting it in the post office, swearing he
began to suspect every body; and, when he returned, said that Master John
should not be so confidently trusted for the future. 'Why so?' said Charles.
'Nay no great matter,' answered Figgins. 'I begin to have my suspicions of him:
but perhaps these devils of women have corrupted him.'

Charles asked his friend what induced his suspicions. Figgins said, 'I caught
the rascal in a lie, that is all: which I cannot bear. Dam'me if there is so
pimping a thing upon earth as an unnecessary lie.' 'From a person in whom you
place confidence,' said Charles, 'there cannot be a crime of such magnitude. As
death is better than torture, so open enmity is better than hidden deceit. Even
a trifling lie, in such circumstances, may conceal the most tremendous
consequences. For my part, I look upon plain integrity to be so positively
essential in the composition of a friend, that though I were one mass of
imperfections, I would forgive the continual reiteration of them, both to
myself and the world, rather than they should be hyperbolically glossed over.
On the contrary, if I thought the man I trusted could even meditate a wish to
deceive me, let my partiality be what it might, I would tear him from my heart,
even though it should burst in making the effort.'

Figgins, who had eyed our hero with extraordinary tokens of amazement, while
he animatedly pronounced these words, first looked pale, then red, but
recovered however in time to put in for his share of this honest opinion; and,
after an eulogium on Charles's way of thinking, and reflecting on John, who
alone he chose to understand as the person all this warmth was levelled at, he
finished his remark with 'Damn the fellow, I should be sorry to find him a
rascal, for I have a regard for him.'

Charles certainly had no particular meaning in the words he had uttered, but
his disappointment at not hearing from his father gave him occasionally a kind
of peevish discontent, as if he found somebody had deceived him, though he knew
not who. As a proof that he had not the smallest mistrust of Figgins, he
entrusted him, as we have just seen, with his letter to put in the post office;
yet he was scarcely gone but he wished he had taken it himself: though he
sincerely believed this wish a tacit, though an involuntary, injustice to his
friend.

The contents of his letter next were gone over in his mind, in which he found
nothing but a repetition of disappointments, that, for ought he knew, would be
rewarded with new ones; especially as he was confident, in his own mind, they
originated in some secret cause which he had not been, nor should ever be
perhaps, able to penetrate. In this trim of thinking, when Figgins returned and
dropped those hints concerning John, out came the very soul of our hero, and so
it would have done had his own ruin been the consequence.

Figgins -- for what reason perhaps the reader may conceive -- verily believed
this thrust was at him, and though he not only saw he had well parried it, but,
as he firmly believed, disarmed his young friend of all suspicion, yet he
feared, that should he take in his head to arm himself frequently with these
impatient doubts, as he did not want for skill in these sort of conflicts, he,
Figgins, might one day or other receive such a hit as might prove a mortal stab
to all his hopes of bringing those schemes to bear which he certainly, for some
reason or other, was concerting; for though I have constantly allowed that
Charles was credulous, he could not be grossly imposed upon; and no man knew
this better than Figgins, who, with all his management, would not have been
able easily to gain his ends, which were now -- though the reader, as I have
said, must wait with patience to know how -- nearly accomplished, had not a
series of unexpected events concurred to give him a helping hand.

CHAPTER VI.
FULL OF INTERESTING MATTER -- AND, AMONG THE REST, TWO DEATHS.

OUR travelers arrived at Lions after a safe and pleasant journey. They
visited every thing curious, were frequently at the play, made acquaintance
with men of condition and taste, and, in short, here, as in other places,
availed themselves of every opportunity of improvement: thus fulfilling the
real purposes of traveling.

These matters however I have even less time to particularize here than I had
heretofore, and therefore shall leave to the readers imagination what was the
employment of a young man and his governor who were really ambitious of
returning home with as much knowledge as they could pick up, but which
acquisition Charles in particular -- as the reader shall hear -- became
possessed of more than he wished.

Our hero, walking one day in a field beyond the ramparts, was meditating on a
small book, in the midst of a grove, when he heard behind him a rustling.
Directing his eyes to the place from whence the noise issued, he saw two men
very warmly attacking each other with drawn swords. In the impetuosity of his
first sensations, he bounded like a fawn to the place, and drawing to part the
combatants, one of them, like Mercutio, was hurt under our hero's arm. He
faultered out ' Oh Jesu Je suis mort!' and fell down.

Charles was so dreadfully shocked at this accident, that he thought of nothing
but endeavoring to succor the wounded person, on which charitable employ he
was so intent, that he did not pay the smallest regard to the other, who, upon
seeing his antagonist drop, fled with the fwiftest precipitation.

A moment's recollection convinced our hero that he was in a most singularly
perilous situation. The poor wounded wretch seemed to be dying, and every
circumstance would serve to make it believed that he was the murderer.
Nevertheless, his strong humanity so prevailed over his prudence, that he ran
without the wood, and holloed to the sentinel upon the ramparts for help,
telling him there was a man dangerously wounded.

Several gentlemen who were walking on the ramparts presently came up, to whom
Charles related, but not without much confusion -- for he was most exceedingly
affected -- the whole matter as it had passed. Unfortunately his relation
gained very little credit. They all knew the nature of duelling, and naturally
imagined a prudent person would, upon such an occasion, go another way rather
than interfere with two men who were agreed upon fairly deciding a quarrel by
the law of arms.

Charles was astonished when he understood their suspicions, and could not help
asking, with some disdain, whether the French always requited the good offices
of strangers in the same manner. One or two of the gentlemen took heat at this,
and said he should answer every thing at large before the general of the police.

Charles treated their menaces with perfect indifference, relying upon the
testimony of the dying man, who however left his protector in the lurch; for
after an ineffectual attempt to speak, he pointed to Charles, and falling
backward, expired.

This action was universally allowed to have been intended as a sign to
distinguish the murderer, and what strongly corroborated the general opinion
was our hero's sword, which was very much stained with blood. It was in vain
that he accounted very naturally for this circumstance, by saying that when he
first saw the dead man fall, he abandoned his sword, the better to lend him
assistance, and that of course, as it lay, the blood, which ran in a stream,
had fallen upon it.

This was construed into cunning and art. In short, the guard arrived, and he
was conducted to the house of the general of the police, comforted however with
' Courage! on pardon en France un coup de vivacite.' In spite however of these
comfortable tidings, Figgins, who had been waiting for our hero to breakfast at
their inn, was very soon summoned to breakfast with him in prison.

Figgins insisted upon it, in the strongest terms, that it was impossible his
friend could be concerned in this business otherwise than as an accidental
mediator. The gentleman who had fallen was a man of some consideration,
resident in that place, where Charles was an absolute stranger, and had not the
smallest acquaintance. He offered to swear that, till this unhappy morning, he
had never been a single ten minutes out of his company since his arrival in
Lions, and how could so serious a quarrel have engendered without previous
malice? -- without the smallest acquaintance with the unfortunate person, or
even knowledge that any such man had existence? He maintained there was not
upon earth a less turbulent spirit than his friend; that his disposition was
the sweetest, mildest, most benignant, in the world; that there could not be in
nature a more benevolent heart. He would answer with his life that, was the
fact as they suspected, his young friend had not the soul to be guilty of such
low, such treacherous baseness as to disown it. On the contrary, as no laws
were so lenient, as to accidental rencounters, as those of France, so far from
denying what had happened, he would feel enough at having been the destruction
of a fellow creature, however unintentionally, without adding guilt to
misfortune, by excusing himself at the expense of a wilful lie.

Besides these arguments, Figgins insisted that they had not consulted even
common probability in this business. His friend had averred that the murderer
fled. Who was he then? No people were so remarkably provident as to who went
and came as the French. Let the book of the general of the police be consulted,
and see who had retired from the town. If he was a settler, it would easily be
known; if a stranger, intelligence of him might be gathered at the place where
he lodged. As to the action of the dying man, he was assured it had been
intended to point out his friend as one who had endeavored to preserve him. In
short, he said let the matter but have time, and be maturely investigated, and
he would resign himself as an accomplice, and willingly await the same fate:
staking his own life upon the issue of his friend's innocence.

This manly and noble speech, which was made in presence of some of the most
considerable people of Lions, had its effect. It was warmly agreed, even by the
relations of the deceased -- who, by the bye, got a fortune by his death --
that every thing ought to be well considered. Accordingly, the term of six
weeks was fixed to make all the necessary enquiries, at which time it was
intended, if nothing happened to exculpate our hero, that he should be brought
to trial.

It was now the business of Figgins to alleviate, as much as possible, the
distresses of his friend. -- he had however very little comfort for him. It had
been found that a stranger had actually absconded on the very morning this sad
affair happened, but as the inland towns in France are not so particular as to
mere strangers as the seaports, he could not learn his name. He asked Charles
if he had no idea who the murderer was. Charles said he had scarcely given him
a single look, so instantaneously was the mischief done; and that from that
moment he had not seen him at all, his whole care having been directed toward
the dying man: but, notwithstanding all these disadvantages, he was sure he had
somewhere seen him, though it was then utterly out of his power to recollect
when or where.

In a few days after the imprisonment of our hero, Figgins came to him and said
he was greatly afraid there was some damned plot in the business, for that the
women were gone off, and had taken John with them.

'What plot can there be?' said Charles. 'In this situation they are tired of
us, and resolved to shift for themselves: a very common resolution for
creatures of their stamp.' 'True,' said Figgins, 'but how will you reconcile
the conduct of Mr. John? I will tell you what has lately struck me.' 'What?'
said Charles. 'Why,' answered Figgins, 'that this same Madame St. Vivier is
known to Mrs. O'Shocknesy, and, if so, there is no mischief, however
detestable, but you may apprehend. That woman has the hypocrisy of ^ crocodile,
the heart of a tygress, and the malic^ of the devil. She delights in mischief;
it seems to be as requisite to her existence as food; there is not such an
infernal succubus in human nature; and may I be damned' -- for our friend
Figgins would sometimes swear -- 'if it were my fate to choose whether to
encounter the anger of a hungry lion, or groan under the influence of a plot
against me, prepared and inflicted by that she fiend, if I would not trust the
claws of old Leo rather than the diabolical fangs of Mother O'Shocknesy.

'Now you may remember,' continued Figgins, 'I caught Master John in a lie. It
was this: -- Kitty had told me she had seen this gentleman of ours very busily
employed in a familiar conversation at Lisle with that fellow of your
brother's, Flush, whom, by the way, I never liked -- indeed I know Mr.
Standfast turned him off on account of his attachment to Mrs. O'Devil. Why Mrs.
Kitty told me this I remember I thought very odd at the time, but catching from
it, at the moment, an idea concerning the embezzlement of the letters, I, with
more bluntness than wit, taxed the gentleman with his intimate acquaintance
with Mr. Flush, which he denied, and which Kitty confirmed to his face. It was
this determined me to take your letters myself, and this has kept me ever since
upon my guard, as to this fellow; and finding now which way he inclines, it is
more than possible he has been a rascal all along, and that even the
half-guinea he refused from Sir Daniel Dogbolt was a feint, through which he
acted according to his instructions.'

Charles said he had never correctly understood that business, or what it
alluded to; nor had he known more than that some difference had happened
between his father and mother, which had been happily adjusted through the
mediation of Mr. Standfast.

Figgins said when his mind could bear the relation he would acquaint him with
all the particulars, exactly as it had been related by my lord to the surgeon,
at the John of Gaunt's Head, and who he said had, spite of all Standfast's
care, not preserved the secret so sacredly as a man of his profession ought.
This however did not happen to be the truth, for it was through Mr. Standfast,
and no other person, that Mr. Figgins came by his intelligence. 'But,' said
Figgins, 'to finish with this dear harmless lady, whom I so dearly love, if she
has any hand in your affairs, you may be assured it will be productive of
mischief to you both in England and here.'

Charles said he had no doubt of the gentlewoman's kind offices, but yet he saw
no harm that could come of them, for his father was pretty well upon his guard
against her; and as to his own conduct, it was, he flattered himself, at least
in material points, not such as to merit reproach. 'All I wish,' said he, 'is
to hear from my dear father; if he remain safe from the malice of our enemies,
I will forgive every thing they can do to me.'

This subject however was never out of Figgins's mouth, and indeed, though
nothing could be managed with more cautious delicacy, one would think he had an
inclination to sink his friends spirits till he should be inclined to save the
trouble of a public trial, by hanging himself in his prison.

All this however was not sufficient to damp the spirits of our hero, though I
must own his situation seemed a good deal to tire his patience. He had so
invariably adhered to those principles which, at his outset in life, he had so
invariably laid down for himself, that, conscious of his own innocent
intentions, he did not believe it possible that he could sink under the weight
of injustice. He therefore entreated his friend -- who, as the trial
approached, put on looks more and more rueful -- to make himself easy. 'How can
I?' said Figgins. 'All the devils in hell, one would think, conspire against
you. I declare to God to see virtue like yours so oppressed is enough to make
one curse one's being, and wish rather to be the vilest reptile than a human
creature.' And then would he enumerate the damned things, as he called them,
that had fallen out to thwart the good intentions of our hero; and these would
he follow up with his apprehensions for his safety; then cut a little out of
the way to take a wipe at that fury in petticoats, Mrs. O'Shocknesy; then
curse, then hope, then shudder, then admire again the fortitude of his friend,
and then exclaim that in such an infernal world as this, it was not worth while
to be virtuous, for that none but rascals were happy.

It was about two days before the trial, when he had one morning wound up, or
rather let down, our hero, by similar remarks to these, that he undertook to go
through the whole business of Miss Snaffle, with all its consequences, which
really shocked Charles to such a degree that his spirits were scarcely able to
bear it. Seeing this, Figgins cursed himself for his inconsiderate rashness.
Said he, 'My unconquerable friendship makes me a fool; and, in proportion as
you are oppressed, you so creep into my heart, that, out of complaisance to
your curiosity, I do the very things which unman you, when -- if like other men
I had more art than honesty -- I should try to render you callous to your fate,
rather than melt you into almost a desire to meet it. But come Charles,' added
he, embracing him, 'I will stand by you nobly, and if you must fall, you shall
not want a friend to revenge you.'

In this delightful mood did this kind friend permit Charles to remain for that
day. On the next he entered his friend's apartment with a most cheerful
countenance, saying there was long-looked-for come at last, and with these
words presented a packet of letters, which he said were just arrived by the
post; but that was not all, another parcel had been left at their bankers,
which he supposed contained the whole of his father's letters, ever since he
left England.

Charles, who had hastily catched at the first letter that came to his hand,
opened it, and found it from Sir Sidney. He wondered to see it begin with Sir,
but getting to the second line, while Figgins was uttering those last words,
which he did not hear, he exclaimed 'Merciful God!' -- and fainted away.

Assistance was summoned, and he recovered; when, having raved himself almost
into another swoon, he became stupid with horror. At length he grew more calm,
and being entreated by his friend to bear his fortunes like a man, he gathered
composure enough to read the following words. TO CHARLES HAZARD ESQUIRE.
SIR,
It is my duty to inform you -- though I scarcely think it will give you any
pain -- that your father is no more! He died suddenly: -- Rumor will too soon
tell you how: but shudder to think that your excesses have shortened his life!

Those excesses, which are, at your age, and for the short time in which you
have committed them, the most shocking that ever were heard of, have been but
too well authenticated to us; therefore, upon no account will I either see you,
or hear from you.

You are willed by your exasperated and unhappy father -- who had not the heart
to alter his first intentions -- your mother's jointure, which is thirteen
hundred a year, and the interest of nine thousand pounds: both for your life. I
am sole executor, but as I am firmly resolved to have no sort of communication
with you, Mr. Balance will honorably negociate this business.

My determinations are unalterable, therefore all attempts to deter me from
them will be useless.

SIDNEY WALTER ROEBUCK.




'Do I live? Am I awake?' cried Charles, staring wildly. 'My excesses shortened
my father's life! What have I done? Heavenly God I shall go distracted.' 'Mrs.
O'Shocknesy,' said Figgins. 'Did I not tell you so? She saw the father's life
hung on his son, and, like a merciless damned harpy as she is, slandered away
the reputation of one, to destroy the existence of the other. I am sure of it:
I would stake my soul that it is a fact.'

'Alas, my poor father!' said Charles, 'how properly is this a sequel to the
wretched business of yesterday! But I to be the cause of his death! I, who
would have given a thousand lives -- infamous as I am -- to save his. Oh my
forboding heart, why did I part from him? But he could not believe it. What are
my villainies? Is it my crime or my virtue that has brought me here? Surely,
surely, thus attacked, Innocence may defend itself.'

'Yours is immaculate,' said Figgins, 'and I will maintain it; nor indeed will
any body doubt it when we come to England. The villainy has reached its
consummation: all its purposes are effected. It will be easily found a mistake;
it will be palliated, glossed over; but how will it bring your father from the
grave? But come, we have need of all our senses at this moment; let us collect
them manfully; we have no guilt to sink us, whatever our accusers may. Come
Charles, resolution man: I have been the partner of your guilt, I will be the
partner of your revenge. Let us see what comes next: this is from Mr.
Standfast. Shall I read it? Charles assented by a nod, and Figgins read thus:
TO CHARLES HAZARD ESQUIRE.
SIR,
As you have made yourself the public talk of this kingdom, as your father,
through you, has


-- 'What!' said Figgins -- destroyed himself!


-- 'Great God!' said Charles; and after a pause, in which both lifted up their
eyes and hands to heaven, he went on, you will not wonder, for the sake of my
character, that I have done with you. Yet, in consideration of my pains and
care in your youth -- which indeed I little thought would be so required -- I
will take this last opportunity to wring your heart, for lenitives I find have
spoilt you, that you may, if yet there remain in it a single spark of
sensibility, awake to a sense of your wickedness, though, complicated and
atrocious as it is, no hopes can be entertained of your repentance.




'Damnation!' said Figgins, 'I have not common patience; the people are all
mad. A man would swear we had began, the moment we left London, by robbing upon
the high way, and that as soon as we arrived in France, we enrolled ourselves
members of a banditti.'

Charles looked vacantly wretched, and Figgins continued. But what will the
task avail of setting the black catalogue --


'Horrid black indeed,' said Figgins -- of your crimes before you, I shall only
feast your eyes on what has given you so much pleasure; and thus the
contemplation of those seducing facts may stimulate you to a commission of
others, if possible, still more daring, to show that you know how to attain
perfection in villainy. Nevertheless, as your father's bounty has so largely
reached me, in return for the unwearied pains I took to render you an
accomplished and worthy member of society, I will make this one effort toward
your conversion.




'Charitable creature!' said Figgins. 'Where has Mr. Standfast picked up so
much scrupulosity? I thought his maxims were to allow a broad liberty of
conscience. Zounds, one would think he had fallen in love with Mrs.
O'Shocknesy. But let us come to the catalogue.'

First then, would not one think that you determined to set honesty, honor,
and even decency at defiance, to debase yourself, whose character was really
high in the world's estimation, and raise your brother, who had so foolishly
borne himself as to be indifferently thought of, by that wanton unnecessary
theft at Calais, which your brother, shocked at such conduct, so handsomely
repaired?




'Well, this is master stroke the first,' said Figgins. 'Why at this rate
Charles your fortune, to be understood, must, like a witches spell, be read
backwards. Poor Standfast! I thought he knew mankind better.'

Next, who will believe but the unmanly attack upon your brother's life, at
Lisle, after introducing him into company to ridicule and exasperate him, was
concerted that you might become heir to your father's title and fortune. Indeed
nothing can be so clear, for in France the murder would have been considered as
a rencounter, and in England it would not have been punishable.




'Well argued, Master Standfast,' said Figgins; 'Why he is an altered man. I am
cursedly mistaken if he did not practice in his youth very nearly as bad
actions as those of which he only accuses you; and yet I believe this is the
first time he ever preached upon such a subject.' -- 'This is deep laid villainy
indeed,' said Charles; 'but go on Mr. Figgins.'

As to your next material crime -- for I shall pass over what may with
propriety be pardonable on the score of youth and inexperience


-- 'very civil, upon my soul,' said Figgins -- what could induce you to do the
very thing of all others, which was most likely to incense Sir Sidney Roebuck,


-- 'Ay,' said Figgins, 'what could that be?' -- to assist in stealing a nun
from a convent


-- 'Whew!' said Figgins. 'What is our civility to honest Combrie so construed?
And yet dam'me if this same Mr. Standfast did not steal a nun upon his own
account, in his youth; and, if report says true, she broke her heart through
his ill usage. But against himself he would have you believe report tells lies.
Why then is it to be believed against his friend? But one man may steal a
horse: -- Never mind it Charles: -- you have been rascally treated indeed.' To
assist in stealing a nun from a convent, must of course prove an immovable bar
to his farther favor. Had not his own virtue resisted the same action in his
youth, the mother of Annette might have been now his wife; for then perhaps she
would not have pined herself to death for love of him in her retirement.




'Here I believe,' said Charles, 'he speaks truth, and had I been guilty of
this crime, Sir Sidney would never have pardoned it.' 'But mark,' said Figgins,
'what a curious gentleman Mr. Stand fast is. He takes a lie, establishes it as
a fact, and then argues upon it as if it were truth. But let us proceed. Oh how
a man might preach upon the folly and credulity of mankind, and take his text
from this letter!'

As to your stealing this lady's fortune, it is certainly no more than a
compound of the last crime; but that does not lessen its magnitude. --
Thoughtless boy! how could you have the bold audacity to set yourself against
the jealous laws both civil and religious, of such a kingdom as France. In this
business I find Mr. Figgins chose to cut a great figure,


-- 'Oh I am glad to find I am brought in at last. Indeed I cut as great a
figure at one place as another, except indeed the robbery at Calais, which this
villainous Charles Hazard chose to conceal even from me, to preserve a false
delicacy to a rascally brother, who, in return for saving him from the gallows,
has connived with his infernal mother to load him with unmerited infamy.' --
But I shall write to him upon the subject.


'And he will answer you Mr. Standfast,' said Figgins. In the mean time I shall
only say that your conduct was madness, and your motive infamous: for though
what you did could not be wholly excused, it might in some degree have admitted
of palliation, had you been actuated only by a disinterested generosity to your
principal; but stipulating for terms with him, and receiving a part of the
money, as the price of your iniquity, confirms the principles of villainy in you
so fully, that volumes of the best precepts and ages of the best examples I
fear could not reclaim you.




'Why no Mr. Standfast,' cried Figgins, 'I do not think they could; for what
signifies washing any thing white that is pure already? Damned, damned
mischievious cat,' added Figgins, and then went on.

I hope you felt your loss of five hundred pounds at cards, as a judgment on
you.




'Well said!' exclaimed Figgins; 'truly parsonic. Mr. Standfast's belief is
like his barn; it swallows any thing.'

The reflection that the man who plundered you is a proscribed character, and
murder his crime, perhaps first induced your acquaintance, and afterward how
could hearts so congenial avoid a society with each other. --




'This is saucily impudent indeed,' said Charles. 'Damnably so,' said Figgins,
and went on.

-- But let it mortify you to reflect that you were not to enjoy the fruits of
your wickedness, but that it was to be wrested from you by your superior in
subtilty, though not in crime, for the purpose of squandering it upon your own
harlot, who nows revels with him, and laughs at you, and who, such is the
certain dependence of one bad character upon another, robbed and deserted you
at Lions, upon finding you committed to prison for murder.




'Why then,' said Figgins, 'by Mr. Standfast's confession I am a good
character, for I will never desert you. But how did he discover this last
business of Madame St. Vivier, for even I had not the heart to tell it you. In
short my friend she has lain her hands on every thing, which is the more
unlucky, as these French counselors will not -- nor indeed will any others --
plead without fees. But let us finish this letter, and talk of these matters
afterward.'

May you escape the punishment due to that crime, and every other, and live to
merit, by your contrition, if not the praise, yet the pity, of all good men.




'The date of which charitable epoch I suppose Mr. Standfast is to appoint'
said Figgins.

Be assured that nothing but a confession of your crimes, and a sincere
repentance of them, can restore you to the countenance, though I am afraid
nothing can to the hearts, of your friends. -- But do not be so mistaken as to
attempt a defense of your actions; there are too many witnesses against you;
even your own servant, whose whole life, upon proof, has been blameless,
shocked at so many repetitions of your unprincipled conduct, has left you, even
without demanding his due, lest he should be thought to have received, though
not guiltily, the wages of iniquity.




'There is a precious rascal for you,' said Figgins. 'I can only say for a man
that pretends to know the world, I never saw such a dupe as Mr. Standfast in
the whole course of my life.'

In short, this is the sum of all: Your father is dead; you are -- though he
fell by his own hand -- virtually his executioner; your brother has take
possession of the title and estate; your mistress is promised to another; and,
thanks to your own villainy, you have not a friend in the world. May God turn
your heart, and make you more worthy the regard of others, as well as

STEPHEN STANDFAST.'




CHAPTER VII.
MORE LETTERS, AND SOME HEROISM.

'WELL by heaven,' said Figgins, as he folded up Mr. Standfast's letter, 'this
is the most consummate piece of cruel treachery that surely ever was concerted.
I could gnaw my flesh. And then this last business! To practice on the
inexperience of your mistress! Damned mixture of stupid credulous folly, and
ignorant obstinate pride. I suppose they intend to marry her to your brother.'

'I believe they do not know themselves what they intend' said Charles. 'This I
know, that they have given me a very grounded, though a very early, conviction
that there is not upon the face of nature so contemptible a being as a human
creature; and I am strongly convinced that, should the event as to my present
situation turn out favorably -- which I am perfectly careless about -- though
I hope I shall love benevolence as much as ever, I shall hereafter look with an
eye of distrust on every man whom I have not proved yet not superficially, but
from that sort of thorough conviction which you have given me -- to be my
friend.'

'I thank you sir,' said Figgins, 'for a compliment which I hope I shall
deserve. But you will give me leave to say that I am astonished at the
tranquillity with which you receive all these unmerited affronts. I expected --
though I rejoice to find it otherwise -- that such a complication of invidious
calumny would have almost turned your brain' -- and in this Mr. Figgins spoke
truth, for he did so expect -- 'and especially this last blow concerning your
mistress.'

'The very number and weight of these slanders,' said Charles, 'are what makes
me sit down perfectly easy under them. I was in a flattering dream as to the
world, and fondly fancied myself in the midst of generous friends, who, till I
left my native country, were willing to give me credit for any little merit I
possessed, and anxiously studious to find a venial motive for any indiscretion.
But this present moment convinces me I was mistaken; their discernment, as to
my real character, was so shallow, that it is plain they laid up every little
trait of youthful folly to ground a falacious argument upon, which they now
believe to be solid reason. This, cooperating with the most unworthy and
unheard of treachery, they have given me up as a profligate and an abandoned
character, impossible to be reclaimed; and this calumny from a quarter they all
detest -- which common reflection must call impossible and a lie -- is
cherished warmly, zealously: cherished to the utter reprobation of him for whom
they pretend a friendship. To whom then does the reprobation really belong?
Does it not recoil on themselves? And what compliment should I pay myself by
calling that man my friend who is so ready blindly, ignorantly, unfeelingly to
think me the worst villain that ever infested the earth? Perhaps they did not
know that I do possess one quality in as strong, but I hope as honest, a degree
at least as any of them. If I do not flatter myself, my pride is of the right
sort; and it shall not bend to the least explanation till I have received a
concession from those who have injured me. No, no, Figgins, an emperor shall
not trample upon me; and by all that is sacred I will see contrition in my
enemies before I deign to communicate with them.'

'My noble friend,' cried Figgins. 'Let me finish,' said Charles. 'As to
Annette, she is a beautiful girl, and I love her better than any woman I ever
saw; or rather, what I feel for her is more like love than I have felt for any
other; but I never could flatter myself we should ever be united: there was
always a something about my mind that forbade me to think of it. As matters are
I will forget her; for though I am convinced this prohibition -- so perverse is
human nature -- would soon, were I to give way to it, make a fool of me, yet it
shall not be; for I will not love her dishonourably, and as to marriage, I do
not love the world so well as to bring its cares upon my head.'

Figgins expressed more amazement at this calm, easy, resolute good sense, as
he was pleased to call it, than at the rest; and then they proceeded to a third
letter, which proved to be from Mr. Gloss. It contained these words: TO CHARLES
HAZARD, ESQUIRE.
MY DEAR SIR,
I must begin my letter in the true mercantile style, by saying that my first
twelve epistles not being honored, I send this my thirteenth, etc. etc.

Jesting apart, my good friend, you are the strangest model of eccentricity
that ever let inconsistency run away with reason.


"What schooled on all sides!" said Figgins. For my own part, I neither see the
satisfaction nor the good sense in suffering all your friends to write so
repeatedly, without deigning to answer their favors; nor how a man can be so
infatuatedly sunk in the delirium of idle pleasures -- which are to be sure
well enough in their season -- as to neglect the much more important duties of
friendship and relative affection.

I need not tell you, for you must have received them, that nearly thirty
letters from your father and others have been sent you.


"These are some of them I suppose," said Figgins. At present indeed answers
would be of little avail, for your father has shot himself,


-- "Delicately announced," said Figgins -- and all your friends have turned
their backs upon you; yet, on the score of the many shining qualities you
certainly possess, those engaging manners, those bewitching attractions, and
that dawning reason, which was, for your years, so decisive and manly, you may
command my friendship as far as one gentleman ought to assist another: --




"On the score of all these considerations," said Figgins, "you had better,
upon my soul, Mr. Gloss, let him command your polite, and therefore unmeaning,
friendship on the score that is between you, and then he would receive about
three hundred pounds, which you borrowed of him in driblets. But let us see
further."

-- Though I greatly fear even my influence with Sir Sidney -- for he does me
justice -- cannot restore you to his good opinion.


"His influence!" said Charles. However, as I mean to vote with him in
parliament -- for you know I told you some time ago, by letter, that I was
returned for the borough of Bray --


"The devil you were!" cried Figgins: you may be assured I shall willingly
embrace every honorable opportunity of offering you my service. You know my
candor, and my consideration for my friends. The first induces me to tell you,
without hesitation, that the baronet has promised me his lovely daughter,


"So so," said Figgins, and the latter that I could not be prevailed upon to
accede to otherwise so desirable a proposal till he assured me, in so many
words, he would never speak to you again.


"Which," said Figgins, "you very probably requested as a favor."

Pray write to me; and if there be any thing I can with propriety do to serve
you, either with government or privately, you may in all worthy matters command,

My dear Sir, Your truly devoted servant, GEORGE GLOSS.




'Here is another precious member of the human community,' said Charles. 'Sir,'
said Figgins, 'what I have heard and seen today baffles my whole experience;
and, for the future, I will not believe that because I see a man do a good or a
sensible thing, that he will not do a wicked or a stupid one; but, on the
contrary, expect to see him turn about, and exhibit that various, pitiable,
contemptible figure that the best and the wisest I find are too apt to
represent.

'To be sure there is one thing in their favor. Nobody has, it is plain,
received any letters from you.' 'But good God,' said Charles, 'is it not very
plain to be seen how all this has come about? Has not the very rascal prevented
it who has gone over to bear false witness against me?'

'True,' cried Figgins, 'and then which way shall we reconcile to the wisdom of
Mr. Standfast, or the goodness of Sir Sidney, so hasty a belief of such slander
against one, of whom it has been their pride to have had such a good opinion.'

'If their conduct be goodness and wisdom,' said Charles, it is both
superficial and supererogate. There is not common sense in it, and I am sure
there is not common good manners: for what virtue is that which condemns
unheard? -- and what modesty that has the presumption to punish without the
right? What are my actions, after all, to these people? Am I dependant on them?
No, I thank God, I am not; nor will I ever call one of them my friend: nay nor
any man upon earth who shall be bold enough to scrutinize my intentions. No, my
will, my desires, my conduct, shall be my own; and if I cannot make friendship
upon any other terms, I would rather be alone in the world with integrity of
heart, than give color, by my intimacy, to their suspicions who have dared to
think me a villain.'

'Admirably reasoned, my friend,' said Figgins, 'and I am sorry for their sakes
to say too justly. -- But let us see this other letter, which bears the same
date with the rest.' TO CHARLES HAZARD ESQUIRE.
SIR,
I know not, in this hurry of my spirits, if there be any precedents in books
of a woman's writing to a man out of mere friendship; at least of sufficient
authenticity to warrant my disregarding decorum in this manner. If there are
not, it is a new incident, and I must rely on the purity of my intentions to
excuse it.

So extremely like a fairy tale, where the hero's bad genius only makes its
appearance, is all that has happened in this family relative to you, that if I
did not fancy I had myself sagacity enough to account for the influence of the
foul fiend, and whence it originates, I should think it very hard indeed that
people could not be contented with losing their own senses, but they must
insist that others lay aside theirs.

That I may hasten through this epistle sir -- for I have a good deal to say --
I am willing, unfashionable as it may be at our house, to do you poetical
justice; not however in the style of your good friends here, who, finding you
in danger of your life, think -- in imitation of ARISTOTLE, RICHARDSON, and the
barber's uncle in Gil Blas -- that they cannot excite in you too much terror.

This candor in me does not proceed from any weak compassion, but from a fair
revisal of your actions at the time they passed under my observation: and I do
not think that charity authorizes me to look farther, at least with a severe
eye.

Abiding by this mode of decision, common justice obliges me to say that all
your mad freaks here, which I would not have given a farthing for you if you
had been without, originated from worthy motives. Musquito, Ego, and even
Toogood smarted, it is true, but they highly merited their punishment, and the
lash was held by the hand of justice; but think ye they forgot it in your
absence? Oh no: scurvy fellows as they are. Thank heaven, however, the worst of
your enemies cannot give a bad motive to your conduct in a certain instance.
Yet there are some who compare you to Lovelace, and call your treatment of Jude
"sparing your rosebud:" -- charming young man as you were, and I will believe
are.

Judy daily blesses you, poor girl, and joins with me to pray for the hard
hearts that are set against you. Your behavior as to her began, continued, and
ended critically right, and her virtue, as it ought, was rewarded in the
catastrophe; nor can a soul capable of such an act indulge a single principle
that could dictate such dreadful crimes as we are all commanded to believe
against you.

As for my part, I have read so much that human nature is a thing I am pretty
well versed in. I must beg leave therefore to use my own proper intellects,
rather than those of others; for though I am devoted to Sir Sidney, yet I am
more so to truth and honor: and these wih not let me see why nature should
perform a miracle, by turning all those excellent gifts she had afforded you
into diabolical ones, merely for the gratification of your enemies, and
commiting a breach of promise, which she was never known in any other instance
to do.

Your father was certainly greatly shocked at not hearing from you; but if we
do not admit all the rest, why should we not charitably believe your letters
have been intercepted. For my part, I should think, if you had committed all
this wickedness, you would the sooner have written to him, if it had been only
for the sake of coloring it. But poor man his behavior was very strange
toward the last; yet you will find he could not bear to curtail you in your
circumstances.

As to the state of our family, it is briefly as follows: Sir Sidney will not
hear a word in your favor from any body; my dear lady you know is the mirror
of duty and goodness, and therefore if she have any sentiments to your
advantage she dare not divulge them even to me; charming Annette, who -- or our
complicated history will be incomplete -- must marry you at last, is grown an
angel, and I scruple not to tell you will never love any body but yourself:
but, dear creature, devoted to her duty, how will she dare to look a stern
father in the face, much less disobey him; and, unfortunately, she is not Lady
Roebuck's child.

I have not mentioned to you however all our family: Mr. Gloss I can assure you
is no very inconsiderable member of it. He has so pushed himself among the
great, that he is in parliament, and he has so attached himself to Sir Sidney,
that he is become his darling. He has certainly a knowledge of human nature,
but it is an artful one; for I can see plainly he has got round the good
gentleman by praising his ancestry, which we all know is his foible. They have
agreed together on making some motion relative to the antiquities of English
baronets: then he has introduced a number of improvements at Castlewick, and
put the people in a way of carrying the goods to market upon much better terms
than they were used to; which is all very good if his motives were so: he has
also been indefatigable in seconding Sir Sidney's designs at Little Hockley,
but how that will be now I do not know, for your brother is beginning to settle
grooms and others of his sporting followers there.

Mr. Gloss, finding my partiality to books, thought he knew where to find me
vulnerable; but all his erudition was not able to cover his designs, which I
could not however come into, for my studies have never been subtilty, but
nature. As to my sweet Miss Annette, he was there entirely at a loss, for she
has no foible.

Thus you see you have no friend but me, except Mr. Figgins, who, if the
current account is to be credited, is almost -- for nobody it seems can be
quite -- as bad as yourself.

Fear not however but some good will work out of this. I shall be upon my
guard, and I am very much mistaken if I do not know of whom to be watchful. I
only remark at present, that as it was said of ALEXANDER the best trait in his
fortune was the choice of his tutor, so I most sincerely believe that you
would, at this moment, have been thought immaculate if the same could be said,
with the same truth, of yours.

I am, sir, Your very sincere friend, EMMA DISTICH.
P. S. I have this moment heard that your brother is to be married in a few
days, and that Mrs. O'Shocknesy, who assumes the title of Lady Dowager Hazard,
is coming to live with the happy pair.






'This girl,' said Figgins, 'with her whimsical style, has more good sense than
all of them put together. Her reading has been like the progress of a be; she
has selected all the sweets, and left the poison behind: and it proves that her
intellects are remarkably strong, for she seems to have gathered as much
mundaine knowledge by inference as others from worldly commerce; and this is
well exemplified in her being too cunning for Mr. Gloss, who indeed seems to be
the director of this plot. I wonder upon what terms he and the Lady Dowager
are.'

'She is a very good girl,' said Charles, 'and I am afraid her solicitude for
me will deprive her of her place.'

'I fear so too,' said Figgins, 'for she does not disguise that she dislikes
Gloss, who will take advantage of her being upon a false scent to get rid of
her; for her suspicions of Mr. Standfast, notwithstanding his scandalous
letter, are surely ill grounded. This will be found out, and she will be turned
away as a mischief-maker. But for this mistake, the remarks in her letter would
have been very shrewd and sensible; but her dislike to Standfast is of ancient
date. He made pretty brisk love to her when he was in the family of Major
Malplaquet, and, upon her resisting his inclinations, he did not place in her
virtue that implicit belief that it merited.'

'I should think that would inspire her contempt,' said Charles, 'rather than
her revenge. However, I cannot help thinking as you do that Mr. Standfast has
given no assistance to this scandal but his belief of its truth, which cannot
have failed to lend weight and consequence to the opinions of the rest, both in
regard to their conviction that he is a judge of mankind, and that he must know
me better than any body. It only turns out that he does not know me at all; nay
that I did not know him; for I could not have thought it possible he could so
soon, nor with so much indifference, have dropped the mask of the kind friendly
adviser, to betray the insolent assuming pedagogue.'

'My dear sir,' said Figgins, 'you will please to recoliect that Mr. Standfast
gets in years, which will not lessen his pride, of which he has possessed a
pretty liberal quantity all his life, and you may be assured it is not
diminished by a recollection that he has a good five hundred a year settled on
him for life; which he ought, by the bye, to have the gratitude to remember
belongs in right to you. My two hundred a year comes from the same source, and
as we deprive you between us of a large unnual sum, it is but common decency
that we should show a wish, even though we have not ability, to deserve it.'

'Well,' said Charles, 'God knows how long I am to live, but that I may not
pass my life in an eternal warfare, I will not investigate any thing: Time
shall do it for me. There is but one inducement to my giving the matter a
single thought, which is the situation of Annette. However, all I can do
actively in relation to her will not only operate more to her disadvantage, but
plunge me into real wretchedness, which is a thing, I thank them all, full
unpleasant enough when one only possesses it in imagination. When my mind is
more at ease I may perhaps answer Emma's letter, but it will be only
strenuously to request she will not concern herself in my affairs at all, and
to make the poor creature easy, by telling her that I can smile with contempt
on all the malice of my enemies.'

'And yet,' said Figgins, 'I cannot methinks help wishing you would answer all
the letters in the terms they deserve.' 'Mr. Figgins,' interrupted Charles,
'though, if I know my heart, I should detest myself could I indulge for two
minutes together an unjust or an ungenerous resolution, yet I am so well
convinced that which I have at present made is founded on reason and propriety,
that I would lose my life rather than relinquish it. No; they shall seek me, or
they shall lose me. Let them take their choice; and, if they do not care which,
it would surely be greatly beneath me not to be as indifferent as they are.'

A summons to dinner put an end to this long conversation, after which Figgins
left his friend, in his miserable apartment, to go and prepare the awful
business of the next day. He was no sooner gone than our hero began to pervade
the contents of those letters which Figgins had brought him from the bankers.
First he selected those from his father, which were filled with such
tenderness, such distress of heart, such sensibility, yet unmixed with a single
reproach, that all poor Charles's fortitude was nearly exhausted. He sighed,
wrung his hands, and cried like a child, which his jailer -- as he entered his
apartment to examine if the rivets of his fetters were fast -- mistaking for
apprehension on account of his approaching trial, begged he would make himself
easy, for he had nothing worse to apprehend than hanging!

If this fate really awaits him, the reader and I may hereafter make some
enquiry concerning his behavior; for, as we have already examined together his
life and character, that same behavior and his last dying speech seems all
that is wanting to wind up his story. At present we are going into happier
company, and if it be objected against us that in so doing we are deserters to
his cause under whose banner we have inlisted, we must even excuse ourselves by
saying that we are not the only friends who have left a hero in prison, to go
over to his enemies.

CHAPTER VIII.
A CLUE TO THE FOREGOING LABYRINTH.

RETROSPECTION is a very good and a very necessary thing. If one's actions
appear worthy upon a review, they will be a sort of security for the future; if
otherwise, their deformity being an unpleasant object of contemplation, we may
perhaps wish to replace it with something of a more lovely appearance: at least
this will be the case with good minds. Some men love singularity, others
ugliness, and I sincerely believe it is in some men's nature to love
wickedness, and even wickedness in which no pleasure can be enjoyed but the
mere exercise of it. For my part, however, I shall not here treat of such
innate, undeducible affections, but endeavor to give to a positive cause every
little freak of fancy that the personages in this history choose to occupy their
attention with.

A very extraordinary conduct has been lately observed to govern all the good
people on this side of the water, ever since the reader and I took leave of
them, in order to accompany our hero to France. What appears least
reconcilable to credibility, is the alteration of Sir Sidney, who, being a man
of reason, of the world, of experience, of consideration, and of uncommon
benevolence, one would naturally suppose must, in a most extraordinary manner,
have been tampered with before he could have been induced to give up a young
man in whose dawnings of maturity he had taken abundant pleasure, whose father
he had loved and honored, and of whose happiness he had hoped to have been the
guardian.

Indeed when our hero left England Sir Sidney contemplated with great pleasure
when he should return, in the bloom of manhood, with all those confirmed
accomplishments so consonant to his rank and talents, the reasonable delight
with which he should witness an union between him and his daughter, and as no
one spoke of Charles but in a style of the most exalted panegyric, no wonder if
he was charmed at seeing every thing and every body confirm such honest and
legitimate sentiments. But, when a week, then a fortnight, then a month, then
two, then four, elapsed without a single line from Charles to either his
father, his mistress, or any other friend, what could Sir Sidney think? What
judgment could he form of those reports which continually assailed his ears,
and which seemed gradually to turn all his friends against him?

It may not be amiss to watch the progress of this business. Zekiel, as the
reader was long ago informed, when he left Eaton went to France. There being in
very straitened circumstances, and totally under the direction of Mr. Flush, he
was obliged to practice many tricks and shifts to get on, especially as Kiddy,
who seems as a manooverer -- his own word -- to be a twin-born with Standfast,
very carefully threw certain gentlemen depredators in his way, who are, as
every body knows, pretty plentiful in France, and who took care -- his own
language again -- to keep the purse, by sweating it, in good running order.

Being very closely driven at Calais, and not having enough of Kiddy about him
to distinguish between what the law calls theft, from that which is so
denominated by reason, he did that through inexperience for which he might have
been hanged, when, in fact, his mode of policy should have made him do only
that for which he ought to have been hanged.

Mr. Dessein, however, who had his policy too, as we have seen, did not choose
to expose him, and, by the advice of his principal, he took care afterward,
however he offended against justice in a religious sense, not to sin against
law.

From a variety of sources which Flush contrived to get opened for him, Mr.
Zekiel, together with his own income and what he could drain from his mother,
and indeed from Mr. Standfast, contrived to cut a very capital dash at Paris.
He set very large sums chez les comptesses, and he betted larger upon the
course of Fontainebleau. In short, in spite of all he could amass together,
honestly or dishonestly, he would have found himself not only aground, but
surrounded with some very marked disgrace, if he had not met with a gentleman
who was so kind as to administer very largely to his wants; and who, not
contented with such liberal instances of kindness to a perfect stranger, gave
evident tokens of satisfaction when the young lord in expectation informed him
he had a very tender affection for his sister.

This gentleman, the reader sees, was Mr. Tadpole. He had, it seems, in company
with the young lady we saw at Lisle, who was, to say truth, not his sister --
which circumstance indeed Mr. Figgins's sagacity taught us to suspect before --
determined to make one bold push to render himself independent. He had amassed
at the gaming table in England about nine hundred pounds, to which his reputed
sister added thirteen hundred, which she had won at a different game. Their
plan was to snap up some young man of good expectations, first supplying him
with money, and afterward with a wife.

Tadpole, who was originally a lawyer's clerk, carefully secured every step he
took, and, by the time he reached England, had Zekiel so completely in his
power, that, being then of age, he scrupled not to make over to his friend the
reversion of a part of his father's terra firma.

Coming so unexpectedly to his title and fortune, advantage was taken of this
power over him, and a marriage suddenly clapped up; not out of fear of any
reluctance in the young lord, but lest an old lady, one Mrs. O'Shocknesy,
should not only destroy the hopes of the young lady, by the exercise of her
power over him, but also those of the gentleman, by furnishing him with the
money to pay off the mortgage.

This marriage, which Emma gave us a hint of, operated as we shall hereafter
have occasion to notice, in a most extraordinary manner; but the business at
present being to account for the reports against our hero, I shall go back to
Lisle, where the reader will recollect I entreated his particular attention to
all that passed.

Our hero had never seen Flush, and the two brothers were so grown out of each
other's remembrance, that it is not wonderful they should remain in mutual
ignorance till an accident unravelled the mystery. After Zekiel had retired,
vowing revenge, and left his brother master of the field of battle, Kiddy, as
we have seen, told him that revenge was very easily in his power. He then
informed him of Madame St. Vivier's intention to complete the happiness of
Charles that evening, and showed him a chamber which he said and believed was
hers. Zekiel, following the direction of his trusty valet, was admitted to
Kitty's bed room, and, in the full belief that he was deceiving his brother,
made as happy as he could wish.

The question here is, how came Flush, who was just arrived, to know so well
all these private matters? The answer is, by Mrs. Kitty, who, together with her
mistress, had been as well instructed upon this occasion by Mrs. O'Shocknesy,
as Miss Snaffle had upon a former one.

Flush, having the honor to know both the ladies, did not scruple, when the
squabble began between our hero and his brother, to interrogate the waiting
maid as to 'how the cat jumped,' as he called it, and, having learnt from her
the particulars of the assignation, proposed to put Zekiel in the place of
Charles, which she promised, without intention to perform; for she knew if it
were detected all their other designs on our hero would be at an end; and, at
the same time, she feared a discovery from Flush, for indeed he menaced it, if
she refused. She therefore directed him to conduct Zekiel to her bed chamber,
where he passed the night, and the person who tapped at the door was Mr.
Tadpole, who having first knocked at his soidisante sister's, thought he had
mistaken the room, and afterward went to his own bed, for fear of further
mistakes.

So completely however were all these cross purposes acted, that Kitty believed
the person who knocked at the door to be no other than Mr. Figgins, who, in his
turn, as has been shown, was otherwise employed. Kitty, however, having given
Madame St. Vivier a hint of this business, she burnt a light in her chamber, by
which means Charles came, as he informed Figgins, at the certainty of his not
being mistaken.

The most awkward circumstance in this affair was the scene which passed the
next day in the post chaise between Zekiel and his two companions. -- Tadpole
had taxed the young lady in the morning as to what person was in her bed
chamber; she assured him it was the young lord; they were therefore astonished
that he himself dropped no hint of it, while, on his side, he trembled for fear
any one should have maliciously discovered to them what he thought had really
happened.

This doubtful taciturnity gave Tadpole a notion that he was inwardly hugging
himself at his success, and that probably having stolen the possession of the
young lady, he might, for some reason or other, slacken in his devoirs for the
future. Miss also had suspicions akin to these, and she had once an idea of
throwing herself at her brother's feet, and making use of this opportunity,
through his authority, of exacting from Zekiel a written promise of marriage.
She refrained however, and it was well she did. Tadpole ventured a few hints.
He said he believed the devil had been let loose the night before in the inn,
for he had heard such running about and knocking at doors, that he could not
get a wink of sleep. Zekiel blundered out an awkward remark or two, Miss
ventured at a few leading questions, and, in short, they were all three on the
verge of a discovery, which would probably have overturned their respective
intentions.

It happened however that but one discovery came of it, and that was confined
to the knowledge of Tadpole and the young lady. It was, that somebody had been
in bed with Miss, which somebody was neither Zekiel nor Tadpole. They
therefore, for they had not an idea of Figgins, concluded it to be Charles, and
this thought dwelling in their imagination, presented itself as a bar to their
scheme. Upon a consultation on this subject afterward, however, they resolved
it should make no difference as to their future measures, and their minds being
thus made up -- which the reader will allow to be a pretty strong instance of
delicacy -- all matters went in their former channel.

When they came to England it was agreed, on all hands, that Mrs. O'Shocknesy
and Standfast should know no more of Mr. and Miss Tadpole than if there had
been no such persons in the world.

And now came, as Figgins called it, masterstroke the first. This gentleman
corresponded with Mr. Standfast, as did also Madame St. Vivier, whose real name
was Jenny Singleton, with Mrs. O'Shocknesy. From their accounts they had began
to frame an accusation, which the arrival of Zekiel greatly improved, and
which, with its amendments, stood as in Standfast's letter.

These tidings were conveyed to Mr. Gloss, who insinuated them into Sir
Sidney's family as opportunity served; and, as fast as one rumor died away, he
broached another, that the good baronet might not be suffered to cool.

In this worthy business he found three very useful tools in Musquito, Ego, and
Toogood; who remembering, as Emma has told us, their old grudge -- especially
when revived in its worst lights by Gloss -- were continually throwing out some
hint to Charles's disadvantage. Musquito said the young fellow was mad, and
because he had been tolerably educated, and puffed up with false applause, had,
like other spoilt children, thought he could carry all the world before him.
Toogood said that he could not have believed a young man of such promising
parts would so disgrace all his friends, while Ego declared that if he had been
a young fellow blessed with so many advantages, he would have turned out the best
creature in the world. In short, Gloss made them play fast and loose, as he
pleased, and when they talked in exaggerating terms of his former pranks, he
once ventured in a mild way to reprobate the part Sir Sidney had taken in the
business of Swash and the tailor, saying he should not wonder to hear his
acquiescence upon that occasion quoted as an excuse for the wretch's enormities.

These measures, together with the interception of Charles's letters, which, by
the bye, furnished Standfast, who received them, with a most admirable guide to
the execution of his schemes, and now and then some cursory intelligence from
genglemen just arrived from France, who saw our hero drunk at an inn, or
quarrelling in a coffee-house, where he refused, notwithstanding their earnest
solicitation, to send any letter or message to England. All these I say worked
his utter ruin in the opinion of his friends; and yet, I must do Sir Sidney the
justice to say he hesitated against what appeared to be positive conviction
till one morning news was brought that Lord Hazard was found shot through the
head, and that the act was certainly committed by himself, for one pistol lay
close by him, and another was found loaded in his pocket; and they were the
same pair he had bought when he was last in town.

Two days after this melancholy accident John arrived, who wept over his old
master's corpse, said he did not wonder at what had happened, afterward
corroborated all that had been reported, did not spare Figgins, and concluded
with an account of Charles's being imprisoned at Lions for murder, producing,
at the same time, a French Gazette, which gave the particulars of the whole
transaction. Under these appearances, with Gloss at his elbow, Sir Sidney wrote
the letter we have seen.

CHAPTER IX.
CONTAINING A RECEIPT TO FORM A GREAT MAN -- A VERY CURIOUS INSTANCE OF FILIAL
PIETY, AND ANOTHER OF MATRIMONIAL COMFORT.

HAVING formerly hinted that Mr. Gloss was selected by Standfast as a husband
for Annette, and again in the last chapter shown that these two gentlemen acted
in concert in a fraud of no less consequence than what SHAKESPEARE, who well
knew human nature, calls the worst of injuries -- the taking away a man's good
name -- I feel it incumbent on me to account for the close intimacy which
certainly did subsist between them.

When Gloss came to England from Madeira, either accident, or necessity, or
something -- for it is not necessary now to be particular -- pointed out Mr.
Standfast as a proper person to assist him in his views of settling in this
country.

That reverend gentleman, ever ready to help out a genius -- for this quality
must be allowed to Mr. Gloss -- advised him to trump up a story of going to the
Cape of Good Hope, and then return, after going only to Madeira, where he
actually had yet some little business, and circulate a report that he had
touched his father's fortune, which, being in merchandise, he had only to
change it into money, to cut a figure.

Being introduced to a number of tradesmen, as a young nabob, he presently sat
himself down in a most elegant house, built a vis a vis, and took up large
quantities of goods: Standfast supplying him with what ready money he was in
absolute necessity of.

Cutting this figure, and having his pretensions backed by Standfast, money was
next borrowed, Snaffle and Dogbolt becoming occasionally collateral securities;
and this trade went on so swimmingly, that in less than a year and a half they
found their names standing out on different engagements for upwards of
twenty-seven thousand pounds! twelve at least of which Standfast had converted
to his own proper use: for the avarice of Mrs. O'Shocknesy was insatiable, and
the poor gentleman doated on her to a degree of infatuation.

Thus situated, their ruin collectively was inevitable, if they could not stem
this storm, which now seemed to be bursting over their heads. The difficulty
seemed to be how to manage it, but to such geniuses all dangers were
surmountable. Some hundreds were laid out in India goods, to show by way of
sample, which were bought for exportation, to save the drawback, and afterward
clandestinely relanded.

Every possible exertion was made to give responsibility and consequence to the
appearance of Mr. Gloss. A large estate was bargained for; nay he even went so
far as to wait on the minister, to offer an exclusive treaty for a loan. Thus
his name rang in the newspapers, and the whole world, believing him to be in
possession of an immense fortune, offered him any assistance he might think
proper to command. Large sums were soon pressed upon him, which went to satisfy
such as would not shift the responsibility from his confederates shoulders to
his. Others did not make any difficulty of doing this; so that after a variety
of negociations, Mr. Gloss's name stood alone for the original sum of
twenty-seven thousand pounds, and seven added to it!

What was the next step? How was he to go on How skreen himself from his
creditors? How indeed, but by borrowing the writings of a friend's estate, and
standing for a borough! He had given proofs of his abilities as a negociator;
nobody knew the theory of commerce better; who then so proper to fill an office
under the state?

He had fixed his eye on the treasury ship of the navy, and I have said he had
a knock of getting to any spot that he fixed his attention on. A public
acknowledgment that he was determined upon having this post, that is to say,
whenever there should be a ministry virtuous enough for him to mix with, gained
him his election.

His speech from the hustings was very original, and therefore very taking. In
all addresses he had hitherto noticed, there were a number of general promises,
which were never performed. He, on the contrary, resolved to promise nothing
but what his constituents were sure he would perform if he could.

He began with saying that he had an interest in offering himself for that
borough, and so had every man living when he made a similar application; for
would any one present, or in the world, exercise his talents for nothing? This,
he said, was honest, and, therefore, he had no doubt it would be popular. He
went on with saying he had watched with great attention the unhappy situation
of this country, and was ready to lend a helping hand to save it from impending
ruin. For this however he certainly expected a reward: and it was but just.
Would a physician save a life without a fee? -- or a parson a soul without his
tithes? It was folly, it was nonsense, it was hypocrisy, for men to pretend
disinterestedness and mere love of their country. He loved his country as well
as any body; was as disinterested as any body; but still, patriotism and
self-denial could not imply, in the present instance, more than this: that
while loaves and fishes are going forward, a man should eat only to satisfy
nature, instead of guttling till he furfeited himself.

He said he would be plain, and fairly lay open all his views. The navy of this
nation was its bulwark, its glory. It was that which lent millions to our
treasury, magnificence to our appearance, and terror to our name. It was that
which made us respected and admired; dreaded and envied. We made but a point on
the face of the globe, but yet that point, though small, was resplendant. It
was gazed at with wonder by the remotest corners of the earth. We were the true
Cynosure of trade; the commercial pole, that, with more than magnetic force,
attracted the interests of surrounding nations. All this was owing to our navy:
the protection of our commerce. His ambition therefore was to be treasurer of
that navy; in the execution of which office, though he expected to be paid for
his trouble, yet he would be bold to say his conduct would deserve it: for he
was sure he should save immense sums to the nation!

He said he despised professions. They were unmanly, ungenerous, and an insult
to those to whom they were made: he had therefore honestly opened his mind.
That honesty would, he doubted not, be a sufficient security with Englishmen,
whose natural character was honesty, for his future good intentions. If he
should have the great honor to be returned for the borough of Bray, and a
minister should come in of sufficient ability and integrity for him to act
with, he would stipulate for the situation he had set his heart upon, and they
would then see how the money would be handled! He would be bold to say, though
it would be for his interest, it should also be for theirs: for the interests
of the member and his constituents were inseparable.

He finished his speech with saying he scorned to appeal to their ears, he
hoped he had appealed to their hearts; and as their own conviction must teach
them that truth, and only truth, had been his guide, he hoped that honesty,
plain dealing, and unreserved candor would mark that day as an epoch when a
member of parliament was chosen who had no expectations but from honor, no
views but from sentiment.

I need not add that Mr. Gloss carried his election; for notwithstanding this
florid speech, which was indeed novel enough, he had bought the borough, and
the gentleman who contested the election was only a nominal antagonist, set up
to save appearances.

This point being carried, the person of Mr. Gloss was sacred, and his
creditors might go whoop for their money. Exasperated with this treatment, his
vis a vis was stopped in the street, and executions served in his house. But this
was as useless as the rest; all his property was made over to Mr. Standfast,
for money lent. And now we see Mr. Gloss without an inch of land he could call
his own, nearly forty thousand pounds in debt, with a house and an equipage
made over for safety to another, a parliament man, a popular speaker, almost
the leader of a party, and making large strides, with the principles we have
seen, toward a responsible and lucrative place under government: for the
treasurership of the navy he was determined to have.

As he really began to boast, and not without reason, of his influence, he
thought he could not attack Sir Sidney in a more vulnerable place than his
ancient house, which, from a long train of collateral argument, he proved to be
older than the baronet himself had suspected.

I shall not go into the minutiae of this arrangement, which must not only be
dry, but uninteresting to the reader, who, I dare say, would bate a little in
the article of birth to such as made up the deficiency in honor -- but only
say that Mr. Gloss made it out very clearly that Sir Sidney was the only living
issue of the family who held the honor of the first English baronetcy, and
offered to make a motion in the house, which he should support with many
powerful arguments, that his majesty be advised to grant to Sir Sidney Walter
Roebuck, and his heirs for ever, an exclusive patent of baronetcy, under the
title of baronet in chief, to be considered as an honor between that of a
common baronet and a baron, in like manner as a marquis is considered between
an earl and a duke, and the precedent to be quoted, as an illustration of the
argument, was to be, that as there was but one real marquis -- which was the
case at that time -- so there should be but one chief baronet.

The baronet certainly listened to the proposal, and turned it a good deal in
his mind, and though he doubted whether he should avail himself of such an
opportunity of aggrandizing his family -- especially as he had no son -- yet,
as he could see nothing but attention to his interest in the conduct of Gloss,
he certainly conceived from that moment a great regard for him. This was
prodigiously augmented by the attention this last mentioned gentleman paid to
Castlewick, and the actual advantage its interests received from his advice,
which both gave the baronet an insight into his capacity, and confirmed his
good opinion of it. All these circumstances cooperating, as indeed Emma has
already told us, no wonder if he had familiar entrance to his house, afterward
to his heart, and at length an offer of his alliance.

Mr. Gloss took care also to appear the friend of Charles; but then his
mediation never came without an insinuation that he was more a friend to
honor. In short the two characters were so strikingly contrasted in the mind
of the baronet, that without any great stretch of propriety, the reader must
allow, under these circumstances, that it is not to be wondered he should turn
about in the manner I have described. Besides -- for I would fain sum up every
trifling figure, to make the aggregate of my reasons upon so important a point
convincing -- Sir Sidney felt a delicate, a nice repugnance, perhaps too much
so, at the idea of a connection with the son of a man who had destroyed
himself, and who had, assuredly, borne in his youth a very bad character.

Again, he plainly foresaw that all his benevolent attempts at Little Hockley
would soon be frustrated by the innovations of the young lord; for it was not
yet so firmly rooted but that, owing to a new crew of revellers, it began
already to lose ground. This, and the recollection of the ancient feuds, which
he now feared would be renewed, heartily conquered his inclination to be in any
respect allied to the family of Lord Hazard, though he admired the talents of
our hero, and really had such a value for him as to wish his welfare, though he
doubted whether he would ever deserve it.

Mr. Standfast and Mrs. O'Shocknesy must now become a little the subject of our
attention. That gentleman and lady had been sometime married: but it was the
wish of both that it should not be published. She brought with her a
comfortable number of debts, and being now a femme couverte, very soon
contracted a number more. In short, there were no bounds to her extravagance,
which Mr. Standsast seemed as anxious to feed as she to indulge. -- His own
income, including a living the gift of my lord, his annuity from that nobleman,
the interest of his legacy from Major Malplaquet, and what he had besides been
able to realize -- for no object upon earth, except Mrs. O'Shocknesy, had been
sixpence expense to him -- was about seventeen hundred a year; the lady had
three; yet we have lately seen above twelve thousand added to their income in a
year and a half! But what was this? He doated on her as implicitly, as
rapturously, and as boyishly as Barn well did on Millwood, and threw large sums
into her lap as willingly, whenever he could steal them: for I think the means
he used to get at them might very well be called theft. On her side, no
duchess must dare to vie with her in taste and expense. But every source from
whence this profusion was supplied at length dried up. Mr. Gloss being in
parliament, nobody would trust him; and thus the whole credit of the
confederacy was at a stand. Besides, Lord Hazard, who was expected to grieve
himself to death for the loss of his wife and the irregularities of his son,
was yet alive, and had no disorder but sorrow, which, though immoderate, did
not seem likely to kill him. What joy then to the heart of this lady to hear he
was no more! -- to find her son in full possession of more than thirteen
thousand a year, the whole of which she intended to command! Her transport knew
no bounds! She bespoke a new carriage and new liveries, and bowled down into
Warwickshire in the most superb and magnificent style that money could procure
or fashion invent: taking with her such domestics for her son as she conceived
proper for his situation in life. In short nothing could equal the triumph with
which she thought herself sure of taking possession of both her son's senses
and his affairs. Judge then what was her astonishment when flying to his arms
he stopped her by introducing his wife, being no other than the very Miss Tadpole
that Figgins, to use his own words, dubbed him with by anticipation at Lisle!
What then did she feel! Words are not strong enough to describe her sensations.
It took her breath away. She raved, stamped, laughed, execrated, and would
probably have died with the violence of her passion, had not a shower of tears
borne away the first torrent of that complication of distressful feelings which
assailed her. At length she accomplished something like articulate utterance,
when the whole school of Billingsgate, had it been present, might have heard
and edified. No opprobrious name that could be scandalously spoken or
maliciously applied, was unremembered. His lordship -- surely no lord was ever
so called before -- was a pitiful rascal, a nincompoop, a hop of my thumb, a
paltry puppy, and a pimping scoundrel. The lady was a scurvy jade, a fortune
hunting minx, a low wretch, and a sorry trull.

Zekiel laughed at all the abuse on himself, but taking fire at the insults
offered to his wife, cried, 'I'll tell you what it is ma'am; I know you see
what you would be at, but dam'me let me tell you dam'me that I am out of my leading
strings, dam'me if I 'ent, and I will not no longer be schooled, do you see, by any
old cat in England.' 'Old cat!' screamed out the lady dowager.

The young lady here interfered, and begged her husband to consider he was
talking to his mother. -- 'To my mother,' cried he, 'why so I know I am, and a
pretty mother she is, now is not she, to abuse you and I in this here manner?
Why I know'd what she was upon; she thought to come here and be lady paramount
of every thing, and snub and ding me about like a lout and a school boy; but
dam'me if I Will have any such doings: no, I will not old gentlewoman, I Will assure
you. I know in a week, if she was to be here, she would be whole and fool; nay I
should not wonder if she wanted at last to take my seat from me in the house of
lords. But hold, now I think on it she has been there once too often already.'

'You brute!' exclaimed his mother. 'You wretch! -- you undutiful cursed devil!
Oh I could tear your eyes out!'

'I dare say you could,' cried the young lord, 'but I Will tell you what mother,
if I am so undutiful, you had better go away from such a cursed devil, for to
tell you the truth I never intended you should live with my wife, seeing as how
it was not unlikely you would advise her to play me a trick or so with my valet
de chamber.'

Mrs. O'Shocknesy could contain herself no longer: she ran to his sword, and
drawing it half way out of the scabbard, swore she would murder him. Lady
Hazard here screamed so loud that Tadpole, who had been walking in the garden,
came to their assistance, and demanded what was the matter.

'The matter?' cried Zekiel; 'only my old mother wants so send me post to the
other world, because I reminded her a little of the follies of her youth. God
bless the good gentlewoman,' added he, 'do now pray go home, wash the paint off
your saded jaws, and chuckle to old Standfast. -- Why do you think I have not
been up to all the rum gig? Why yes I have; but it was no business of mine, you
know, while I could coax you out of the ready. Now, do you see, I can supply
myself, and thanks to nobody: -- so every one for himself, and God for us all.
Mr. Standfast has two or three goodish things: they may keep you snug enough,
if you have a mind to live pretty and decent, as an old gentlewoman ought. As
for me I intend to live nobly, and spend my money like a man!'

'But still my lord,' said Tadpole -- 'Brother Tadpole,' interrupted Zekiel,
'I'll be damned if I live in the same house with a wife and a mother, and
there is it do you see. That being the maxim of the thing, you had better, old
lady, as I said before, go back again; and it may be as well for you to keep a
quiet tongue, and advise Master Standfast to do the same, or it may be the
worse for both you, do you see, and the rum duke too.

I have neither time nor inclination, nor indeed capacity to paint the fury of
the lady, at her leaving the house, which she did soon after. Every bitter wish
her invention could supply was lavished on her son. Among the rest, I think she
said she hoped to her soul he would be both a beggar and a cuckold.

The lady's return to Mr. Standfast, who was prevented by business from
accompanying her into the country, was truly a curious one. She blamed him for
every thing, which was her usual method whenever any thing miscarried; and he,
as usual, bore his jobation with astonishing coolness. This provoked her: her
passion then provoked him: one epithet begat another, till he was all the old,
sapless, doting idiots that her fertile fancy could invent; and she was, by his
account, the damnedest infernal hell-cat that ever was born to curse an unhappy
rascal like him.

From storming they went to upbraiding then they proceeded to the situation of
their affairs, which were found to be plunged over head and ears in
difficulties. This, in spite of them, brought on reflection, and that upbraided
them with the infamous practices they had been guilty of to serve an ungrateful
wretch, who, after he had mounted to affluence by their means, had kicked down
the p^ that raised him! And here I cannot help remarking that the very devil
for whom they had been so long toiling, his ends accomplished, spit in their
faces, and forsook them.

CHAPTER X.
IN WHICH MORE KNOTTY POINTS ARE CLEARED UP.

THE reader will judge right if he fancies this reception of Mrs. O'Shocknesy
was a concerted thing between my lord and his brother in law, who was now his
steward, as was Flush his butler. Indeed, as every servant formerly in the
house was by this time replaced by others, brought in at the instance of these
two friends, his lordship was doomed to be as much in leading strings as ever
his mother could have held him for the life of her; but as he was suffered in
every thing to have his own way, he did not concern himself with what they did
privately, but let them feather their nests in quiet, under the idea of taking
all his affairs off his hands, because he was a man of rank, in whom it was
vulgar to let business interfere with pleasure.

Mr. Tadpole and Mr. Kiddy understood one another very well, for the latter
had, while they were in France, made a discovery, of which the reader shall
some time hence participate.

A secret to a minister of state, or his type, a great man's butler, is a
matter of some consequence. -- Here then Flush set up his rest. It is true he
balanced, when he first came to England, and was within a hair's breadth of
destroying all Tadpole's hopes, by making the above discovery to his old master
Standfast; but that gentleman making him some proposal or other that he did not
like, he retracted before he had so explained himself as to betray Tadpole, and
matters having since turned out so much to his advantage, he thanked his stars
that he had now sat himself down comfortably for life.

Whether Kiddy was tired of his youthful follies, or whether his whirligig
inclinations had wearied themselves with turning round, I know not, but he
seemed like a worn-out weathercock to be glad to rust where he had stopped: and
this choice was manifest in a total alteration in his manners. He went to
church, nay more, he was very often closeted with a methodist preacher, with
whom he got drunk, and sang psalms.

The young lord used to smoke this, as he called it, and gave him many a dry
rub, to one of which sallies he one day replied, 'Why Lord love your lordship,
my lord, when you come to repent, as I do, of all your worldly gig, and are
down upon the heavenly comfort of a religious life, you may tell the old rum
codger with his hour glass, come when he will, you are up to all he knows, and
indifferent, as some old learned gentleman says, whether you close your peepers
in sleep or in death.'

Emma, who, as she informed our hero, was up on the watch, no sooner heard of
Kiddy's conversion, but knowing he must be full of good intelligence for her,
determined to tamper with him: not that she had any expectation of finding him
less a hypocrite in his new calling than in his old one. She therefore saw
there might be danger in putting her designs in execution personally. In fact
Emma saw herself of consequence in the very way she had all her life wished to
be; for she was convinced she should have it in her power, in the language of
those romances she so dearly loved, to conduct two constant lovers to the
temple of Felicity, through all the briars and bogs that impeded their passage.
-- Flush she pitched upon as the vehicle in this troublesome journey, which
Swash and his daughter were to guide, while she herself, like some tutelary
genius, should watch their motions, inspire them with courage on the road, and
remove all difficulties in their passage to this desirable goal.

In less figurative language, she set Swash, who with good reason loved Charles
most sincerely, to insinuate himself into Flush's good graces, who, I can tell
you, had already began to love homage, so little had the spirit mended his
humility.

It was in the miller's instructions never to mention a word of our hero, or,
if he found that unavoidable, to cover any suspicion of his friendship, by
railing against him, but at the same time to cherish all that dropped from Flush
-- who now, for distinction, began to be called Canting Kiddy -- that could in
the remotest degree lead to any circumstance that implied a plot having been
formed against him.

As to Jude, her part was a capital one, and had she not been perfected in it
by a very capable instructress, she might have spoilt all.

Kiddy, it was notorious, loved a pretty girl; Judy was instructed to throw
herself in his way, to give an account of his behavior, and proceed step by
step as she should be directed by Emma. It was foreseen her virtue would be
attacked, but this was the very cunning of the scene. Whenever this should
happen to be the case, she was directed to draw, in her simple way, a pathetic
picture of the wickedness of mankind, and lament the blindness of the world,
who could load the preserver of her innocence with unmerited reproaches, while
he who was seeking to destroy it had the character of sanctity and penitence.
They were not so mad however as to trust to Judy's prudence alone, nor her
rhetoric, for force might overcome both: Swash therefore was to be at hand upon
any trying occasion, to rescue her, which being romantic, was still more to
Emma's taste.

If she should get at any material evidence, her next step was to strengthen
her own weak force by the alliance, as she should think fit, of either Mr:
Friend or Mr. Balance, or both; and as she saw many obstacles would lie in the
way, particularly the business of Gloss, she advised Annette to avow implicitly
her affection for Charles, which her father had formerly authorized, and who
would not so far contradict his own excellent character as to insist on her
marrying one man before she had forgotten the other. Besides Mr. Gloss was not
yet treasurer of the navy, and therefore could not make those offers as to
fortune which a man of Sir Sidney's rank and possessions would of course
expect, especially when he became chief baronet; which circumstance, ridiculous
as it was, really at times occupied his reflections: for what man is there, let
him be ever so good or ever so wise, but has his weak side.

All this jumble or chaos of circumstances were fluctuating at this time in
Emma's head, out of which she had no doubt but she should form a world of
happiness for the young couple.

Matters being in this state as to our hero in England, the reader and I will
once more take a trip to the continent, in which journey we cannot do better
than follow the steps of Madame St. Vivier and her handmaid Kitty, whose
private motives being made clearer -- which seems very necessary -- this
history will stand as disentangled as any one could reasonably desire who
wishes things to be brought forward in their natural order.

It has been seen that I am not very fond of dwelling upon trifling
circumstances, I shall therefore, without mentioning a word of these ladies
bringing up, say that Madame St. Vivier was a fashionable woman of the town,
and that Miss Kitty, though her handmaid, had been in no less a sphere of life
than herself. Indeed, but a very few years before, she had cut a figure little
less brilliant than Mrs. O'Shocknesy, but falling in love with either the
beauty or the brogue of Mr. Ireland, she had really attached herself to him
with a singular degree of constancy for a lady of her profession.

When this gentleman was obliged to abscond, in consequence of his duel, he
left his affairs in the hands of an intimate friend, who thought proper to take
no other notice of the trust, than by appropriating every thing to his own use,
without remitting his friend abroad, or allowing the lady at home, a single
sixpence: so that in this case Kiddy's remark of honor among thieves did not
apply.

Mrs. Kitty having been sometime out of the way of practice -- for fashion has
as much to do in these cases as beauty -- had recourse to her old friend Jenny
Singleton, who began just then also to be on the decline, and proposed a visit
to Sedan, where Mr. Ireland then was, with a view to consult him on their
future operations.

This expedition was lucky enough, for Mr. Gloss coming across them, they were
tutored by Mrs. O'Shocknesy how to make their journey worth while.

Figgins gave them intelligence concerning the departure of Charles; and, as it
had been concerted, they met him at Dover.

The ladies however, determined to make all sure, had privately agreed to act
in the very manner Figgins has described; for their experience gave them reason
to believe that it was not impossible but Mr. Ireland might forget to give them
the meeting. They therefore were in appearance to be alternately mistress and
maid, both to save expense, to keep their secrets to themselves, and also to
avail themselves of any opportunity that might happen of snapping up any
English booby, by way of completing his tour for improvement.

Matters turned out however very much to their satisfaction. They met with Mr.
Ireland at Sedan; he attended them to Nancy, where, as it has been seen, he
plundered our hero of a tolerable supply. Nor did he absolutely part with them,
but hovered about as it were, till his affairs called him into Italy, to which
place -- after robbing our hero of every thing they could lay their hands on,
as we heard Figgins inform him -- these two kind ladies followed him.

CHAPTER XI.
A JESUITICAL EXPLANATION -- THE SEPARATION OF TWO FRIENDS -- AND AN ANSWER TO
EMMA'S LETTER.

IF the reader and I were unfeeling enough to leave Charles in such a situation
that death seemed almost desirable to him, Mr. Figgins appears to have been
more solicitous about him, for in less than half an hour after the melancholy
moment wherein I describe him reading his father's letters, he returned with
great pleasure in his countenance, took his friend by the hand, and giving him
joy, told him he was liberated!

Charles, going from one extreme to the other, was enraptured at the news, and
requested to be informed how so unexpected an event had been brought about.
Figgins answered him that they were in no place to satisfy his curiosity. They
were then joined by their attorney, who had stayed behind to pay the fees of
the prison; and now the jailor, who a little before had earnestly examined our
hero's chains, to see if they were fast enough, came with great ceremony to
unfasten them.

This and all other punctilios over, they sallied forth, and Charles and
Figgins being arrived at their inn, the latter thus accounted for his friend's
enlargement.

Mr. Figgins said that no single day had past since his friend's imprisonment
but some step had been taken to get at the truth of the unhappy business, which
had been the means of his suffering in so worthy a cause. The accounts had been
for a good while various and unsatisfactory, and therefore he determined, as he
had enough in all conscience to vex him without being eternally tortured with
such suspense, not to say a word till some certain intelligence should arrive.
He said the first clue he had of any thing like a chance of success, though he
took no notice of it at the time, was his friend's saying he was sure he had
somewhere seen the murderer. This put it into his head -- though he owned it
was a conjecture greatly at random. 'But.' added he 'I would catch as much at a
straw for my friend's safety as my own. That Ireland, who was a great duellist,
was probably the man.'

'And by heaven,' said Charles, 'I do believe he was; though it never struck me
so till this moment.'

'You shall hear,' said Figgins. 'I was inclined the more to believe this on
hearing his name mentioned in an odd way by Madame St. Vivier, with whom I now
began to think he had maintained some intelligence all along; for I recollected
that it dropped from her at Nancy that she had seen him in England. This set me
upon interrogating Kitty, who confessed his having been at Lions, and that very
probably he was the guilty person.'

'I was now convinced they knew it. Thinking therefore to practice the trick
your brother taught us at Lisle, I ordered John to enquire every day at the
post office, and to bring me any letters directed to Madame St. Vivier. He, I
suppose, made them acquainted with these instructions, for after waiting till
about three weeks ago, to no purpose, I was just thinking what other method I
could hit upon, when, all on a sudden, the ladies and Mr. John decamped, as I
imagined, together, but we have since learnt he went to England.'

'Women cannot so easily travel secretly in France as men. I therefore soon
found out their route, which, as I suspected, led to where Mr. Ireland was
waiting for them. My first intention was to have pursued them myself, but
reflecting I should be of more use to you upon the spot, I got, by the
interference of our banker, a very intelligent young man to go in my stead.

'The instructions given to this young man were not to act so as to endanger
Mr. Ireland -- for that I knew you did not wish -- but only to get from him
such sort of satisfaction as should acquit you. -- The first part of this
injunction was unnecessary, for though he overtook the ladies in the kingdom of
France, the gentleman was safe in the confines of Savoy. They however, fearing
for themselves, served him as a guide, and coming at length to where Mr.
Ireland had appointed them, he did you ample justice, making voluntary oath
that you had no part in the fray, but that of a mediator, and that so far from
having any malice, you could not possibly know either the quarrel or its cause;
for that all you did was merely the effect of accident, and entirely with a
view to prevent mischief.'

'This confession, so sworn -- which is now lodged to ground your discharge
upon -- he accompanied with this letter, which you will find attributes the
duel to the hastiness of the gentleman who unfortunately fell. He talks of
unhandsome reflections against Englishmen in general, and him in particular. In
short, be the cause of quarrel what it may, he had it in his power to palliate
the matter as he thought proper, for there are no witnesses to contradict him.

'Thus,' added he, 'my noble friend, you are at liberty, and I offer myself to
avenge you on your enemies in any way you may think proper to point out for
me.'

Charles thanked him heartily, but said his only revenge would be contemptuous
indifference.

In some parts of this account Mr. Figgins exceeded the truth, and in others
fell short of it. He had not set John to enquire about letters; he had not
taken a hint from our hero as to Ireland; he had not wormed the matter out of
the ladies. On the contrary, a note had been received explanatory of Ireland's
flight on the very morning it happened, and the intelligence had not been
protracted out of tenderness to Charles, but to cover the safety of the
sugitive; for though a gentleman was sent, as our hero was informed, and did
actually return with the letter and oath already mentioned, yet Madame St.
Vivier, who, to do her justice, was as willing as any body to save Charles,
stipulated however that no arrangement should take place till Mr. Ireland
should be fully out of danger. Then again there was no part of the conduct of
these ladies unknown to him. He knew why they went to Sedan; he was accessory
to the loss of the money at Nancy; he even learnt that Kitty and Ireland were
upon the best terms; he consented when they went away to their taking that
money of which he pretended to have been robbed; and, lastly, so far from not
being acquainted with John's departure for England, he sent him there, and --
not to hide the truth -- with proper instructions how our hero should be
written to: so that he knew every word of Mr. Standfast's letter before Charles
received it.

Mr. Figgins now began to be very inquisitive as to our hero's future plan.
Charles said he should immediately write to Mr. Balance, and if he found him
willing to supply him without the ceremony of going to England, he should
continue his tour as he originally intended; 'for,' said he, 'I see nothing in
my native country that should make me desirous of returning to it.'

'Nor I either,' said Figgins, 'except it were to curse them all round.'

'Pretty advice indeed,' said Charles, with a laugh: 'want a man deliberately
to go seven hundred miles for no better purpose than to put himself in a
passion.'

'Well then may I be damned,' said Figgins, 'if I think there is your fellow
upon the face of the earth. Such prudence and discernment at your age is truly
astonishing.'

The reader sees that Figgins did not want Charles to go to England, but as he
well knew the right kind of argument to hold with mankind, the stronger
Charles's obstinacy appeared, the more he argued against it. He showed how easy
it would be to undeceive Sir Sidney. He painted the beauties of Annette; the
danger of losing her; the triumph of obtaining her from his rival; till at
length, being highly exhilirated with wine, he had reason to repent of his
warmth, for Charles, in the heat of his vivacity, said something that implied a
determination to return.

Fortune however, envious perhaps of his having so narrowly escaped an untimely
end, or thinking the hero of such a history as this had not been long enough
upon his probation, or bent upon bringing about his catastrophe, whatever it
be, by the means of Mrs. Emma, her agent, or for some other equally wise and
considerate motive, determined to give Charles good time to deliberate, before
he should come to any resolution; for he was that night taken with a violent
fever, which lasting him several days without the smallest intermission, and
several weeks with but very little, he was at length left in a most emaciated
condition, with all the symptoms of a gradual decline.

The moment he was able he wrote to Mr. Balance, without however dropping a
hint of his illness, which precaution he enjoined Figgins also to observe,
thinking, probably, it would look like an overture to a reconciliation, which,
had he even wished, his pride would have forbid him to acknowledge.

Indeed he was pretty resolute as to his future intentions; for though his
bodily strength was greatly impaired, his mental faculties were at least as
strong as ever.

This was the only serious illness he had ever had in his life. It had given
him excellent time for reflection, and the more he reflected the less he saw to
be ashamed of. In proportion therefore as he found himself wronged, he
persisted in his firm determination to consider himself independent, and
accountable to no man for his actions: and, as to enjoy the full possession of
such principles he must not have many friendships, he resolved to continue his
tour, that, by gathering a plentiful stock of accomplishments, he might be the
better qualified to find a friend in himself.

This scheme he was also determined to pursue after his own fancy, which part
he digested as deliberately as the rest. Taking therefore an opportunity one
day, when the physician advised him to try the air of Montpelier, he thus
opened his mind to his friend Figgins.

'My dear sir, it would be but a poor return to your warm and unshaken
friendship, merely to say it will ever be remembered by me with that sort of
heartfelt pleasure every thing gives me that originates from such handsome and
liberal principles. It would however be taking a very unfriendly advantage of
you if I could be so unreasonable as to requite so much generosity by suffering
you to neglect and injure your affairs on my account.

'My father has settled on you an annuity, to which is now annexed no
conditions on your side of attention to me; for he being dead, his kindness
must naturally be considered as a remembrance of past, instead of a reward for
present, services: but as I know your worthy heart will not let you regard
yourself as entitled to this esteem, unless you acquit your conscience of
receiving it upon any other principle than that of desert, instead of throwing
away your time on me -- time which, at your season of life, must be very
precious to you, and which you can without doubt employ to greater advantage in
the bosom of your family and affairs -- you shall keep a constant
correspondence with me, and I will promise to profit by that advantage as much
as my capacity and abilities permit me: so now do not take it unkind that I
should have resolved to pursue my travels alone, but rather let me have your
excuse that I have already taken up so much of your time, to your prejudice.'

It happened luckily for Mr. Figgins, that this was the very subject he had
himself been two or three times on the point of broaching, but he felt so
awkward about it that he could not for the soul of him tell how to begin.
Having however the ice broken for him, he did not scruple to acknowledge that
his affairs at home were rather in a disordered condition, and that he
sincerely believed, were he on the spot, a certain bishop would at that time
have an opportunity of promoting him: but yet he could not think of leaving his
dear, his honored friend; it would look as if he was of a piece with the rest
of the world, and had basely deserted his cause.

'Your own heart and my experience of your generous friendship will, my dear
Figgins,' said Charles, 'acquit you; for, after all, what signifies what all
the world says abroad, when you have a cheerful monitor at home that approves
your actions. Beside, in the opinion of those who take the freedom so very
liberally to talk of me, you will retrieve your character instead of injure it,
by quitting a man so unworthy to be spoken well of.'

'Rather,' said Figgins, if I am induced to leave you, let it be with a view to
confound any rascal who shall dare to use you ill. Now I think of it, you have
need of a friend there to silence your calumniators, and I assure you neither
Mr. Standfast, whose friendship it is my intention to renounce, Mr. Gloss, your
brother, nor even Sir Sidney, shall dare to traduce your character with
impunity.' To which Charles said, 'Figgins, if you would have me believe you
value either my friendship or peace of mind, imitate what I should do in the
same situation. When you hear any one vilify me, laugh in his face, without
lifting him into consequence enough to think him worthy an answer.'

After a great deal of persuasion on one side, and much apparent reluctance on
the other, it was agreed upon that our hero and Mr. Figgins should part. This
they did with many warm protestations of friendship, and future attention to
each other's interest -- on one side I am sure very sincere -- and a firm
promise to keep up a regular correspondence.

Not two days after the departure of Mr. Figgins, Charles wrote to Mr. Balance,
by whom he had been treated, as to his money, in a very gentlemanly manner,
desiring, without giving a single reason, that he would immediately grant out
of his fortune a hundred a year to Mr. Figgins for life; and about four hours
after this letter was dispatched, he received one from Emma, informing him of
his brother's actual marriage -- and also that Lady Hazard was in a way to
bless him with a son and heir -- the discomfiture of the Lady Dowager; the
unaltered inflexibility of Sir Sidney; the neutrality of Lady Roebuck; the
constancy of Annette; a congratulation on his release, which they had all heard
from some spy in the camp; to which she added, pray God Mr. Figgins prove not
rather an Euristeus than a Pylades; a gentle reproach for his silence; an
exhortation to return; 'but indeed,' said she, 'to what purpose? Justice, come
as amply as it may, can now scarcely make you amends. Of what use was the
pyramid to Aesop after they had hurled him from the rock?' -- and lastly, she
informed him that she had a most formidable plot, which had already taken root,
and when it should have grown, blossomed, and borne fruit, she doubted not but
she should gather a plentiful crop of justice to him, credit to herself,
conviction to the abused, and confusion to his enemies.

Charles had not answered Emma's former letter, it is true, but he was
determined now to do so once for all. This was his letter. MY GOOD EMMA,
Your attention to me, to speak in your own way, is a panegyric on yourself,
and a lampoon on those around you; for even though I should deserve all they
have so very liberally laid to my charge, a little charity one should think
would not do them any harm. But I see the confederacy is strong, and had I the
shadow of a wish to break it up -- which I really have not -- it would, I dare
say, be no easy matter.

Your information, as to your sweet young lady, is very flattering, and, at any
other time, would have been very delightful; but why should I pursue what I can
never arrive at: since the folly of her own family has made an union between us
impracticable? Be therefore, good Emma -- for upon my soul you are really a
good creature -- a friend to her, and instead of filling her ears with
imaginary happiness, which she can never enjoy -- recommend to her an
observance of her duty, by which she will no doubt more fully accomplish all
her wishes. You will the more readily induce her to this by assuring her, which
you may with great truth, that whatever may have been my sentiments, I am
determined not to think of her in future. -- Indeed my intention, and that for
many reasons, is never to see her again, and without any ill compliment to your
literary wisdom, I must say you are a dunce if you do not see why.

As to Sir Sidney and the rest of my formidable accusers, I will not take the
trouble to care what they think of me; for, though I heartily forgive them --
though I think pity is the properer word -- and would do them any service I
honorably could -- but I believe they think mine rather a shabby kind of
honor -- yet the world should not purchase from me a grain of friendship for
them.

And now Emma, as you are so kind as not to think me quite the hang dog they
have painted me, do pray believe that what I have said above was dictated by
sincerity; and, this admitted, your understanding will tell you that I shall be
insensible to all persuasion; for you see, by my deliberation, that these
resolutions are not the caprice of a moment. Seeing this, it will also strike
you as repugnant both to your safety and my honor -- which you know it would
be a terrible thing not to redeem -- to hold farther conference on the subject.
The same reasons will show you the necessity of dropping your plot. No, my
strange, valuable, kind girl, keep the friendship of your patron; keep your
good opinion of me nevertheless; and leave the rest to time, who, according to
SHAKESAEARE -- for you love a quotation -- "tries all old offenders," and Time
being a very just judge, I shall never have any objection to appear before him.

Adieu: show your wishes to oblige me by implicitly adhering to the contents of
this letter.

Your kind well-wisher, CHARLES HAZARD.




CHAPTER XII.
CONTAINING AN EVENT WHICH, HOWEVER SAGACIOUS THE READER MAY BE, WILL NOT BE
ANTICIPATED.

CHARLES continued in a very weak state. As soon therefore as he had received
from Mr. Balance such kind of authority as enabled him to find himself in cash,
travel where he might, he complied with his physician's advice, and removed, by
short stages, to Montpelier, with only a valet de chamber and a laquais, both
Frenchmen: his intention being to shun the English as much as possible.

His disorder for some time gave every appearance that if the malignity of his
friends went so far as to wish him in the other world, they would soon be
satisfied. Perhaps some of them might have been happy to have contemplated his
situation. -- Their charitable expectations however would have been
disappointed, for his youth and constitution triumphed over the consumption,
and, what perhaps was a greater victory, over the united efforts of the
physicians; and at length -- but not in less than seven months -- his recovery
was pronounced to be certain.

I might here draw a striking picture enough of a young man of rank and
fortune, with excellent talents, an admirable heart, young, handsome, and sweet
tempered, without a single fault that might not be defended upon principles of
reason, hemmed in by an host of enemies, and apparently dying by himself in a
remote corner of a strange kingdom. All this interspersed with apt observation,
and embellished with proper reflections, would indeed make up good moral matter
in this place, and give me an opportunity of finishing the second volume with
some very pretty, round, well-turned reading: -- but the business of this
history is -- as indeed I think every other ought to be -- action, which I give
the reader warning will be more and more rapid as we go on. I therefore beg,
that whoever shall wish I had paused at such and such a place, and given my
muse a bait, cramming down every mouthful with a moral sentence, will supply
that sentence themselves, which will be more than one advantage to me: it will
save me the trouble; it will be more to the taste of every reader; and it will
give free scope to all those who think with me, to go on without skipping.

Charles did not want company at Montpelier, for he did not want money. He had
officers and abbes out of number, and sometimes ladies, and now and then an
English gentleman in misfortunes, who was not the worse for his trouble in
visiting him. At other times he read the best authors, and never lost any
opportunity of speaking French, which he at last accomplished correctly and
elegantly.

His health was re-established sooner than his strength. On this account he
slowly visited most of the towns in the south of France, where he met with a
variety of characters, with whose histories, were I so disposed, I could
interlard my book, till, as I once heard an Irishman say of a bad play, the
main plot would be all episode. I shall however, which is modest enough, choose
but one, and now we are talking of Irishmen, it shall be a gentleman of that
country; he shall be a monk, called Father Fitzgibbon, and member of a convent
of Benedictines.

Our hero, because perhaps he was in a wine country -- for sick people are very
whimsical -- took it in his head to long for some beer; an inclination however
he did not seem likely to gratify, for enquiry had been repeatedly made for
that beverage to purpose. His valet, who had a most indulgent master -- and
they say a good master makes a good servant -- determining not to give the
matter up quietly, procured intelligence that about two leagues off there was a
convent of English, Irish, and Scotch, where, for their own use, they brewed
excellent beer. To this convent, without saying a word to Charles, he posted.
Having told his story, he received for answer, that they brewed the beer for
their own use, as he had heard, but, nevertheless, if upon paying them a visit
they should like the gentleman, they would supply him with as much as he could
drink. A card to this effect was dispatched, inviting Charles to dine with them
the next day. He obeyed that summons and several others, till, what with the
beer, the good company, and the ride, which I believe had most merit -- as the
air in Wales performs that cure which the physicians attribute to the goat's
milk -- in a short time he found himself in perfect health.

I should not have mentioned this circumstance so minutely had I not designed
to introduce Father Fitzgibbon, who was superior of this convent, to the
reader, and I should not have introduced Father Fitzgibbon to the reader if I
had not had a material reason for it.

This friar was, as I have said, a native of Ireland. He was of a good family,
but being a younger brother, he quitted Dublin and went to Bath -- the usual
market -- in search of a fortune. There he contrived to lodge in the same
house, where lodged also an ancient lady and her daughter, the widow and
heiress of an old hunks, who had amassed a large fortune by boiling blubber at
Deptford. It was immaterial to him which he married, but he was determined upon
one of them, and that one should be her who was richest. This his
intelligencers informed him was the daughter, who being very ignorant and
conceited, and besides beset hard, yielded upon easier terms than marriage,
which conditions the Irishman did not boggle about, because for why, said he,
'sure cannot I make you very happy after I have ruined you for ever.'

The appointment being made when and where this forward young lady, for the
first time, was to yield up the possession of her person to her intended
husband, Fitzgibbon, which is not extraordinary in an Irishman, made a blunder;
for, mistaking his way, instead of Miss's room, he got into her mamma's, who
expected a gallant likewise.

Before the morning they discovered their mutual mistake, and before the next
morning Fitgibbon, prevailed on the old lady to rob the young lady of her
fortune, with which they set off for France, and of which money, three years
after, when this antiquated Venus died, he had just enough left to purchase a
commission in the Irish brigades. To be brief: After much riotous conduct, and
many misdemeanors, he was broken, when the church, -- which is in France
something like what we say in England of the sea and the gallows -- received
him.

He had been superior of this convent of Benedictines four years, and at the
end of three more he was to visit his own country for a twelvemonth, when he
assured our hero he would spend a month with him in England.

For a few hours, at a time of vacant hilarity, Charles could not be in more
agreeable company. He laid himself out for their convenience, sent them several
desirable presents, and left, at his departure, a handsome donation, which
Fitzgibbon did not scruple to tell him, in a whisper, should be laid out in
excellent claret.

Charles had stayed so long in France that the time was now nearly arrived
which he had intended to have apportioned to his whole tour: for his promise to
his father had been to return in time to pass his birthday with him, when he
should have attained his one and twentieth year. He therefore determined to go
back to England, in order to take his affairs into his own hands, after which,
if he should feel himself so disposed, he might then be in time to make his
tour of Italy; for so far from having any body to control him, he did not think
there were six persons upon the face of the earth who cared threepence about
him. In this mind he set out, with a view to stay a month at Paris, and then
jog on leisurely for England. He arrived at Aix la Chapelle late in the
evening, where he supped, and then ordered post horses to be ready the next
morning. The house seemed to be very full of guests, and just as our hero got
into bed, they were reinforced by a company from the play. Charles had been
dropped asleep about an hour, when he was, all on a sudden, awoke by a violent
screaming. For a moment -- which is very natural in a strange bed -- he knew
not where he was. Recollecting himself however, he hurried on his breeches and
slippers, and throwing a morning gown over him, took his sword, and darted from
his own chamber to that from whence the noise issued. The door was locked, but
he burst it open with his foot, and immediately saw a French officer struggling
with a young lady, who still shrieked with all her force. With the hilt of his
sword he struck the ravisher in a moment to the ground, then placing himself
between him and the young lady, he stood ready for him, in a posture of
defense, against he should attempt to rise. At the moment he placed himself in
this attitude, rouse reader your whole attention! -- exert your whole stock of
penetration! -- prepare for a most unlooked-for surprise! -- yet, let it be
ever so great, it cannot be any thing equal to that of our hero, when, on
looking toward the door, he saw several persons enter the chamber, and, among
the foremost, Sir Sidney, Lady Roebuck, and Emma!

Reader, it was Annette herself whom Charles had rescued from a ravisher! --
who having in the fifteen months that he had been absent ripened into woman,
and improved in every limb and feature into more perfection than ever was
described by the ablest pen or correctest pencil; nay had the best poet or
painter that ever wrote or drew seen her, like our hero, at that moment, and
even felt the same captivating sensation from the astonishing power of her
irresistible charms, then so greatly heightened, still must a description of
them have been incomplete: for neither are there words nor colors strong
enough for the task. Charles, though he had but a moment, which was imperfectly
lent him by the relative intelligence received from seeing who entered the
room, in that moment gazed away his soul; his very brain received the whole
force of her incomparable attractions, and love took triumphant possession of
him.

During this interval, short as it was, the officer had got up, unseen by our
hero, and was coming toward him. This constrained him to transfer his
attention from the lady to the gentleman. He asked, in a firm voice if he dared
justify his conduct; to which he was answered, 'No sir; it was unpardonable. It
was wine, it was distraction! I have suffered an ignominious blow, but I
deserved it, and you are a stranger. No sir, I shall ask for no satisfaction;
for light and blameable as I may have behaved, though my existence depends on
my courage, and the sword is my profession, I dare not draw it in a
dishonorable cause.'

Sir Sidney, who at first thought very differently of this business, especially
when he heard Emma exclaim as they approached the chamber, 'Oh Christ, there is
Mr. Hazard!' felt, from the strongest conviction, a warm glow of gratitude
toward our hero. This however was a little checked by reflection, as well as a
contemplation of what Charles was then doing, who, forgetting there were a
number of spectators present, stood like a statue, devouring with his eyes the
beauty of Annette, which was now heightened by conscious innocence and thankful
pleasure. In this short interval, during which Sir Sidney deliberated, Annette
was modestly delighted, Emma hugged herself, and our hero was fascinated, in
came to their relief Mr. Gloss, who being in a few words informed of the
business, went up in a style of the greatest familiarity to Charles, and
seizing him by the hand, cried out, 'My dear sir, how do you do? I thought you
were in Italy. For God's sake why don't you let your friends hear from you?'
Charles flung from him in great indignation, saying, 'I don't know you sir,'
and was making toward the door, but Sir Sidney, who could not bear to receive
a service of such magnitude without noticing it, stopped him, saying, 'I cannot
refrain from warmly acknowledging this unexpected kindness, which has been as
bravely and gallantly, as disinterestedly, shown me. You know Mr. Hazard I have
a warm heart, and a generous action touches it; therefore, this of yours, which
has probably saved my honor, I shall not, you may be assured, think lightly
of; and if -- '

'Surely,' said Charles, recovering himself into a complacent, yet erect
dignity, 'you jest Sir Sidney! What I have done is at best but a common duty,
which requires no partial thanks, because the greatest stranger would have been
equally entitled to it. But how do you know it was not the act of one ravisher
anxious to defeat the designs of another? I dare say it will have that color
by tomorrow morning. In the mean time you shall be assured I am honest in
something, nor will you doubt it when I tell you that whatever motive induced
me to that which has preserved Miss Roebuck's honor to her family, it was not
friendship to her father: and so sir, good night to you.' So saying, he bowed
respectfully to the ladies, and left the room.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

