THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Captain Robert Boil, In several Parts of the
World. Intermixed with The STORY of Mrs. VILLARS, an English Lady with whom he
made his surprising Escape from Barbary; The HISTORY of an Italian Captive; and
the LIFE of Don Pedro Aquilio, etc. Full of various and amazing Turns of
Fortune. To which is added, The Voyage, Shipwreck, and Miraculous Preservation,
of Richard Castelman, Gent. With a Description of the City of Phila^elphia, and
the Country of Pensylvania.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN WATTS, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court, near
Lincoln's Inn Fields. 1726.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Young, One of the Lords of the Treasury,
and Knight of the most Honorable Order of the BATH.
SIR,
THE Great and Noble of all Ages, have, and ever will be marked out by Writers
of every Degree to patronize their Labors: And as Public Fame (though sparing
of her Favors) has distinguished You in an Age of Politeness, Wit, and
Learning, among other eminent Virtues that exalt the Mind, and dignify Human
Nature; I am sufficiently justified to the World in the Choice of my Patron:
But must depend on your known Candor, for thus presuming, without your Leave.
Yet I have this for my Excuse, Exalted Merit is free to the Consideration of
all Men, and where Excellencies shine, every Man has a Right to admire.

Though Praise is the just Due of Merit, and all the World would join with me
while I grew warm in yours, yet as I know your Nature more inclined to deserve
than receive it, I shall ease You of that Pain, and in Silence wonder, where
Words must fail.

The People of Mexico, every Year, offered something to their Emperor in Token
of Vassalage; and frequently, among Things worthy the Notice of a King, he
received even Sacks of common Earth, from those Persons who could not afford a
nobler Offering: But they, like me, did what was in their Power, with an
Expression in their Language, which signified, I would it were more worthy of
your Acceptance. I am assured from your Goodness to find Pardon for this
Freedom, though I add to my Presumption, by subscribing my self,

Your most Obedient, Humble Servant.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Sheets are a Detail of Fortunes I have run through for many
Years; and however extraordinary they may appear, I shall give you the
Circumstances for Truth. Yet this I must own, they lay by me undigested, and I
had never any Intention to make 'em public, if an old Acquaintance had not
taken my loose Papers from me, and declared, if I would not digest 'em, he
would.

The Shipwreck of my Friend Mr. Castelman, the Dangers he underwent, together
with the Descriptions of Pensylvania, and Philadelphia the Capital of that
Country, I hope will not displease the Reader. There are no Embelishments, nor
one Step out of the Road of Truth. I believe every one that knows him, will
give him the Character of a Person of the greatest Probity; as the Post he is
in will sufficiently testify.

THE ADVENTURES OF Captain Robert Boil, etc.
I WAS born at a Seaport called Boston in Lincolnshire. My Father was Captain
and Owner of a Merchant-Ship that traded to the West Indies, but was cast away
homeward-bound upon the Rocks of Silly, and but one Man saved of his whole
Crew. My Mother and I were at an Aunt's in London when the unhappy News of my
Father's Death arrived.

I was too young to feel my Loss; but my Mother's Grief soon broke her Heart,
and left me a poor helpless Orphan not ten Years of Age. It Is true, I had a
tender Aunt that was in pretty good Circumstances, who took Care of my
Education. I soon learnt to read, and write a good Hand; I understood a little
Latin, and was perfect Master of the French Tongue, which I had been learning
from my Infancy; my Mother being born at Paris, where my Father married her
very young, and brought her to reside at Boston.

By that time I had reached Fourteen Years of Age, my Aunt told me it was Time
for me to think of some Trade, desiring me to choose what I liked best, and she
would provide for me accordingly. Said she, If I might advise you, I would have
you study the Law, under the Tuition of your Uncle --; But I told her I did not
much care for any Calling that must owe its Prosperity to the Misfortune of
others. And at last I chose that of a Watchmaker, as imagining my self to have
a good mechanical Head. Accordingly I went upon Liking (as they call it) and my
Master and I agreeing very well, I was bound with the usual Forms, and found
civil Usage from him, in respect of my Birth and the Misfortunes of our Family.

My Aunt paid Forty Guineas (which was reckoned, at that Time, a great Price;
but he was one of the Top of his Business) and besides to find me in Clothes
and other Necessaries, during my Seven Years Apprenticeship.

The first Half Year we agreed very well; but within that Time my Master had
married a Wife of a pretty good Fortune, and a large Share of Ill Nature. In a
Month's time she began to tyrannize over my Master, as well as me, and soon
proved, as the Saying is, The gray Mare to be the better Horse. She brought it
to that Pass at last, that I was obliged to go on all her halfpenny Errands,
and carry her Book to Church of a Sunday after her. I bore this tolerably well,
but not without complaining to my Aunt, who advised me to make my self as easy
as I could, for she feared Speaking would do no good.

I went on this Way for a whole Year, and then to complete my Misfortunes, my
poor Aunt died of a Dropsy. This indeed was the greatest Shock of all my Life;
for while she lived I felt no want of Father or Mother. She left me 800 l. and
my Uncle -- to be my Guardian. I shall forbear mentioning his Name, not out of
Regard to him, but of his Children, who have proved a sweet Grafting from a
sour Stock, and as good as he was base.

My Shrew of a Mistress continued her Ill Nature to me, and one Accident made
her prove outrageous.

My Master had a vast Trade, and vented a great many Watches beyond Sea. One
Day he had a large Parcel of them to go on Board a Ship bound for Lisbon; the
Vessel lay at Deptford, and my Master was pleased to take me along with him in
the Boat.

Before we were got to Limehouse, my Master called to Mind that he had forgot a
Silver Watch that he had purposely made for the Captain of the Ship. He landed
me at Ratcliff-Cross, and desired I would be expeditious in going (for the Tide
running downwards I could get to the Exchange sooner on Foot than by Water
against the Stream) then to take Boat at Billingsgate, and follow him to the
Ship.

I ran almost all the Way, and I believe got to the Exchange in half an Hour.
When I came home, I found no Body in the Shop but my Fellow-Prentice, who
informed me my Mistress was above. I went immediately up Stairs for the Watch
(for my Master told me he had left it in his own Room, being he had wore it
several Days to prove the going of it) but found the Door shut. Standing a
Moment to consider, I heard a Man's Voice speaking to my Mistress, in a low
Key, and I soon understood by their Dialogue that Love was the Subject they
talked of. I listened some Time, till I found they had left off Discoursing,
and were entered upon Action.

Now at the Head of the Stairs the Maid had left a Step-Ladder, that she had
used in the Morning, in nailing up some Valens to the Windows in the
Dining Room, and there being a Glass over the Chamber Door, I had a great Mind
to see who it was that was doing my Master's Business in his Absence. Thereupon
I fixed the Ladder very softly against the Wainscot by the Door, and up I got;
but leaning toward the Window in order to see into the Room, my Weight made
the Ladder slip, and the Top sliding against the Door burst it open, and in
fell I into the Room, Ladder and all, with no little Noise.

The loving Couple were mightily surpised you may be sure, and were in such a
Fright that they had forgot what they were a doing. But I saw enough to
convince me that my Master was in a fair way to get to Heaven purely upon my
Mistress's Account.

After our Surprise was over, and every thing put in Order again between the
Gentleman and Madam, I ventured to tell her my Errand. She gave me the Watch
with a hearty good Box on the Ear, and told me she wondered how I had the
Assurance to come up without Knocking; but, added she, I believe you rather
came upon some knavish Design, and had intended to rob your Master, if I had
not been in the Room with my Physician, that came on purpose to see how I did.

It was plain enough what Physic she was taking, yet I made my Excuse to her
that I went to remove the Ladder, and it fell out of my Hand against the Door
and burst it open; but I told her I was sorry I had disturbed her, made my
Honors and walked off, taking no Notice that I had seen any Thing. I took
Water at Billingsgate, and followed my Master.

In the Boat I began to ruminate with my self, whether I had best keep this
Accident a Secret, or disclose it to my Master. At last, with many Pro's and
Con's with my self, I resolved to acquaint him with it; partly to be revenged
on my Mistress for the Blow she struck me, and on the other side not to let my
honest Master be kept in Ignorance of her Usage of him.

When I came on Board, the Captain commanded me (with my Master's leave) to sit
down at Table with 'em. We dined heartily, the Wine and Punch went merrily
round, and my Master, the Captain, with two more that were Passengers, began to
be in high Mirth; when Word was brought that the Captain's Lady (as the
Messenger called her) would be on Board in an Hour to take her Leave of him. My
Master upon this Message began to be merry with the Captain; I wonder, said he,
that you Seafaring Men will venture upon Wives. Why so? replied the Captain.
Why so! returned my Master, Because in my Opinion it should put you in Mind of
Cuckold's-Point as you went by Water: Your Absence gives 'em such a
Convenience, that I believe few let slip the Opportunity. Why, answered the
Captain, may not your Wife, even now, be doing you the Favor; has she not Time
enough, do you imagine? The Thing's soon done; and if they have an Inclination,
Watching and Restraint will do no Good: Many an Alderman has been cornuted
while upon Change; and I knew a Parson's Wife that seldom went to Church, but
took Time by the Forelock, and while the Husband (good Man) was taking Care of
his Flock, the good Woman at Home was at her Occupation with her Gallant, a
rich young Farmer. But the Parson one Afternoon being taken suddenly ill with a
Giddiness in his Head, was conveyed Home before he had begun his Work, and
there soon found the Occasion of his Pain; for he had been breeding Horns, as
Children breed Teeth, a little unkindly. But however, the Parson having
Witnesses enough of his Promotion in the Herd of Cuckolds, went to Law with the
Farmer, and recovered 500 l. Damages; and yet he has been heard often to say,
that his Wife's Tenement was never the worse.

This Story occasioned some other much to the same Purpose: At last my Master
and I, (the Tide being turned,) took our Leaves of the Company, and wished 'em
a good Voyage. Coming by Cuckold's-Point, my Master cried, Robin, why don't you
pull off your Hat to the Gentleman in the Window yonder? I pulled off my Hat
very orderly, but saw no Body; at which my Master fell into a great Fit of
Laughter, and cried I had been very courteous to the Horns. I then,
understanding his Meaning, told him, that it was only for married Men to show
their Complaisance that way; and, being a little piqu'd at the Affront I
thought put upon me, said I believed most married Men were, or would be in the
List of Cuckolds. Why, how now, Sirrah! replied my Master, do you think I am, or
shall be a Cuckold? Why truly, said I, Sir, I have but little Reason to believe
my Mistress a Saint more than any other Woman; and to inform you farther of
what I have seen to Day, I beg you would be pleased to go to some Public
House, that we may not be observed by the Watermen. My Master's Color began to
change upon this; and being very impatient to be informed of what I knew,
ordered the Waterman to land at Ratcliff-Cross, and wait a while.

We went to the Ship Tavern and had a private Room, where I declared to him the
whole Truth. After many Questions and Answers between us, I soon found he
believed all that I told him, for he turned as pale as Ashes, and the Tears
stood in his Eyes. I then was sorry I had disclosed it to him, remembering the
inimitable Shakespeare, He that is robbed, not wanting what is stole,
Let him not know it, and he is not robbed at all.
After some Time being silent, my Master broke into many extravagant Words, and
threatening Actions; and at last I ventured to tell him, I thought him in the
wrong to grieve at what could not be called back, and I wondered the World
should unjustly cast upon the Man the Ignominy which was properly due to the
Woman for her Licentiousness.

After some Time he began to be more calm, and made me this Compliment; Robin,
said he, I have observed in thee a more than common Understanding, Pr'ythee
tell me in what Manner I shall behave my self in this Affait. I thank you, Sir,
said I, for your good Opinion of me, and, were it my own Case, I would not take
any Notice of it till I found her in the Fact, or such Circumstances that even
she her self could not deny; and for these two Reasons, 1. Whenever it comes to
an open Rupture you will have but an uneasy Living; and 2. that she may take it
into her Head to deny it, and then the whole Weight of her Anger will fall upon
me; and truly, said I, I have too much of her Ill Nature already to bear any
more with any manner of Patience.

My Master resolved to follow my Counsel, and intended to make his Wife believe
he knew nothing of the Matter.

My Master could not imagine who this Gallant should be, by my Description, for
I had never seen him before. We went to our Boat, and so Home. When we came in,
my Mistress asked my Master if Robin, meaning me, had been telling him any
Stories. Stories, Child! answered my Master, what Stories? he has told me
nothing. Nay, no great matter, said my Mistress, but I gave him a Box on the
Ear this Morning, when he came back for the Watch you had forgot, and I did not
know but he had made some Complaint; but I am sorry for it, and will make him
Amends one Time or other. This she said so loud that I might hear.

The next Day when my Master was gone to Change, she came up into the
Workhouse, as we called it, up three Pair of Stairs, and took an Occasion of
sending my Fellow-Prentice on some concerted Errand. When he was gone out she
sat down upon his Chair, and looked me in the Face for some time. Well Robin,
said she, I am very much obliged to you, that you did not take any Notice of
the Accident that happened Yesterday to your Master; and to make you Amends for
your Silence I give you this Broad Piece to buy you a Pair of Gloves, with this
Promise, that you and I will never disagree again. I received her Money, and
told her I should never take any farther Notice of it. She called me good Lad,
and left me.

My Master had not always an Opportunity of talking with me at home, so he
appointed me every Sunday after Sermon in the Evening at some Tavern or other,
that we might talk about the matter. At our first Meeting I told him the Story
of the Broad Piece, and the Discourse my Mistress and I had together. I showed
him the Money, and he soon knew the Piece to be his Wife's from the particular
Fairness of it, being the same he had some time ago given her for a
Pocket-Piece.

Now, said he, Robin, I am fully convinced of the Infidelity of my Wife; for
notwithstanding your former Story, I had some faint Hopes it might have been a
Tale of thine, raised out of Malice to thy Mistress, from her indifferent Usage
of thee.

But now to find out this Spark, that I may reak my Vengeance on him first;
for, to own my Folly, Robin, I must tell thee I cannot find I shall ever be able
to hate this ungrateful Woman. Some time after, my Master was pretty well
convinced that his Wife had been with her Spark to the Mulberry-Garden, and my
Master had discovered who he was; he proved to be a young Attorney of
Clifford's-Inn. The next Thing we consulted about at our weekly Meeting was how
to give 'em an Opportunity of pursuing their Amor at Home. In Order to this,
my Master gave out to my Mistress that he should be obliged to go as far as St.
Margaret's in Kent, to look after some Goods, that were landed there in order
to avoid paying Custom for them, and he feared the Affair would not be so well
managed if he was not present.

The Tuesday following was chose for the Day of his setting out. My Master gave
me public Orders to go to several Places in his Absence, to look after the
Workmen (for there are several Trades belonging to the making of a Watch). On
Tuesday Morning my Master got on Horseback, in Order (as my Mistress and the
rest of the Family thought) to pursue his Journey: But he went no farther than
Islington, and returned, putting up his Horse again; and went strait to the
Place of our Rendezvous.

As soon as my Master was gone, my Mistress called me up to her, and asked me
if I had Time to step a little Way for her. I told her 'twas impossible, being
I had some Work to finish that I was obliged to carry out immediately. Then she
begged I would call her a Porter, which I did, and one of my particular
Acquaintance, one well to pass in the World; for a City Porter in those Days
was a very beneficial Employment, there being then no Penny-Post-Office. I told
him what he should do, that he must go to my Mistress and receive the Letter,
and then to an adjacent Alehouse, and wait till I came to him. Accordingly he
received the Letter, and went to the Place I appointed. I did not let him wait
long, but ordered my Matters as if I was going about my Master's Business, and
went to the Porter. From thence I took him along with me to my Master, where we
opened the Letter, and found it as follows; -- "Dear Tom, it is an Age since
last I saw you; the Cuckold's gone out of Town for a Week, therefore meet me at
the Old Place by Six this Evening." Here we were at a Stand, for we could not
imagine where the Old Place was, unless the Mulberry-Garden. At last we
resolved to send the Porter to the Spark, and bring the Answer to us, to see if
that would give us more Light in the Affair. Accordingly he went, and returned
with his Billet; we made bold to open it, and found it contained these Words,
-- My Life, I don't think the old Place convenient, being a Brother Lawyer has
discovered something of our Intrigue; therefore I Will wait on you before the
Time, that we may concert Measures accordingly. I am glad your Beast is out of
Town; we'll add another Antler to adorn his Brow, as soon as I have the
Happiness to see her who shall eternally command yours. --

When my Master perceived that the Scene was to be opened at his own House, he
began to demur: But after keeping Silence a little Time, he spoke to me to this
purpose. Robin, this Letter has in some sort confounded our Design, for what I
intend to act I would not, if it could be avoided, put in Execution at home,
for fear it should make too much Noise; for, added he smiling, though a Man has
the Misfortune to be a Cuckold, yet he would not have all the World know it. I
told him I was glad to see him so merry upon the Occasion, but begged he would
not keep the Porter any longer, for fear of some Accident. He thanked me for my
Care, sealed up the Letter again, and sent him away with it. When the Porter
was gone, my Master ordered me to go home again, and observe how Matters went
there, and as soon as ever the Spark came, to send the same Porter back to him
with this Notice, That the Work was ready to carry home, whenever I thought fit.

I had not been at home a quarter of an Hour ere my Gentleman came in a Coach;
he went up Stairs, but did not stay a Moment, came down again, whispered the
Coachman, and drove into Cheapside. I was at a loss how to behave my self, but
my Mistress ordered another Coach to be called. When I found that, I sent for
the Porter, and told him secretly that he must dog that Coach let it go where
it would, and be expeditious in bringing me Word. My Mistress came down in her
Hood and Mask in her Hand, and went off in the Coach. I looked after her as far
as I could see her, and o^bser'd the Porter to jump up behind the Coach I
immediately went to my Master, and acquainted him with the Business. He hurried
me home again, for fear the Porter should wait for me, and ordered me to bring
him, when he came, to the Pope's-Head Tavern, because he would be nearer home.

The Porter did not return in two Hours: He told me that the Coach drove to
York Stairs in York Buildings, and there they got out and took a Pair of Oars;
he went in another, and followed 'em till they landed at Lambeth, and dogged
them into the White-Lyon Inn. There he staid some time, to see if they intended
to go from thence; he walked into the Kitchen and drank a Mug of Ale, and in a
little time one of the Waiters came in, and told the Cook the Gentleman and his
Wife had bespoke a roasted Fowl and some Fish for their Dinner, and had ordered
clean Sheets to be put to air, for as soon as they had dined they designed to
go to Bed, being the Stage Coach was to call them up at One the next Morning.

I did not think it altogether so proper to take the Porter to the Pope's-Head
to my Master, but went alone, where I found him with another Gentleman, a
Stranger to me. When I had given him an Account, we took Coach all together and
drove to the Horse-Ferry, Westminster, took Boat and landed at Lambeth. We all
went into the White-Lyon the back Way, and I went to the Drawer (as we had
before concerted) and asked if there was not a Gentleman and a Lady that did
design to lie there all Night to wait for a Stage Coach in the Morning; he
answered in the Affirmative, but added they were that moment gone to Bed, that
they might be the better able to rise in the Morning. I asked him which Room
they lay in, for that I had Business of great Consequence to communicate to
him. Why that Room up one Pair of Stairs, answered the Drawer, and pointed at
the Door. Well, said I, fetch me a Pint of Wine, I Will drink a Glass, and then
go and wait on them.

The Drawer ran down for the Wine, and in the mean time I beckoned my Master;
up Stairs we went, I set my Foot against the Door, burst it open, and there we
soon perceived the loving Couple playing at Rantum Scantum. I shut to the Door
again, and stood Guard that no One should enter. My Master laid fast hold of my
naked Gentleman, and with the Assistance of his Friend threw him upon his Back,
clapped a Pistol to his Breast, and swore he would shoot him if he offered to
stir or cry out. Then my Master's Friend took out a Box of Instruments, and,
with a Pair of Scissars for that purpose, soon deprived him of what Senesino
and several Italian Singers want, as well as our Spark. The Thing was done so
suddenly, that I believe my Gentleman hardly knew his Loss till he felt the
Blood trickle about his Legs. He made several Attempts to get up, but to no
purpose. My Master told him he had better be quiet, for fear he should be worse
served, (but in my Opinion that could hardly be.) The Surgeon (for it proved my
Master's Friend was no other,) had all his Implements about him; he managed his
Needle, his Plasters, and Salves, and finished my Gentleman, and would have
had him gone home something lighter than he came, but he proved so weak with
Loss of Blood and the Pain together, that he fainted away.

My Mistress had hid herself behind the Curtain, and did not so much as say one
Word; but in all her Concern she took Care to dress her self, and when she had
done she sat upon the Bedside next the Wall, and seemed to be in deep
Discontent.

We had got my Gentleman to himself again by the help of the Drawer, who soon
found how Matters went. When we had done, my Master said to his Wife, Madam, I
must confess I was to blame to disturb you in your Diversion, but I own my
Fault, and will endeavor to mend it by leaving you together to solace your
selves, and so I take my Leave.

Upon this we marched down Stairs, paid for our Wine, and went to our Boat that
waited for us, and landed at the Still-yard. My Master was very uneasy all the
Way home, and we could not get one Word out of him. He went up Stairs, locked
himself in his Room, and remained alone several Hours. I would have been
willing to have diverted his Melancholy, but did not well know how I should go
about it.

Near seven a Clock in the Evening he called me up Stairs, and asked me if I
had heard any thing of his Wife. I told him no. Nay, said he, if she has any
Shame left, she will hardly attempt to come home again in haste. After some
time he went out, and did not come home again till twelve a Clock. He asked me
still after my Mistress, and understanding we had no News of her, went to Bed.

The next Morning he ordered me to send the Porter to Lambeth, to learn how
they behaved themselvos when we had left 'em. He returned, and told my Master
that the Gentlewoman went away as soon as she found we were gone, and left the
Gentleman there, who was so weak that he remained there still, and had sent for
several of his Acquaintance.

In the Afternoon my Mistress's Mother came to my Master, and they had a long
Discourse, and afterward went out together. But I was never more surpised in
my Life, when he came home the same Evening with his Wife and Mother. He
vouchsafed to tell me the next Day that his Wife resolved never to be guilty of
any Fault again, and by her Submission and the Entreaties of her Mother, he had
resolved to take her home once more. Sir, said I, if you can forgive her, no
one else has any thing to do with it. But, added I, I fear I shall feel the
Effects of her Displeasure. No, answered my Master, that was one of my
Conditions with your Mistress, that she should take no Notice to you of past
Transactions. And truly she kept her Word, for she would not so much as look at
me.

She continued very reserved for a great while, and never went out but to
Church of a Sunday.

In the latter End of the same Year my Master began to be out of Order, and the
Physician advised him to go into the Country for the Air; and accordingly he
took Lodgings at Hampstead, where my Mistress used to go twice or thrice every
Week to see him; and my Master told me (when I went of a Sunday to wait upon
him, to give him an Account of the Business of the Shop) that his Wife had been
so tender of him in his Illness, that he verily believed he should never have
any Occasion to blame her Conduct again. I told him I was as well pleased as he
was.

About a Week afterward my Mistress went in and out very often, and feem'd to
be very busy, giving Orders to my Fellow-Prentice for taking her a Place in
the Hampstead Coach as usual. This happened on the Tuesday, and I saw her no
more that Week.

When I went to my Master on the Sunday following, he asked me if my Mistress
was out of Order, being he had not seen her since the Monday last. Nor I since
Tuesday, said I, but I thought she had been with you, for she took a Place in
the Coach in order to come to you that Day, and sent out several Bundles to be
carried; as she usually did when she was coming to wait on you.

My Master was so confounded with what I told him, that he did not offer to
speak for some time, and the Sweat ran down his Face like Drops of Rain. At
last, said he, Robin, I fear all is not well! My Wife has certainly undone me.
Come, hope for the best, said I.

Well, my Master resolved, weak as he was, to go for London immediately. We
took a Coach, and soon got home; and there to our great Sorrow found my
Mistress had robbed my Master to the Value of Five Thousand Pound in Bank Notes
and Money, with Six and Thirty Gold Watches and Seventeen Silver Ones, besides
her own wearing Clothes. My Master at this Loss sunk down upon his Bed. I went
and fetched some of his Neighbors and Friends to comfort him, while I ran up
and down like a Madman, to see if I could get any Tidings of the Thief.

I went to give Orders at the Bank to stop Payment, but to my great Sorrow
found the Money had been received four Days before. I came back to acquaint my
Master with my ill Success, and found him alone and gone to Bed. When I told
him I could not hear any Tidings of my Mistress, and that the Money had been
received, he cried, Robin, it is not the Money that grieves me, but the ill
Usage of my Wife; it is that has got to my Heart, and never to be removed till
Death. I sat up with him a great while, till he told me he began to be sleepy,
and ordered me to retire; but as I was going from him, he took me by the Hand,
and bid me good Night. I found by his Pulse that he was in a Fever, and begged
I might call a Physician; but he said he should be better on the Morning, if
not he would send for one. Finding him willing to rest, I left him and went to
Bed.

As soon as I waked in the Morning, I put on my Gown, and went to see how he
did; but found him so weak and faint that he had not Strength enough to lift up
his Head. I was immediately running to fetch a Physician that lived hard by our
House, but my Master called me back, and told me it was too late, for, said he,
I feel my last Moment approaching. He ordered me to sit upon the Bed by him, he
took my Hand in his, which burnt like Fire, and said, Robin, my Wife has killed
me; I could have born any other Misfortune with Temper; if thou ever should
see her, tell her from me that I forgive her, and that I beg she would reform
her Life; but also let her know that she was the Death of me. I told him I
would not have him talk of Dying for an ungrateful Woman that did not deserve
the least Regard, but to cheer up his Spirits and let me go for a Physician.
No, said he, all Physic or Counsel comes too late;

I Have that within which baffles all their Art,
Sure Means to make the Soul and Body part,
A burning Fever and a broken Heart.
He had no sooner repeated those Lines but his Speech failed him, his Eyes
closed, and he expired only with a Sigh.

I must confess I was inwardly shocked, and the Spirit of Revenge rose in my
Soul against the barbarous Cause of his End.

When I had a little recollected my scattered Thoughts, I went to a Cousin of
my Master's that lived in Cheapside, and desired he would come and take Care of
his Affairs. For my own Part I could not compose my self for two or three Days:
At last I went to my Uncle, and desired he would let me have Twenty Pounds to
buy me Mourning, (for I did intend to wear Black, that my melancholy Outside
might conform with what I felt within) out of Respect to my Master's Memory.
Mourning, Bob! answered my Uncle, Why if thy Master's Friends will not give it
thee, it is my Opinion thou ought not to think on it. Yes, Sir, added I, I
think it my Duty; for though my Mistress used me ill, my Master always was civil
to me. But my Uncle told me in plain Terms that I should not have a Farthing. I
told him I wanted but my own; but he replied, when he thought I was of Years
enough to manage my Money my self, perhaps I might be trusted with it, but at
present he would take Care of it for me.

I was very uneasy at this Affair, for it began to look as if he intended to
cheat me of it, and I did not stick to tell him my Sentiments in a civil
manner, but to no purpose. I left him with a very heavy Heart, and came home. I
went to Bed in the utmost Confusion of Thought; yet notwithstanding my
Discontent, slept 'till Morning. I got up about six a-clock, with a scurvy Idea
of my future Fortune. About eight, my Uncle's Man brought me a Letter from him,
in which he begged my Pardon, and told me it was only to try my Temper. The Man
gave me ten Guineas by his Order, and farther told me that his Tailor would be
with me immediately to take my Directions; and accordingly before the Fellow
was gone he came, took Measure of me, and told me he would be sure to bring my
Clothes home by twelve a-clock the next Day; and he kept his Word with me.

In the mean time I had provided my self with every Thing else with the Money
my Uncle had sent me; and the same Evening waited on him to return him Thanks.
Bob, said he, I had only a Mind to try your Temper, and I find thou art
Father's own Child, a Chip of the old Block.

He would have me stay to sup with him, and among other Discourse he asked me
what I did intend to do now my Master was dead, for he did not suppose I was
Master of my Trade enough to follow it. I replied, I knew enough to recommend
my self to any other Master without paying any more Money. My Uncle replied, I
needed not be in such haste, but take some Time to consider of it, and in the
mean while I should live with him and be heartily welcome. And to make his
Actions agree with his Words he gave me five Guineas more for Pocket-Money, and
gave Directions for me to be with one of his Clerks, a good-natured young
Fellow, that was a School-fellow of mine.

I was very glad of the Occasion, living with my Uncle in great Tranquillity the
space of a Month, and all the time he seemed to be very fond of me, never
denying me any thing that I asked him.

One Sunday Morning before Church-time he called me to him, and (after many
Professions of Friendship) asked me if I had never done any Business for my
Master out of the Watch-making Trade. I pretty well guessed at what he meant,
and answered him in the Affirmative. Very well, said he, I must send you as far
as Gravesend tomorrow about the same Affair; and if I executed my Commission
dexterously, he told me it should be the better for me.

The next Morning I got up, and my Uncle sent me with a Letter into Pall Mall
to a Client of his, and returning with an Answer, found him taking his Leave of
a Gentleman that looked like a Sea-Officer. As soon as their Compliments were
over, my Uncle dispatched me away to Billingsgate, and gave me Instructions
what to do. I was to enquire for a Ship called the Success, Capt. Stokes
Commander, at Gravesend, and then to follow his Directions.

As I was talking with my Uncle, my Bedfellow thrust a Book into my Pocket, and
told me that would divert me in the Boat, if I had not Company that I liked. I
did not much regard what he said, but went about my Business, got into the
Gravesend Boat which put off upon the Instant, and had the Fortune to light of
good Company, and one young Man that was going to the same Ship as I was.

We were very merry all the Way with little Stories we told among our selves.
We got on Board the Success about two a-clock in the Afternoon, and the first
Person I saw was the same Man that I found with my Uncle in the Morning. He
took me by the Hand, and carried me into the Cabin, and set a Piece of Ship
Beef before me. When I had dined, he informed me my Things would be on Board
immediately. I told him it was very well; not suspecting any thing. Afterward
the Captain went out, and left me alone in the Cabin: I got up, and looking out
of the Cabin Window, found the Ship was under Sail. At first I began to be
surpised, but yet was so ignorant that I thought we were sailing up the River.
While I was ruminating on the Matter, the Captain came and told me my Things
were ready for me, whenever I would. I went out; but how was I surpised when I
saw my Trunk that I left at my Uncle's with all my Clothes in it! I was in such
Confusion that I had not Power to utter one Word for some time. At last,
recovering out of my Surprise, I asked him the Meaning of what I saw! Meaning,
Child! replied the Captain: Why, what is the Matter? would you go such a Voyage
as we are upon without Necessaries? What Voyage? returned I. Why, to Virginia,
replied the Captain. At that Answer I sat me down upon my Chest and burst into
Tears, and had such a Combat in my Mind that bereaved me of the Power even of
thinking for some time. The Captain indeed did all he could to comfort me: At
last I fancied it might be only a Jest; but to my Sorrow found by all their
Discourse it was but too much in earnest.

The Captain declared that my Uncle had bargained with him for my Passage, and
that I was to be delivered to a Relation I had in Charlestown, upon the
Continent of America. I asked ^he Name, but he told me one that I had never
heard of before.

When I found I was certainly betrayed by my ^arbarous Uncle, I fell upon my
Knees, and begged the Captain to put me on Shore, and I would find some Means
to pay the Sum he was to have for my Passage. He answered, he was too well paid
already to let me go on Shore again; and further added, I had nothing to do but
to make my self easy, for I was not likely to set my Foot in Europe, till I had
first seen America.

I found it was to no purpose to entreat any further: It is true I had no
Aversion for the Sea, but rather an Inclination; and if my Uncle had made any
Proposals to me concerning such a Voyage, and properly prepared, it is ten to
one if I had not accepted it. But in this manner to be kidnapp'd, for it was no
better, and then the Dread of being parted with as a Slave when I came thither,
shocked me prodigiously. But being naturally of an easy Temper, eight or ten
Days pretty well wore off my Apprehensions, and I began to be contented with my
wretched Fate. I set my self with all my Diligence to learn the Mathematics,
as also the Work of a Sailor, and quickly attained to some Knowledge I soon
ingratiated my self with most of the Crew* who instructed me in all they knew.

I mentioned a Book my Uncle's Clerk put in my Pocket, as I left the Chambers
that Morning I was trepanned, which for the first three or four Days I did not
remember; but putting my Hand in my Pocket to feel for something else, I took
it out, and found in it a Letter directed for me, which was as follows;

Dear Bob,
WHen you went to St. James's this Morning [supposing I would have read it the
Day I received it] I overheard my Master discoursin^ with a Captain of a Ship,
and I learnt that h^ intends to send you to Virginia. I could not understand
the Particulars, but enough to know the Bargain is made. My Friendship to you
and the Barbarity of your Uncle obliges me to give you this (I hope) timely
Notice. I shall leave the Management to you; but whatever Steps you take, I am
not to be in the Question: and I thought of this way to acquaint you with it,
fearing I should not have the Opportunity of speaking to you. Farewell till I
see you again, which I hope in God will not be long.

A. M.


This Letter made me curse my Fate again; for if I had had the good Fortune to
have read it before I was on Shipboard, I might have prevented my Uncle's
Design: But it was my Destiny, and therefore I submitted to it.

We met with nothing in our Voyage till we came near the Canaries: When one
Evening we heard several Cannons fired, as we supposed two Leagues from us. Our
Captain altered his Course, in order to avoid a Rencounter with an Enemy; for
our Ship carried but ten Guns and twenty Men, besides Passengers. But
notwithstanding the Captain's Care, as soon as ever the Morning dawned and the
Fog was cleared up, we found our selves within half a Mile of a Rover of
Barbary. We were all mightily surpised, for the Gally made up to us with Sails
and Oars, being to Windward of us. Our Captain advised us to surrender
immediately, but the Sailors were for fighting, and were confirmed in their
Opinion upon Sight of another Vessel bearing down upon us, whom they knew to be
Spanish by her Colors. All our Guns were immediately brought to the Starboard
Side, and every Body ready to engage, Passengers and all who were willing to
preserve their Liberty.

The Rover by this time was just upon the Starboard Bow, and prepared to board
us. We had some Hand Grenades on board, with several other Stores for our Fort
at Charlestown, and a Gunner as one of our Passengers. He ordered several Men
into our Main-Top with Grenades, and followed himself, and as soon as ever the
Gally came near enough, our Men at the Helm bore away, and fired our Guns upon
him, which raked 'em fore and aft, and did much Execution. Our Gunner above in
the Top threw in upon them with his Grenades, which we could perceive put them
into much Confusion. But all this would not have availed, if they had not
perceived the Spanish Man of War bearing upon us. They did not make any farther
Attempts to board us, but they fired their Cannon and gaul'd us with their
small Arms.

I had gotten a Musket on board and had discharged it as I thought, for it
flashed in the Pan, and the Noise of the other Pieces deceived me. I charged
again, but then found by the Rammer that my Piece had not gone off. However I
was resolved to fire it: I stood upon the larboard Gunnel just upon the
Forecastle, to be as far from the Enemy as I could, and fired my Piece; but
being double charged, and a stubborn Jade, gave me such a Bang that threw me
over the Side of our Ship; my Foot hung in the Fore Change for some time, but
struggling (with my Head downwards) to raise my self up, my Foot disentangled,
and I fell plum into the Sea.

Although I had learnt to swim in England, yet the Fright, the Smoke and all
together took away my Understanding, and I found by my Struggling that I had got
within ten Yards of the Rover, and she that Instant bearing away before the
Wind, they did me the Favor to stun me with a Stroke of one of their Oars, and
took me on board them.

They rowed with all their Strength, and the Wind being in their Stern, they
insensibly left the Success, who flatted their Sails and laid by till the
Spanish Ship came up with her, and then we could perceive 'em both making after
the Rover.

The Captain of the Corsair was an Irish Renegado, and as soon as he was out of
Danger, he sent for me into the Cabin, and asked me several Questions
concerning our Ship, where she was bound, and who I was, (for he took me for
more than a common Sailor, being I was not in a Sailor's Habit.) I told him my
Story, as I have related in the foregoing Sheets. He shook his Head, and, with
a Smile, said I was very ready at a Lie. Sir, said I, I am so far from lying,
that I jumped overboard on purpose to come to your Vessel rather than to stay
with them, choosing to be a Slave nearer home, than to go I don't know where
with the Knave that trepanned me: And to convince your Honor of the Truth (for
I honored him much) here is the Letter which my Uncle's Clerk slipped into my
Pocket in a Book, (for by good Fortune I had the Letter and Book in my Pocket
when I fell overboard.) At reading the Letter he was convinced, he said, of my
Sincerity; and thou shall see, added he, notwithstanding the bad Opinion is
held of us Renegado's, that you shall fare the better for your Confidence in
us. Sir, returned I, this Accident may convince you that I thought very well of
your Honor, for as soon as I saw your Honor upon Deck giving Command, I
thought you had the Look of a Gentleman; (though by the By he had a damned Tyburn
Face.)

I clarkt him up so well (with your Honor) that he began to fancy himself a
Hero indeed. He ordered my Chains to be taken off, (for they had done me the
Favor to provide me some as soon as ever they had got me on board) and told me
that if I would turn Mohammedan I should have Command under him. I answered him,
I hoped he would give me some Time to consider of it. Ay, ay, Time, thou shall
have half a Year's Time to consider of it, returned the Captain. He carried me
out upon Deck, and told my Story to his Crew, who were mightily pleased with
the Relation, and saluted me after the Moorish manner, by bowing their Heads,
and clapping their Hands across upon their Breasts.

There were several other English Renegado's that were Officers in the Galley,
but most of the common Sailors were natural Moors. The Captain told me that he
did design to make for Sallee with all the Expedition he could, for he had
engaged with a Spanish Man of War the Night before, and had suffered very much
in both his Vessel and Crew: but he told me he would soon be out again, for he
had another Vessel ready in Sallee Road to put out to Sea. We had before Night
lost Sight of the Success, and Spanish Man of War, that had so luckily freed
her from the Infidels Clutches; and we steered for Sallee.

Ten Days after we discovered the African Shore, within five Leagues West of
Sallee Road; and the Wind favoring us, we anchored in the Harbor by Six in
the Evening. The Captain went ashore, but ordered me to remain on Board till
the next Day.

I must confess I began to have some Hopes of seeing my own Country again, but
yet did not know how to bring it about; however, I resolved to trust Providence.

The next Morning my Master sent for me on Shore, by a young Renegado Sailor
born at London, whose Christian Name I learnt was Francis Corbet, but had
exchanged it for Mustapha; a good intelligent young Fellow, and one that was a
perfect Master of the Mathematics. The Reason why he did not accompany the
Captain in this Voyage, was a violent Fever when he set Sail. I asked him why
he could forget the Savior of the World to turn Mohammedan; he told me that he
was only one from the Teeth outward, and he thought it better to trust God with
his Soul, than those barbarous Wretches with his Body. I thought it was a
pretty free Declaration to one that was an utter Stranger to him.

As soon as we were landed, I had the whole Town of Sallee staring at me; for
the Captain of the Rover had taken Care to spread my Story among 'em; and I had
as much Respect shown me by the People of the Town as he had. He took me home
to his own House, and used me with much Civility for a Week or ten Days; during
that time he had carried me twice or thrice to his Country House, about six
Miles up the River. It was a very pleasant Place, situated in a little Wood,
with the River running round it, and no approaching to it but over a
Drawbridge. At this House his Wives lived, for I was informed he had several.

Observing his Garden, I told him it was but indifferently kept. He answered it
was for want of a Gardener, none of his Slaves understanding that Art. I
offered him my Service, but told him I did not pretend to be a Gardener, but I
was assured I could soon make Amendment to it, with the Help of some of his
Servants. He ordered me to take as many as I thought fit, and, added he,
because I am impatient to see it in a better condition, I Will leave you here. I
told him I begged to be excused now, because I should want several Things for
my Designs. If it be Tools, said he, or Seeds of all Sorts, I have 'em here.
Upon which he carried me into a little House, meant for a Green-house, where I
found every Thing that was wanting, with a large Quantity of European Seeds and
Roots. I told him I was satisfied there was every thing that I should want. The
Captain ordered me a Bed to be made in the Green-house, and an old Eunuch, that
understood French very well, to wait on me, with a strict Order that I should
have every Thing I asked for, but I was not to approach the House in his
Absence upon any Account. I told him I had no Curiosity that way, and did not
doubt but I should show him something that would please him the next time he
came, which was to be in 20 Days.

As soon as he was gone I went to Work, (for Gardening was what I always took
delight in, both Theoric and Practic.)

I drew out Plans, ordered my Workmen, and in six Days time brought it into
some Form. I perceived in the middle of the Garden a Puddle of Water, which I
gave Directions to be drained, and found that it had been formerly a Fountain,
but was only choked up with Filth by Neglect. I asked the old Eunuch if he had
ever known it to play, and he answered in the negative, neither did they
imagine it to be any such thing; for his Master had bought the Estate of an old
Spanish Renegado four Years before, and he told him it had been a Fish Pond. I
examined about the River, and found the Head of the Pipes stopped with Rubbish,
which I cleared, and by degrees the Water worked through into the Fountain, and
out again through another Conveyance. I observed that there had been Figures upon
it, by the Pipes; I asked my Eunuch if he had ever seen any such things: He
told me there were several lying in a back Yard on the other Side the House. I
went with him, and found four small Figures of Tritons, and a Neptune in his
Chariot drawn by Sea-Horses. I ordered them to be brought to the Fountain, and
fixed them on, (first stopping the Water) and then letting it loose again
finished my Fountain, which played admirably out of the Shells of the Tritons,
(which they seemed to blow with) from the Nostrils of the Horses, and the
Trident of the Neptune. The Workmen were astonished to see with what Expedition
I had completed it, and imagined I had dealt with the Devil. The next Morning
the Eunuch came to me before I was up, and desired I Would give him the Key of my
Chamber, and be contented to be a Prisoner till he came to me again. I was a
little surpised, and asked him the Reason: He told me he could not give me
any, being it was beyond his Commission. Accordingly he locked me in, and went
away. I began to ruminate about this Accident, but could not imagine the Cause:
I had no Way to look out toward the Garden, being the Windows of the
Green-house looked over the River into the Wood, and the Back which frontted
the House had only painted Windows for Ornament, not Use. In about two Hours my
Eunuch came and released me, and we dined together. I used all the Rhetoric I
was Master of to find out the Secret, but to no Purpose; he only added that I
must be in the same Condition again the next Morning. This was still more
surprising, and I began to think by Degrees I should entirely lose my Liberty.
The old Eunuch imagining my Thoughts, assured me there was no harm meant to me.
This Afternoon was my last Day's Work, and in three Days more I expected the
Captain. About an Hour before Night I perceived another Eunuch of the House
talking earnestly with him that used to attend me, who immediately came to me,
and told me he must beg me to retire to my Chamber that Instant; upon which I
readily obeyed, knowing it was to no purpose to contend.

I was upon the Tenters to know the Reason of my Confinement: Whilst I was
employing my Thoughts about it, I heard the Voices of Women. It surpised me at
first, but I soon sound that was the Reason of my being made a Prisoner. When
the Eunuch came to bring me my Supper, I told him he need not have made such a
Secret of what I was locked up for, for I had found it out; and then told him
that I had heard Women's Voices in the Garden. Did you? (said he, surpised)
I Will take Care they shall keep their Tongues within their Teeth for the future.
He said no more, but immediately went out, and soon returned and told me I
should hear no more of them. I was confounded with this odd Proceeding, and my
Curiosity began to be more and more raised.

When I was left alone, I began to examine my Room where I was, to see if I
could find ever a Peep-hole; and by good Fortune found one made by Time and ill
Weather under the Pent-house. I upon the instant of my Discovery made all the
Use I could of it, and soon perceived three Women in the Walk with their Backs
toward me. They were in a Turkish Undress, with their Necks bare: One of them
above the rest seemed to me to have a better Shape and Air than commonly the
Women of Morocco have. I don't know what came over me, but I seemed impatiently
to expect their nearer Approach. At last my Desires were answered; for as soon
as they had spent some Time at my new Fountain, they directed their Steps
toward my Confinement, and when they were near enough, I could distinguish
them to be three handsome Women; but one of 'em that seemed to be very
melancholy, surpassed the other two, at least in my Opinion. She seemed to be
about twenty, fair to a Miracle, and much like an Englishwoman. She did not
seem to converse with the other two, but followed them with an Air of
Contemplation; and I could observe her sigh often. I never till this Moment had
the least Regard to any of the Female Sex, no more than good Manners and
Decency required; but I found my self in a Moment full of aching Tenderness for
this strange Woman. Though I had no time for Thought till the Ladies were
retired, I then began to reason with my self, and found Love like Destiny was
not to be avoided; and the more I thought, the more I was plunged in this
tormenting, yet pleasing Passion. Yet I thought it was very odd to fall in
Love, considering my Circumstances. I had nothing to hope, and all to fear: I
was poor, a Prisoner, and a Stranger, far from my native Country, in want even
of Necessaries, and, to complete my Misery, sunk in one Hour an Age in Love.
Every new Thought seemed a Thorn to torment me; yet notwithstanding all these
Difficulties, a Beam of Hope would now and then shine through the thick Clouds of
Despair, and encourage me to love on. From this Thought I began to think with
Reason (if a Lover can be called a reasonable Creature) how I should manage my
Passion. I began to reflect the Moors were jealous of their Women even to a
Degree, and did not in the least doubt but my Irish Renegado had learnt that
Part of their Manners. At last I pitched upon an odd Expedient: I determined to
show to my Captain an utter Detestation of all Females, (and in truth the Usage
my poor Master met with from his Wife, very much lessened the Regard I owed the
Sex) and try what that would do. This Thought seemed to give me some
Satisfaction, and as soon as the Eunuch came to release me, I begged he would
sup with me that Evening. He accordingly promised me, and came immediately with
my Supper, and brought under his Garment a Bottle of excellent Greek Wine. I
must confess I was surpised and pleased; for as I knew the Moors are
restrained from Wine, I did not expect any there. The Eunuch told me, smiling,
that he had brought that Cordial to make me Amends for the Loss of my Liberty;
for though, added he, Mussulmen are not allowed to drink Wine, we very well
know you Europeans seldom eat without it; and our Master (meaning the Captain)
is not so strict a Mussulman but he drinks much himself, and procures privately
great Quantities for his own Use. I told him, I thought Mahomet ordered his
Followers to abstain from Wine, because an immoderate Use of it generally
turned to immoderate Passions; but to take it sparingly gave Health and Vigor
to the Body, and Cheerfulness to the Spirits. He agreed with me in my
Sentiments, and showed he approved of them by drinking to me. Notwithstanding
my Endeavors to hide the Trouble of my Spirit, my kind Eunuch took Notice of a
Concern in my Countenance, and cheered me up with repeated Glasses; and
imagining my Confinement caused that Alteration, told me he would not have me
take to Heart the small Abridgement of my Liberty, for as soon as his Master
arrived, I should not be restrained any more; for the Cause would cease, by the
Confinement of the Ladies to their several Apartments. I told him, with a
seeming Joy, that I should be mightily pleased when that should happen, for I
abhorred the Sight of them; Women were my utter Aversion, and had been from my
Infancy; and that Aversion was aggravated by the Knowledge of their Perfidy;
and I thought it the greatest Curse could fall upon that noble Creature Man not
to be born without them. Upon this I told him the Story of my Master and
Mistress, and several extravagant Tales of my own Invention, which painted that
beautiful Part of the Creation in the Color of the Devil. My Companion praised
me for slighting the Sex, and backed my Stories with as many of his own
Knowledge. Between our familiar Talk and our Greek Wine, he began to be very
loquacious: He told me, his Master, after the Mode of the Moors, had several
Wives, beside a Captive that he had lately taken, that seemed averse to his
Passion, and all the Rhetoric he was Master of could not prevail. He did not
know, he said, what Countrywoman she was, but she spoke very good French. I
imagined this could be no other than that sweet Creature I had seen: I changed
Color; but to put it off said, A Pox take all the Sex, don't let us talk of
them any more. I am afraid, said he, you love to converse with the Men, and
that makes you slight the Women. I did not immediately understand him, but he
soon explained upon it, and then I was no longer ignorant. I told him it was of
such a beastly Nature, that I was of Opinion those Persons that used it should
be treated worse than Beasts. Why, replied he, it is so common here that it is
reckoned only a Piece of Gallantry. Well, said I, I hate that Action, even
worse if it be possible than the Sight of the Female Sex. The old Man and I
parted like two Friends; but before he went, I told him he need not give
himself any great Trouble to lock me in for the future, for I would take Care
of my self. Well, well, said he, and shook his Head, I believe I may trust you.
As soon as he was gone I went to Bed, not to Sleep, for I had Thought enough
about me to keep me waking. I began to conceive a great deal of Hopes from my
Dissimulation. I spent the whole Night in thinking of a thousand Expedients to
forward my Designs, till I had thought of so many that they were all confused
like a Skein of Silk pulled the wrong way. At last with the Fatigue of Thought
I fell asleep till Sunrising, nor awaked till I heard Voices in the Garden. I
ran immediately and barred my Door on the Inside, for fear of being discovered
at my Peephole, huddled on my Clothes, and ran up; where I saw my lovely
Charmer reading in a Book, walking by her self in the Alley that led to my
Prison. The other Women were got about the Fountain, admiring the playing of
the Water. She drew nearer me; but what was my pleasing Surprise when I heard
her repeat the following Lines in English!

-- My Grief lies all within,
And those external manners of Laments
Are meely Shadows to the unseen Grief
That swells with Silence in my tortured Soul.
I must confess, the Transports I felt were beyond Expression: She had such a
Softness in her Voice, and yet so musical, that it made my Blood thrill through
my Veins. In short, during the time I beheld her, I was in such an Ecstasie,
that all my Cares were forgot. She turned up the Walk again, but I followed her
with my longing Eyes till she was out of Sight: I then turned them into my
Imagination, and there beheld her still.

I was convinced she was an English Woman, and kept in her Restraint against
her Will. I soon resolved with my self to find some Expedient to let her know I
would serve her all that lay in my Power, if she was disposed to accept it.

I had staid so long fixed at my Peep-hole, that the old Eunuch knocked at my
Door, which soon roused me from my pleasing Thoughts, and put me upon another
Task, which was to dissemble. I suffered him to knock twice or thrice before I
let him in; at last I opened the Door, when he had called to me to give me to
know who it was: As Soon as he was entered, I began to exclaim against him in a
friendly manner; said I, You promised me Yesterday that I should not be
troubled with the Tongues of those Female Devils, and I have been so plagued
with them for an Hour together, that I was obliged to shut my Door, and run up
Stairs to be free from the Sound. He smiling told me, the Fumes of the Wine
which he drank overnight had drove it out of his Thoughts, but he would be
sure to give them a Caution to hold their Tongues for the time to come: But
then, added I, I may be surpised by them when I little expect 'em. No, said
he, I Will take Care to send, or bring you Word when they are disposed to walk in
the Garden again. I thanked him for his Caution. He told me he did design to
come and dine with me that Day, for, added he, I shall not have another
Opportunity a great while, for the Captain has sent Word he will be here
tomorrow without fail. Accordingly he came with a roasted Pheasant, and some
boiled Rice, attended with another Bottle of Greek Wine.

Notwithstanding my new Passion, I eat and drank heartily; but my Eunuch got
almost tipsey, and the Fumes of the Wine getting up into his Head, he desired
he might repose himself on my Bed for a while, which I granted him; well
knowing if he had been found out, we might both have suffered for tasting the
Juice of the Grape. I had much rather he had gone within the House to have
slept, for I could not even think to the purpose while he was there: But he
soon got into a sound Sleep, which I found out by his Snoreing. I then ventured
to take Pen and Ink, and wrote the following Lines.

To the English Lady.
Madam,
I Have observed your melancholy Air, and other Circumstances, speak you a
Prisoner here. The Person that writes this is your Countryman, and though in the
same Distress, yet has a Heart and Hand to do you Service. I flatter my self it
will one Time or other be in my Power to effect our Liberty. If you have no
Thoughts that way, I am persuaded you have too much Generosity to do one a
Prejudice that would venture any thing to serve you. You know the Consequence
if this Note should be discovered, therefore I beg you would destroy it as soon
as you have perused it; and if you will favor me with an Answer, with your
Sentiments of what I have wrote, you will find a String hanging on the North Side
of the Garden House, to which if you fix your Letter, I shall be ready to
prevent Discovery of what may hurt you, and him whom you may freely command.


I had not the Convenience of Sealing-wax or Wafer, therefore I folded it up,
and directed it To the ENGLISH LADY. When I had finished, I began to have odd
and confused Notions of the Success of it: Perhaps, said I to my self, she may
be contented with her Fortune, or be afraid to hazard any Attempt toward her
Liberty: She may also imagine I am set on purpose to betray her, and therefore
to show her Innocence may discover me to the Captain. I was in a hundred Minds:
Sometimes I resolved to burn the Letter; but at last Love prevailed upon all my
Reasons to the contrary, and I resolved to try the Success of it the first
Opportunity.

In reasoning with my self, and writing my Letter, I had spent three Hours, and
therefore I thought it high time to awake my Eunuch, who started up frighted
out of his Senses. When he had recovered himself, he thanked me for breaking
his Rest, for he was assured he was wanted within. And he nicked his Time to a
hair, for before he was got half way the Walk (for I immediately got up to my
Peep-hole) I saw the Ladies at the farther End. He talked to them some time,
and then left them, to go into the House.

They saunter'd about the Garden a good while, till at last two of them sat
down by the Fountain, and the English Lady continued her Walk toward my
Apartment. Now my Blood ran its swift Course, and the whole Frame of my Body
felt violent Emotions. I thought this was a fair Opportunity, and yet was
fearful to make Use on it. But mustring all my Spirits, I ventured, and when she
was within twenty Paces of the Green-house, I darted the Letter, and by good
Fortune it fell in the Middle of the Gravel-Walk, so that it was almost
impossible to miss on it; but had it happened otherwise, I had time enough to
run down and take it up before any one else could discover it. She continued
her Walk, and when she came at it, she kicked it with her Foot, once or twice,
and at last took it up. She was reading in a Book, as she was the Day before; I
could perceive her open it, and spread the Note upon her Book, so that no one
could tell but that she was reading. It is not possible to express the Anxiety
I lay under all this while: But I began to be a little more composed, when I
observed her tearing the Letter into very small Pieces, and scattering them in
several Places of the Garden. She had not walked far, but she returned, and
viewed the Green-house with a great deal of Regard, and, to my Imagination,
wanted to come to the North Side of it, as mentioned in the Note, yet seemed
fearful; often looking back, and not fully confirmed in her Resolution, at last
went unwillingly to the rest of the Ladies. This gave me some Hopes that she
received the Letter kindly, and that I should hear from her soon.

I observed she sat by the Fountain very intent upon her Book, which did not
much please me. In about a quarter of an Hour, she got up, and came toward the
Green-house again. When I saw her coming, I ran down Stairs, and fixed a
Packthread to the top of the Window, for fear if she should take Courage, and
come to that Side, not seeing the Packthread, she might be startled, and
persuade her self there was nothing in it. I had placed it, and got to my
Peep-hole before she had reached the South Side. But coming close to the Wall,
I could not see her by reason the smallness of the Hole cut off my Sight. But
in less than a Minute I discovered her walking back again, and sometimes
turning to view the Place of my Retirement. As Soon as she had got to the Top of
the Walk, (for I had not Power to stir before) I went down, and pulling in the
Packthread, found a Piece of Paper tied to it. I untied it with a great deal of
Expectation and Impatience, and found these Words wrote with a Pencil, upon a
clean Leaf of a Book (which I suppose she had torn from that she had been
reading in.)

I Was much surprised when I perused a Note, I found in the Walk of the Garden,
as believing it directed to me. I confess I am a Person in Distress, but know
not how to take the Word of a Stranger, and one I never saw, who perhaps is no
more than a Spy upon my Actions, and what the Note contained may be by Order of
him who pretends to tyrannize over me, because I am in his Power; and seeks
this Way to find out my Inclination, for Pretenses to use me worse. Therefore
I Will expect a farther Assurance in half an Hour from the same Place. And I Will
take an Opportunity to convey my real Sentiments back again.

The Joy I felt at reading this Note cannot be expressed in Words. I sat me
down and wrote the following Answer.

MAdam, to tell you my Motive to serve you, may convince you of my Sincerity,
which I Will let alone till I have the Favor of speaking to you, if ever I am so
happy. You have heard, no doubt, of the Person that the Master of this House
brought from Sallee, who is the same that is willing, and proud to serve you*
By him that died upon the Cross for our Sins, I am sincere in what I write to
you; and if I cannot serve you, it will be the greatest Grief can happen to one
who shall ever be yours.

R. B.


When I had wrote this I went to the usual Place, and saw my Charmer very near
me. I threw it down as before; she readily took it up, and walked back again,
tearing the Note when she had read it, as she did the former, and went into the
House. Just as she was got within the Gate the other Eunuch came out (not my
friendly Eunuch) and as he was walking along, I observed him picking up the
Pieces of the torn Notes. If any one had observed my Countenance at this
Action, they might have discovered the utmost Confusion there. I thought we
were certainly undone, and could not tell how to behave my self. I sometimes
repented of the Affair, but yet I always found my Concern was more for her whom
I loved, than for my self. As Soon as he had picked up all he could find, he
returned, with my hearty Curse, and Wishes that he might be obliged to swallow
them down his Throat for a Penance.

I don't know when I should have recovered out of my fit of Confusion, if the
Sight of my Bliss had not done it. She went to the Fountain, sat her down upon
the Margin, and spent some time there, then rose and made to my Apartment; she
took two or three Turns with a Book in her Hand, but at last went out of Sight,
as before. I staid till I saw her in the Walks again, and then ran down, where
I found another writ with Ink, as follows.

I Am convinced of your Sincerity, and shall wholly rely upon your Endeavors
to help me. If we succeed, and get our Liberty, I have it in my Power to reward
you when we arrive in England. As we are two unhappy Persons, I should not be
displeased to see the Man that I own an Obligation to, even in his Intention to
serve me. I have Liberty enough, I mean as far as my Bounds, and am not
over-closely watched. The Captain who took me Prisoner has hitherto used me
very civilly, and is only Troublesome when he tells me he loves me. I have kept
him from being too violent, by showing him a little Civility sometimes, but how
long he will continue within the Limits of Modesty I cannot tell. It Is that
makes me dread his Presence, and the sooner I am out of his Power, the sooner I
shall breath the Air of Content, which is the Wish of

Your humble Servant.


At the reading of this Paper, my Heart ran oer with Contentment; and had it
not been for he Fear of what would happen about the Pieces ^f the Letter that
were picked up by the cursed Eunuch, I should not have known how to have
^ontain'd my Transports; but the Thought of ^^at, like Water on a Fire, dampt
my Joy. I ^ast my Time between Hopes and Fears, till my ^unuch came to sup with
me. I had torn my ^etter into many Pieces, and had disposed of all ^^e
Fragments that had any Writing on it, but ^wo or three small Bits that were
vacant of ^ords lay under Feet. As soon as ever my Eu^uch spied them, he picked
them up, and said, ^ did not do well to tread upon Paper; for, added ^e, if
Achmat had seen you (meaning the other ^unuch) he would have been in a strange
Pas^on. He has chid the Lady that my Master ^^ought home last, very severely,
for throwing Pieces of Paper about the Garden, well knowing it could be only
she that had don't, because the rest were all Mahometans, and know the Virtue
of it. I asked the Reason of all this Bustle, about a Thing we Europeans put to
the most servile Uses. He told me with some Entreaty at last, that all true
Mussulmen have a great deal of Regard for Bits of Paper, because the Name of
God, or their Prophet, may be wrote upon it; and they have a Tradition, that
when they are called out of Purgatory at the Day of Judgment, to be Inhabitants
of the ever-blessed Mansions, there will be no other Way to come to their
Prophet Mahomet, but over a large red-hot Iron Grate, which they must walk over
Barefoot. And therefore, upon the Instant as they are going to step upon the
Grate, all the Pieces of Paper they have picked up during their Residence in
this World will run and place themselves of their own accord under their Feet,
so that they will be enabled to get to their Prophet without much Difficulty.
This whimsical Story set my Heart a^ Rest, and we supped cheerfully, emptied our
Flas^ of Wine which held two Quarts, and took ou^ Leaves. I went to Bed, and
felt such a Calm i^ my Mind, that I did not lie long awake, bu continued
sleeping till ten a-clock the next Day I was surpised, and vexed I had rested
so long when I considered perhaps that I had lost Sigh^ of my Love. I dressed
my self, and took a Wal^ in the Garden, finding the Coast clear as ^ thought.
The Sun being pretty warm, I retir'^ to a little Shade made by a few Laurel
Trees but was much surpised to find her that was eve^ in my Thoughts, sitting
under the Shade in ^ thoughtful Posture. She turned her Head at the Noise I
made in approaching her, and was running away. I plucked up (with much ado)
Courage enough to speak to her; Madam, said I, I would not have you be under
any Apprehension. If I had known you had been here, I would not have disturbed
you. I will only inform you, that I am the Person that has vowed to serve you
to the utmost of my Power. Sir, answered she, I am not at all displeased at
this Interview which is merely Chance; on the contrary I am pleased to see the
Person whom I once hope to be obliged to for my Liberty, and wish we could
often meet, that we might consult about the Means. Madam (answered I) if you will
condescend so far, I don't doubt but to find Opportunities enough. I told her
of my Plot with the Eunuch, and I had some Hopes it might produce something.
She approved of my Design, and my Conduct hitherto. She added that she would
take hold of all Opportunities to walk in the Garden (where I had informed her
I could see her without being seen) and so we parted for fear of being
discovered. She went into the House, and I went back to my Dwelling, and in
less than half an Hour the Captain arrived. He came to fetch me to Dinner, and
told me I had worked by Magic, or I could never have done what I did. He told
me he thought himself much obliged to me, and that I should find it. I answered
him, I was convinced it was but my Duty to serve him with every thing in my
Power, and that if he pleased I would make farther Improvements. He made me a
great many Compliments his way, and declared he would leave it to my better
Judgment.

By this time Dinner was ready, and I was ordered to sit down at Table with
him, (for though he had turned Mohammedan, yet he eat as we do in Europe, not on
the Ground upon Carpets as the Asiatics and Africans do.) We had our Dinner
dressed after the English Fashion, and we drank plentifully of his Greek Wine.
He told me he had a Dispensation from the Mufty to drink Wine, and smiled. I
answered I believed the Crime was pardonable by Mahomet, if it was drank with
Moderation. For my Part, I don't think (said I) Religion consists in
Castigation and Penance; and I am convinced that an upright Man, let him be
Jew, Turk, or Christian, may find his Way to Heaven. We had several Discourses
at Dinner about Religion, but I soon discovered the Captain knew very little of
any; and I am of the Opinion there is very few of the Renegado's think of
Religion: Their Motive to change is Ease and Interest. But this is a Digression.

When Dinner was over, we walked in the Garden, and I showed the Captain what
Improvements I had designed to make. He approved of every thing I said, and
informed me that he had heard from Mirza the Eunuch my Abhorrence of Women. But
he advised me to keep my Sentiments secret, for when you abjure (said he) the
Moorish Women will make you feel their Resentments. But it is odd, continued he,
that one of your Youth and Make should take such an Aversion to the Female Sex.
I told him I had very good Reasons for my Hatred, and even my Mother was odious
to me, though she brought me into the World. Well but, added the Captain, Time
and a Fair Face may make great Alterations. I told him I was very well assured
I should carry my Resentment to the Grave. I fancy (said he) I have an English
Woman, a Slave of mine, that I have lately taken, would make you change your
Sentiments, if you saw her. Sir, answered I, I would be willing to stand the
Trial to convince you of the contrary, though I would as soon look upon a Serpent
with my Will Well, said he, I have not learnt the Strictness of he Moors, in
keeping Women without being even; or if I had, your Aversion to them would
onvince me I have not much to fear. He desired me to walk awhile in the
Garden, and he would be with me again immediately. Upon this ^e left me, and
went into the House, and re^urn'd in five Minutes. Come, said he, I have
ordered ^y Women to walk in the Garden, and you and will abscond behind these
Laurels, where we ^ay see them, and not be seen. We had not sat ^ong, before we
could perceive three Women ^oming toward us. The two first were very ^andsom,
a little inclining to Fat, one seemed to ^e about thirty, and the other twenty
one accor^ing to my Guess, and not so fair as our English Women; but the third
was she I looked for. All my Circumspection could not avoid my feeling a ^udden
flow of my Blood rise into my Face, which my Captain observed. Well said he
(when ^hey were walked out of hearing) I have taken Notice of your Disorder,
and perceive your real Aversion is unsurmountable, which I am not sor^y for,
being it will add to your Liberty. I have ^o Occasion to have you confined when
they walk in the Garden, for I fancy (added he laugh^ng) you will shun 'em fast
enough. Just, answered ^ as I would a creeping Snake, unless it were to ^estroy
'em, and that the Regard I have for you would prevent. The last (said the
Captain) is your Countrywoman, one that I took in a Ship (my ^ast Voyage but
one) bound for the Island of Zant. I liked her so well, that I refused her
Ransom that amounted to five hundred pounds, and her Charms have overcome me so
much, that ^ would willingly enjoy her with her own Con^ent, for Compulsion
palls the Joy. I have given ^er twenty Days to consider on it, and when that
Time's expired, if she will not consent, I am resolved to force her.

Lord (said I in a seeming Passion) how can you take such an extraordinary
Trouble for a thing that does not deserve the least Regard. If the rest of the
World were of your Mind (said my Captain) the Women would have but a scurvy
Time on it. Now it is to me amazing (replied I) that Men should take Pains, live
hard, and run all Hazards, to come home, and spend all the Fruits of their
Labor on such Trifles, that perhaps have not the least Tenderness for 'em,
especially in these hot Counties where Women are given to be amorous, and yet
have but one Man to sometimes a Dozen of them and more; when perhaps a dozen
Men would hardly satisfy one Woman. Why (replied my Captain) that is the Reason
they are so strictly guarded, we pretty well know what they expect. Now, if I
had not had this Aversion to Women (I returned) I have a Secret without
Witchcraft, to make a Woman dote upon a Man. How, said the Captain, have you
such a Secret? if you will let me know it, I will not only give you your Liberty,
but amply reward you besides. Sir, said I, I thank you; but as for disclosing
the Secret, it is what I never can do; yet it is in my Power to prepare you a
chemical Liquid, which put into White Wind will do the Business, though it will
take up a great deal of Time, and be very expensive. As for the Expense,
replied the Captain, I shall not value it. But in how long Time can it be done?
Not under one hundred Days after Projection, answered I. Upon this he paused
some Time; A hundred Days is a great while, yet I think it is better to wait for
her Consent than to force her. So far (said I) I think you are in the right;
and further (added I) you may continue her Affection, as long as you think fit,
by now and then adding some of the chemical Drops into any Liquid she shall
drink, after she has taken the first Prescription.

The Captain seemed mightily pleased with my Project, and asked me what the
Charge would be. I answered, I feared it would be about two hundred Pounds in
this Country, though it would be much cheaper in England, where the things that I
should want were easier to be had; but I told him I could not give a just
Account of the Charge, till I saw the Prices of the Things I should want. I
told him I was afraid I should find it a difficult thing to get a Still, for
that was the first thing I should want. He answered me, he did not question but
I should easily procure every thing I wanted for Money, and he would take care
I should not stand in need of that. He farther told me that several Jews in
Sallee had all manner of Drugs, and he believed every thing else that I should
want. (For fear of the worst) I told him, I should not want my Drugs these
fifty Days, though I should want the Still immediately, and Liberty to go into
the neighboring Woods in the Nightime, being there were several Herbs that I
must gather by Moonlight, and when the Moon was in its Full, in the Increase,
or Decrease, according to the Nature of the Herb I wanted. He told me I should
have all the Liberty I required, not doubting I would make any wrong Use of it.
I told him, to be more secure, he might send who he thought fit, to guard me.
No, returned he, I Will leave you to your self. But you may take who you will
with you of my Servants, if you want their Assistance. I told him I should
stand in need of some of 'em sometimes. Well, said he, you shall go up with me,
and take what Money you have Occasion for. So accordingly we went into a little
Closet, where was a strong Box, which he opened, and took out two hundred and
fifty Spanish Pistoles; said he, if there is not enough, you may have more. I
told him I was assured there was too much. Well, said he, we'll reckon after
the Affair is over. And because it will be so long about, I Will even take
another cruising Voyage, that I may not think the Time tedious. I was very glad
to hear him say so, because I should have the better Opportunity to work my
Design. Though I dissembled my Joy, and told him I should be sorry for that, for
I should often have something or other to give the Woman he designed me to work
upon. Well (said he) Mirza shall take your Directions. Upon saying this he
called Mirza to us; Mirza, said the Captain, you must observe this Person's
Orders; whatever he commands you to do, you must obey with as much Exactness as
if you were serving of me. This he told Mirza in the Moorish Tongue, but
explained it to me in English. Mirza also told me in French the Commission his
Master had given him, and farther added, he hoped I would often command him to
visit the Wine Cellar. I told him we would not want. I advised the Captain to
let me go to Town, to enquire for the Still as soon as possible, and to be
known to those People that sold the Drugs. Why if you will (replied the
Captain) we'll go immediately; upon which I consented. He ordered a Horse to be
sadled for me, and I went into the Green-house to prepare my self; and luckily
for me I did, for I found a Note fixed to the String, which my fair
Correspondent had taken Opportunity of leaving, when she walked in the Garden
by the Captain's Order. The Contents were as follows.

SIR,
I Take this Opportunity to acquaint you that the Tyrant Captain is arrived,
and has given me twenty Days to consent to his abominable Love. I hope you will
believe me when I tell you it has almost taken away my Senses. The Time I fear
is too short for us to effect our Laberty; and if we do not succeed before the
fatal Day, I shall be the most miserable Wretch the Earth contains. Let me hear
from you, and if you can give me the least Glimpse of Hope to lull my Sorrows,
fail not to cheer the Heart of

Yours.


How lucky was it for me to find this Note! It might have fell into the
Captain's Hands, and then we had been in a fine Condition. I had Time to write
but a short Answer, which I threw on the Ground, and pulled in my String; it
was this, Hope every Thing: Write no more till tomorrow. I locked my Door, and
took the Key with me.

When we were on Horseback, our chief Discourse was concerning Charms,
Philtres, and Witchcraft. I convinced him there was not any such thing in the
World; and my Compound was the only thing that could do what was desired. He
asked me if I my self had ever tried the Experiment: I told him more than once;
and related the following Tale to him off hand.

There lived in our Neighborhood a rich old Man and very amorous, but deformed
to the last Degree: He was round-shoulder'd, broad-fac'd, bleareye'd,
short-nosed, and his Mouth as wide as his Face was broad; a pretty Object as
one should see. This old Gentleman fell in Love with a very pretty Woman, a
Mercer's Daughter over against him, but seemed to be the very Offspring of
Pride, and nothing less than a Lord should be her Husband, being well assured
her Charms would conquer every one that looked upon her. She could not bear the
thoughts of the old Gentleman, and whenever he talked of his Passion treated
him so ill that he was almost distracted. I went to visit him one Day, as I
often used to do, for before his Love-Fit he was wont to be very good Company,
and would make as free with his Deformity as any Body else would do; but I
found him now in such a Condition that I began to pity him. I used all the
Arguments I was capable of to bring him to Reason, but it was the same thing as
to stem a Torrent. At last I called to Mind this Elixir, which I had never
tried before this Occasion; I was pretty well convinced of its Virtue from what
I saw it was composed of, though the chief Ingredient is calcined Gold.

This wonderful Arcanum was found out by an Uncle of mine that had studied the
Secrets of Nature sixty Years. When he was dying he called me to him, and gave
it me in Writing, with the most sacred Conjuration that I should never reveal
it, nor cause it to be wrote till I thought my last Hour near, and to destroy
that which he gave me in ten Days, for fear it should be found by Accident, and
that ten Days would be sufficient to imprint it in my Memory; I give it into
your Hands, said my dying Uncle, because I find thy Understanding exceeds thy
Years, and thy Aversion for Women will never let thee make an ill Use of the
valuable Secret; and further added, that the Charge would deter me from doing
it upon any slight Occasion. I took it from him with a sacred Promise not to
disclos^ it, till on my Deathbed; for if my Uncle had recovered I must have
delivered it up to him again: But he expired in half an Hour.

I so far pitied the old Gentleman (and also having a Desire to try the
Experiment) that I told him I had it in my Power to make the Lady as fond of
him as Love could wish, if he would go to the Charge. He told me he did not
value the Expense, but he had no Faith in Charms. I convinced him at last, went
to work, and accomplished my Affair. The Quantity I made would serve a hundred
Years, and I had a Bottle in my Trunk when I was trepanned aboard, which if you
had had the good Fortune to have taken, would have saved you Time, and Money.

When I had brought my old Gentleman a Bottle of my Stuff, he seemed even then
to have little Faith in it; but I bad him have Patience till the Trial. All he
had to do was to convey about forty Drops in a Glass of White Wind fasting.
That, said he to me, will be a difficult thing, for I know she hates me,
neither will she stay in the Company where I am. However I told him I would do
my Endeavor to find an Opportunity: So I ordered him to keep a small Bottle in
his Breeches Pocket, (for it must be warmed naturally with the Heat of the
Person's Body that is to give it.) And in two or three Days I prevailed upon a
Relation of mine to invite the Lady to drink Tea with her: I acquainted my old
Lover that he should come in as by Accident, and bring a Pint of White Wind as
a Taste of a Parcel he was to dispose of. Every Thing happened as desired; the
old Gentleman came in, and got an Opportunity of conveying some of the Drops
into a Glass of Wine, and I had the Satisfaction of seeing her drink it. This
passed off, and we parted: But the poor Woman in less than ten Days was
distractedly in Love with the old Gentleman, who took his Opportunity, enjoyed
her, and after despised her.

Now the Nature of this Elixir is, that if the Dose is not renewed every time
the Moon is in the full, the Object beloved will sink into dull Indifference
again.

My Captain told me he thought I might have made my Fortune by such a Secret. I
replied I had forgot to tell him that my Uncle made that one of his Articles,
that I should never sell a Drop of it, and I assured him I would always keep my
Promise.

Our Story brought us to Town, and I was very much pleased, for I was both
tired in inventing Lies to amuse him, and riding after the Moorish manner, with
one's Knees almost to one's Mouth; and there is no altering the Stirrups.

We alighted at the Captain's House; he sent about the Town, and in an Hour
bought a complete Still. He went with me to the Jew's that disposed of Drugs,
and by good Fortune, and a good Memory, I remembered the Names of a great many
Sorts. I laid out some Money then, and told him I should want a great many
other Sorts, and larger Quantities. Of this Jew I borrowed a Crucible (through
the Captain's Interest) to melt the Gold, as I told him. The things were
ordered immediately to the Country House, the Captain desired I would make no
Delay, so I returned, and got home just by Sunset. I immediately ran to my
Green-house to see if the Piece of Paper was there, but I found it was gone;
this pleased me.

I went to Bed and rose early in the Morning, and seemed to be very busy about
the Garden. I sent for my Eunuch out of the House, and told him what I had
undertaken for the Captain; but I farther added, if he did not now and then
give me his Company, attended with a Bottle of the Juice of the Grape, I could
not possibly go through with my Undertaking. He answered me, smiling, that he
had Orders from his Master not to disobey me in any thing. But, added I, I have
a harder Task than all this, for I am compelled to have some Discourse with the
Woman I am to work upon, to find out her Temper; for according to her
Disposition I am to add or diminish several of my Ingredients. Nothing could
have prevailed upon me, continued I, to have undertaken this hateful Task, but
the Hopes I have of Liberty; for that is the Agreement between the Captain and
me, if I succeed in my Design, which I am in no doubt of. I should be glad,
returned the Eunuch, you might meet with what you desire, yet I should be sorry
to lose your good Company. I shall with some Regret, answered I, part with you;
but Desire of Liberty, and indeed of revenging my self on my unkind Uncle,
which is natural to us Mortals, will make me as expeditious as I can in my
Work. I ordered him to let me have a Couple of Servants, to go with me into the
Fields that Night, to carry the Herbs I should gather; and he told me they
should attend me.

I now began to think of acquainting the Lady with some Part of my Design, and
therefore wrote her a Note to this Effect.

Madam,
I Hope to have the Honor of conversing with you without Fear, and even with
the Consent of your Tyrant. I have laid a Scheme for our Liberty, that with the
Blessing of God I hope will succeed. You Will smile when I tell you I am to
understand natural Magic: But I shall think nothing difficult, if in the End I
can serve one who may ever command

Yours.


In less than an Hour I saw the Ladies coming down the Walk: I ran immediately
up to my Peep-hole, and observed the Mistress of my Heart sauntring the same
Way she used to go. As Soon as I had discovered her in the Walks again, I ran
down, and found a Note in the room of mine; (at first I was uneasy, imagining
she had not taken mine away) which contained to this purpose.

I Am something revived at your short Sentence I found upon the Ground
Yesterday. I learnt your going to Town with the Captain by a Discourse between
Achmat and Mirza; for I understand the Morisco Tongue enough to pick out the
Sense of what they say: Yet I had not ventured to write, for fear my Note
should have miscarried, if I had not seen you talking to Mirza out of my
Window. Only consider my Time is very short, and if there is no other way to
avoid the Captain, I must fly to Death as my only Refuge. Think of it, and
Farewell. Let me have an Answer the soonest, for Doubt and Expectation are but
lingering Torments.

I wrote her the following Answer.

Madam,
I WILL write to you no more, and beg the Favor you would desist from giving
your self any farther Trouble. I will have the Pleasure of talking to you
openly tomorrow, and let you into the whole Scheme I have laid for our
Liberty. But let me beg you to be cheerful, though reserved in your Countenance
when we meet, for fear we should be observed.


She came to the old Place in an Hour after she had brought the last, with
another Note (as she told me afterward,) but reading mine, she did not leave
it behind her.

After my Eunuch and I had dined, I went into the neighboring Wood with two of
the Captain's Slaves that were Blacks: I loaded them with Herbs of several
Sorts, any thing I could lay my Hands on, and ordered them to carry 'em into
the Garden. I had taken Care to tie every particular Herb with a String, so
that there was no Danger of mixing: These I hung in Bundles upon the Branches
of several Trees in the Garden, and out we went again. In short, I gathered a
good Horse-load of different Sorts, and some I laid upon the Banks, and others
I covered with Earth, that it looked as if I was about Business. I could hardly
forbear smiling sometimes when alone, notwithstanding my Anxiety for the
Success of my Design, to think how soon I drew in the credulous Captain. Then I
began to be in a thousand Fears of his discovering my Intention to some of the
Moorish Physicians, for though generally ignorant, yet they would soon have found
I was but an Impostor.

While I was amidst my Fears the Captain arrived, whose sight gave me some
Trouble. He came up to me, looking about him at what I had done; Why this looks
like Work, said he. Yes Sir, said I, I am willing to begin, that I may make an
End the sooner: But Sir, I must entreat one Favor, that you would not impart
the Secret to any one of your Family but Mirza, nor to no one else upon any
Account whatsoever: If they seem inquisitive, tell 'em I am only distilling
some simple Waters for your Closet. I like your Advice, answered the Captain,
and will be sure to follow it: The Reason of my coming down now was to take my
Leave of you, for I design to set Sail tomorrow Morning early, for I am
informed of a rich Vessel that will be in our Latitude in ten Days, from a
Prisoner that is lately taken belonging to Spain: I cannot tell how long I shall
be out, but I hope by that time I come back, I shall find every thing in
readiness. Sir, I returned, I don't fear but to accomplish my Design before you
come back. Well, said he, do you think you shall want any Thing else? I told
him, nothing but now and then a Gallon of Sea Water. Well, said he, I shall
leave Mustapha behind me in Town, who shall obey you in whatever you shall
command. Well, said he, Farewell (and shook me by the Hand) I Will just go in and
give 'em a fresh Charge concerning you, and then to Town again. I was very glad
to hear him say so; and he was as good as his Word, for in half an hour he took
Horse: He shook his Hand at me as he went by me, and I heartily wished it might
be the last Time we might see one another; not as I could complain of my
Treatment, for he had used me very handsomely; and if it had not been in regard
to the Business of my Love, I should not have wished him ill.

Mirza came to me, and told me his Master had given 'em so strict a Charge to
observe my Directions, that if I had a mind to dispose of his Estate, 'twas his
own Fault, for we must not disobey you. Yes, answered I, if ever you find me
requiring any thing foreign to this Affair, I Will give you leave to deny me; but
there is one thing I must command you since I have the Power, and that is to
come and sup with me, and bring some of the Nectar along with you, for I am
really fatigued with stooping and walking in the Sun when I gathered those
Herbs. Well, returned Mirza, I believe I shall not find much Difficulty in
obeying your Commands; and I have one Favor to beg of you, which is, that you
will lay your Injunctions on Achmat, that he may partake. Said I, not today
Mirza, another time with all my Heart. Nay, replied Mirza, it is not out of
Love to Achmat that I desire it, but that he may be as deep in Sin as my self;
for if he should ever discover me, I cannot tell the Consequence. Well, returned
I, we'll find an Opportunity. The Hour of Supper being come, Mirza arrived with
a couple of Flasks. We eat and drank so heartily, that Mirza was incapable of
helping himself; but was so inebriated with Wine, that I began to repent of my
plying him so fast. I was forced to drag him, and lay him on my Bed. But how to
conceal it from Achmat was my greatest Care; for I did not doubt but he would
be wanted; and accordingly it so fell out. For about twelve a-clock at Night he
came, and knocked at my Door. I was up, and thinking of my Design. I opened the
Door, and understood by his Signs, that he wanted Mirza. I let him know by
Signs, that I had sent him to gather me some Herbs by Moonlight. He was
satisfied, and went back again. Now Mirza kept the Key of the Gate, so that my
Story was feazable enough.

About four a-clock in the Morning Mirza waked, but frighted out of his Wits to
find it Morning; though I soon composed him, by letting him understand how I had
managed Achmat. He returned me a thousand Thanks, and told me, he should never
be able to make me amends. I asked him, how I should order it to see this
Woman, for I could not go to Work till I had conversed with her: And yet by
Heaven and Paradise (said I) I shall be more concerned at the Interview, than
at any thing which ever happened to me; (and that was but Truth, for my Mind
was perplexed between Hope and Fear, Joy and Anxiety.) I pity you indeed, said
Mirza, and I wish I could any way ease you of the Trouble. Well, said I, then
let her come alone into the Garden, as I am sprinkling my Herbs by and by; for
I think one Woman is enough to plague a Man. Oh (said Mirza) all Men are not of
your Mind. But I Will leave you, and hope to find you in better Humor, when I
see you again.

I had ordered a Slave to bring me some Water, and a large Quantity of Salt, to
mix with it, only to amuse 'em. With this I sprinkled the Herbs I had gathered,
and I was very busy about nothing.

I saw presently after the Idol of my Soul, and Mirza running before her. When
he was near enough to me to be heard, he said, I must beg you to excuse my
waiting on you for a little while; for my not being in the House last Night, as
usual, has let my Business so increase upon my Hands, that I must make use of
all Opportunities to regain lost Time. I told him, I would not be his
Hindrance, but was very sorry I could not have his Presence upon this Occasion;
for I should be in a very great Dilemma. He made me no Answer (being the Lady
was within hearing) but returned into the House.

As Soon as the Coast was clear, I accosted her with a great deal of Timerity.
Madam, said I, the happy Time is come, that I may tell you, without Fear or
Danger, how much you may command me. Sir, (returned she) I am convinced of your
sincere Desire to serve me; and as I have wrote to you, in one of my Notes, if
Heaven prospers our Wishes, and we arrive safely in England, I hope it will be
in my Power to reward you. Madam, (said I) the Success will amply reward me for
all my Trouble; and as one Climate gave us Birth, it is my Duty to do all I can
to serve you, if I had no other Motive. But if you please, let us consult, now
we have Time by the Forelock, how we shall order our Affairs. Sir, replied the
Lady, I am convinced your Understanding wants not to be instructed; and if you
please, I Will be rull'd by you in every thing. Madam, (said I) have you any
Objection to be disguised in the Habit of a Man? for (added I) we may so
accomplish our Liberty with more ease. I have no Objection to it, answered the
Lady; but how will you procure it? Please to leave that to me (I returned) and
in less than ten Days I hope we shall be out of Danger. I then informed her of
the Scheme I had laid, which she mightily approved; and told me she thought my
Understanding outwent my Years. I told her some Accidents in Life new edged our
Thoughts, and if we succeeded, the Inspiration came from her. I observed she
blushed at my Discourse, yet did not look as if she took ll what I had said.
But I was much concerned to see her change the Discourse. I did not think ^t
proper to declare my self any further, hoping when I had affected her Liberty,
Gratitude would befriend me in her Heart. I observed, by her Conversation, she
had a large share of Understanding, and a happy turn of Wit. In short, this
^nterview had fixed my Heart entirely hers. I had ^everal times thought of
inquiring into her Forune, and how she was brought into her unhappy Slavery,
but desisted, till we had more Lei^ure. She told me, she feared we should make
^ur Conversation too long; not said she (with a Look that shot through my
Heart) as I am oppressed with your Company, but for fear we may be observed. I
told her, I believed we should not have many more Opportunities; therefore I
begged her to be ready in a few Days, to leave this hateful Place. She answered
me, that she would wait with some Impatience my Commands, and any Hour should
find her in Readiness. She farther added, that she wished she might be as
ready, and as willing, at her last Call. I begged her to cast off all
melancholy Thoughts, and trust to Providence. Upon which we parted; with this
her Answer, that she was ever resigned to the Will of Heaven; and whatever
should happen, she would do her Endeavor to make her self easy, even if it was
the Miscarriage of our Design.

When she was gone, I soon found the Sight of her increased my Passion (if it
was possible for Love like mine to suffer Augmentation.) But it was Love alone
that worked Miracles of old; it was Love that roused me from supine Slavery;
for I must own once more, if it had not been for this fated Passion, I should
never have attempted any thing to regain my Liberty. But even my Love slumber'd
now and then, that industrious Diligence might wake, and I was resolved to put
the Design in Execution with all the Expedition imaginable, for fear of
Accidents. I went on amusing the House, with Variety of Works for my
Preparation; and I was continually ordering the Slaves to Town* for one thing
or other, to strengthen their Opinion.

Mirza came to me soon after. At his Approach* I did my endeavor to put on a
Countenance with little satissaction of Mind, but I am apt to believe I did it
but aukwardly. For as the Face is the Index of the Mind, I am of Opinion, a
Person of nice Judgment and Observation may discover a false Passion, with as
much ease, as a Jeweller would distinguish the different Species of Stones (if
we may call them so.) Well, said Mirza, your fiery Trial is over; but I
perceive by your Countenance, your Chagrine would willingly wear off, if you would
but suffer it. Why truly, said I, I have two different Passions struggling in my
Mind, that is, Joy and Grief. I am pleased to think I shall succeed in the
Affair I have undertaken; and yet grieved that I must be compelled to suffer
the Torment I endure to help the Operation. Consider the Reward (replied Mirza)
that is to follow. I changed the Discourse, that I might not be put to the
Trouble to speak against my Conscience any longer. I told him I should be
obliged to go to Town for Salt Water out of the Sea, and other Necessaries,
that I should stay for. Why, replied Mirza, you may send for Salt Water,
without being at the Trouble of going your self. I told him I was obliged to go
in Person, because I was to take it out of the Sea, when the Sun was in a
particular Altitude. Nay, returned Mirza, I am only concerned upon my own
Account, for I have engaged Achmat to dine with you today, with a great deal
of Trouble. Well, returned I, I will not disappoint you. I Will stay one Day
longer to oblige you. He returned me many Thanks for my Condescension, and went
into the House to prepare Things accordingly.

All the while he was absent, I was contriving my Scheme. When Dinner was
ready, Mirza brought it in, accompanied with Achmat. He had taken Care at
several Times to bring Wine, and had placed it in a Vault in the Green-house.
Achmat made his Moorish Honors, and we all sat down. Mirza begged I would call
the Wine a Cordial, that the Captain had given me. But I might have called it
what Name I would, for Achmat did not understand me; for Mirza was my
Interpreter, and with much Persuasion we prevailed upon him to taste it. But
when he had drank one Glass, he seemed to like it mightily, and soon asked for
another; and in short, plied his Hand to his Head so often, that he was obliged
to get up, and played such Pranks, danced and sung, and rolled about, that it
put us in a Fright, for fear some one should hear the Noise he made. Which to
remedy, I made him drink more, till at last he dropped down, and fell asleep. We
laid him upon my Bed, and did not intend to disturb him.

I told Mirza, now we had accomplished this great Affair, I had a mind to go to
Town even then, for the Sun shone, and perhaps it might not the next Day, and I
was willing to take the first favorable Opportunity. He told me, what I
pleased now the Jobb was done. Accordingly Horses and Slaves were provided me,
and away I went for Sallee. When I came to Town I found Mustapha at home, who
congratulated me with the Favor I had received from his Master, and farther
added, that he had given him full Charge to obey me in whatever I should
command. I told him I should want his Assistance immediately with a small Boat,
only he and I, and I begged him to take his Quadrant with him, for I should
want his Art a little. We took the Boat he had provided me, and rowed out of
the Bay till we came to a small Promontory, where I desired him to take the
Elevation of the Pole. When he had so done, we lav'd Water into a Vessel we
brought for that purpose, and went home again. From thence I went to the Jew's,
and begged he would furnish me with a Moorish Habit for my present Wear; for
the People of the Country do so stare at me, said I, being in a different Dress
from them, that it makes me ashamed. He provided me with a very handsome one,
which I had packed up carefully, that no one should observe what it was. I
bought several Trifles of him that I had no occasion for, and at several Times
other rich Habits; but one thing particularly that I hoped I should want, which
was a Pint of liquid Laudanum.

I went to Mustapha, and ordered my things to be got ready: While that was
doing, I endeavored to sound him to know whether he had any Thoughts about his
Liberty, for I remembered at our first Meeting he declared himself, as I
thought, very frankly: But in all his Discourse now, I found him of a wavering
uncertain Temper, and therefore I thought it the wisest way to keep my Design
to my self, and go another way to work. I took my leave of him, and went home.
I unloaded my Horses, and took particular Care of my Bundle of Things. My Salt
Water I put into shallow Pans in the Sun, which in a Day's time produced small
Quantities of Salt. I did not want to try Experiments, yet I was pleased to see
the Operations.

I began to set my Still on Work the next Day, but was soon interrupted in my
Progress by the hasty Arrival of Mirza. Said he, we have brought a fine House
upon our Heads; yonder is Achmat will not be contented without more of the Francks
Cordial [the Moors call all Europeans Francks.] I asked him how he ordered him
when he waked, after I had left 'em; he told me, he was so greedy after the
precious Liquor, that he drained the empty Bottles; and he believed if Mahomet
himself had made him a Visit, and Achmat had got a Bottle to his Nose, he would
not have bid him welcome till he had seen the Bottom. Well, said I, you know
the Liquor is not mine, but I Will stand by you in the Consumption of it. Well,
if you please then, said Mirza, we'll trouble you with our Company tonight.
With all my Heart, said I; so we agreed to sup together. Mirza farther added,
that the Ladies had a mind to see my Still at work. I told him they might do as
they thought fit, but I would get out of the Way; and accordingly he went to
fetch them. The Moorish Women came down the Walk in a hasty manner to observe
it, but the English Lady came alone as usual. I had got on the other Side of
the Laurel Trees, and took Care to appear in her Sight. As Soon as she saw me,
she cautiously approached me, and told me softly she wanted to have a little
Talk with me. I answered her, we had an Opportunity very favorable; and then
let her know how the other Women were employed, (beside we had the Laurel Walk
between us, and I was out of Sight from every Body else.) She told me she had
something particular to mention to me; said she, we shall certainly want Money
to accommodate us with many Necessaries in our dangerous Voyage. I told her
what Money I had saved for our Design, but that we should certainly have
Occasion for more, if we were obliged to go for Spain. That was one of the
Reasons, said she, why I wanted to confer with you: It is in my Power to
procure a considerable Sum, and though it is not so much as I have lost by the
Captain, yet I have even a Scruple to take clandestinely from him what I may
say is my own justly. I soon removed her Scruples, and then she farther told
me, what was in her Power to take was chiefly in Jewels, which would be better
for Concealment and Carriage than Money. By this time she observed the other
Ladies coming toward her, which she informed me of; upon that I took my leave,
and absconded. When they were gone off the Walks, Mirza came to me to release
me, as he called it, and told me the Ladies were mighty well pleased with the
View of my Work and Materials. I told him, I hoped they would not give me that
Trouble often: He answered, he would take Care for the future.

Now the Crisis of my Project was very near. I went to Town the next Day, and
took Mustapha for more Water; and farther added, I should want him a Night or
two hence to procure Water by Moonlight. He wondered at my Proceeding, but his
Master had told him that I was something very extraordinary, and suspected me
of Magic; but he also informed him that I was using my Art for his Benefit. I
told him I had several Materials to wash in the Sea Water in the Full of the
Moon (which was at that time) and then I should give him no farther Trouble.
From thence I went to my Jew's again, and privately procured several sorts of
dried Provisions, as Neats Tongues, Biskets, dried Fish, Wine, and a small
Puncheon of Water, and several other Necessaries, all to be ready at a Moment's
Warning.

When I had provided every thing, I went home again, and got an Opportunity the
same Day to speak with my Mistress. I desired she would be ready about twelve
a-clock at Night, with every thing she had a mind to take with her. She told me
she could not tell how to escape the Vigilance of the Eunuchs, for, said she,
they lock me up every Night when they go to Bed; nay, every Day, when they are
not with me. I desired her to leave that to me. I invited Mirza and Achmat to
sup with me that Night, for I told 'em I was obliged to sit up to watch my
Work, being it was coming to a Head, and that I was to go to Town before Day.
They complied with my Request with a great deal of Joy; and the Hour drawing
near, they locked up the Doors of the House, and came with a great deal of
Contentment in their Looks. We sat down, and I plied them with Wine till they
thought they had enough. For the finishing Stroke I desired 'em to drink one
Cup of a Liquor of my own distilling, which they soon complied with. I went and
fetched a Bottle of Brandy that I had procured on purpose, in which I had
conveyed a large Quantity of Laudanum, to be ready for this Occasion. I gave
'em each a good large Cup, which they swallowed, but did not very well like the
Taste. I told them I had distilled that Liquor on purpose to keep the Fumes of
the Wine (or Cordial, as Achmat would have it) out of the Head. They were very
well pleased if it would have that Effect, yet desired another Glass of Wine to
put the Taste out of their Mouths, which I complied with. The Liquor soon had
its desired Effect, and a profound Sleep locked up all their Senses. I with
some Fear took the Keys out of Achmat's Pocket, and went directly to the House,
and at last found the right Key that opened the Place where my Treasure was
reposed. Though she found her self at Liberty, yet she shook with timorous
Apprehensions. I encouraged her all I could, and brought her the Disguise which
I had provided for her. While she was getting ready, I retired out of Decency,
and got out my Horses, and an Italian Slave, whom I had two or three times
taken to Town with me: He understood a little French, and I had observed
something in his Countenance that spoke him worthy of a better Fate. I had not
once mentioned to him any thing of my Project, for fear of any Accident, but I
had ordered him to be ready to go with me that Night. When I came back, I found
my Mistress ready, and something impatient. I informed her she must submit to
another Disguise. She asked me what that was: I took out a Paper of Ombre, and
told her she must permit me to rub it over her Face and Hands; which I did: But
the Pleasure of touching her Flesh in that gentle manner perfectly put me in an
Ecstasy, which she observed, for I could not help softly squeezing her Hand.
She did not seem displeased at my Transport, but yet I thought the Occasion she
had to make Use of me made her bear with me. As Soon as we were ready we went
out, but I first locked the Doors and left 'em as I found 'em. My Mind was
confused between Hope, Fear, Joy, and Terror, and I did not doubt but the Lady
was in a worse Condition; but all my Task was to comfort her. When I had helped
her up on Horseback, I called for the Italian Slave, and we both mounted, for I
would not let him walk on Foot as usual.

When we were got safe from the House, I began to ask the Italian Slave several
Questions, as where he was born, how long he had been a Slave, and so forth. I
found by his Answers that he had no Hopes of Liberty, for he had sent several
Letters to his Friends in Italy, and never could receive any Answer. Then I
began to come nearer the matter, and gave him some Hint of our Design, but with
this Addition, even Death should not deter me from the Execution. He had hardly
Patience to hear me out, but begged he might share the same Fate with me, and
if he got his Liberty through my Means, he should never forget the Obligation,
but I might be Master of that Life I should be the Means of saving; for, added
he, to live in Slavery is but to be always dying the worst of Deaths. I soon
found by his manner of expressing himself that he was sincere in what he said.
At last I told him all my Design; which he mightily approved of, and said every
thing was so well concerted, that with the Blessing of God it could not
miscarry.

When we arrived at the Captain's Town House, we found Mustapha waiting for me.
I had considered we could not do without him, yet I would not venture to
mention our Escape, till we had him safe upon the Sea. I ordered every thing
into the Boat, and to hide my disguised Lady, I told Mustapha that it was a
young Gentleman that had been bit by a mad Dog, and I had brought him to dip
him in the Sea, by the Desire of his Friends that lived in the Neighborhood in
the Country, which was allowed to be the only Cure.

When we had gained the main Sea, I began to open my Design to Mustapha, but
was something surpised to hear him call out for Help. I immediately drew a
Pistol out of my Pocket (for I had procured several Pair) held it to his
Breast, and threatened him with Death that Moment, if he offered to open his
Mouth: I added, that we had gone too far to stop now; and I believe, if he had
made any Resistance, I should certainly have dispatched him. When he found
Resistance would signify nothing, he sat him down and wept bitterly. I was
really sorry to see him so much afflicted, and comforted him all I could; and,
to encourage him, I told him, as soon as we arrived at Magazan, (a strong Port
belonging to the Portuguese upon the Afric Coast) where I had designed to steer
our Course, he should not only have his Liberty, but I would reward him with
fifty Pistoles for the Pains he should be at. I further added, I would not have
given him this Trouble, if I could have found a possibility of doing without
him. He seemed to be satisfied, and promised us all the Help he could. I told
him we would make the best of our way to Magazan, not being above twenty
Leagues South of Sallee: He seemed very much pleased our Voyage was to be so
short, for the Wind was fair, and we hoped to arrive at Magazan in two Days at
the farthest. I had provided every thing that was necessary for a much longer
Voyage, and when we had directed our Course, and were settled in our Way, I
desired the Lady to take some Refreshment, and compose her unsettled Thoughts*
for we were now out of all manner of Danger. I said this only to comfort her,
for I was even in fear of the Captain's Ship, or some other Moorish Vessel,
meeting us by Chance; and the Italian put into my Head another Fear, that as I
had declared I was never at Magazan, nor did not know where it was situated, he
was not assured but Mustapha might steer his Course to some Place that was
possessed by the Moors. I gave Mustapha a Hint of it, with a Promise of a quick
Dispatch if he betrayed us: But he assured me there was never another Port
between that and Magazan. After we had refreshed our selves, I entreated the
Lady to acquaint us how she came into the Power of the Captain. Now we are
something at Ease, said she obligingly, I shall inform you with Pleasure.

THE HISTORY OF Mrs. VILLARS.
MY Father's Name was Villars, an eminent Merchant of the City of Bristol. My
Mother died when I was very young, so that I could never know the Loss of her.
The Care of my Father atton'd for the Want of my Mother: He gave me all the
Education that was proper to our Sex; but before I was Sixteen my Father died.
The Grief and Sorrow I felt for his Death, was not recompensed by an Estate of
two thousand Pounds a Year, which he left entirely at my own Disposal; besides
several valuable Jewels of my Mother's. My Fortune, I suppose, brought me many
Admirers; but as I was a Stranger to Love, I had no Inclination to marry: Yet
being pestered so much with their Company and Courtship, I retired to a Country
House near the Sea Side; and as I did not care to see any of my Suitors, so
whenever they came I always left Word I was gone abroad, or out of Order; and
in a little time I got clear of their Impertinence.

I had the Misfortune to be a Woman of Business, though young; for my Father had
several Vessels at Sea. The Captain of one of the Ships that traded to Turkey
brought me a Bill of Lading, and I happened to please him, (though more than I
knew till afterward.) In short, he fell desperately in Love with me, but
hearing my Aversion to Matrimony, never declared his Passion to me; yet by
Bribes and Presents gained over to his Interest a Maid that lived with me, who
for a hundred Pound had placed him in a Closet in my Bedchamber. I came and
undressed my self as Usual, and went to Rest: But I had not been long laid ere
I found a Person pulling down the Clothes, and attempting to come to Bed to me.
I was prodigiously surpised and frightened, as any one would imagine: I called
for Help, but no one came to my Assistance; for the Maid had taken Care of
that. I got out of Bed with much ado, and attempted to open the Door, but found
I was locked in. I used Entreaties to the Wretch (who was disguised in such a
manner that I could not know him, for he had got a Mask on) but all to no
purpose: He seized me, and I was so faint with Struggling, that he was very
near accomplishing his barbarous Design, when my other Closet Door flew open,
(for I had one at each End of the Room) and there came out another Man
disguised. My Fear could not be well increased; but I was in such a Terror that
I did not well know whether I was really alive.

The Person who came out last seized immediately on the other, who let me go to
defend himself. I ran to the Door, and Fear adding to my Strength, I burst it
open; but how, or which way, I cannot remember. I ran to the Maid's Chamber,
and the Noise and Confusion we were in alarmed the Men Servants. I had slipped on
a Gown; and when I had got all the Men together, I told 'em the Reason of this
Alarm. They immediately armed themselves, and ran up to my Chamber, but the
Persons were both gone. In searching the Room we found a Piece of a Mask on the
Ground, and a Handkerchief marked L. K. with Stains of Blood in several Parts
of the Room. We could not imagine who they were; and I was so very much
confused and frightened, that I did not examine the Bottom of it that Night,
but went to Bed in another Room very ill with the Fright; though not before I
had given Order to two of my Men Servants to watch at my Chamber Door.

I searched the Closets of that other Room, and under the Bed, before I would
venture. And it being a Room where my Father used to lie, it had a Bar on the
Inside, so I and my Maid went to Bed. Notwithstanding my Fatigue, Frights and
Fears, I fell asleep, and when I woke in the Morning, found my self very well.
I began then to think reasonably of my last Night's Adventure, and easily
judged, that one or both of my Maids must be in the Confederacy, for my Door
never used to be locked on the Outside before. I sent for all my Servants up,
Men and Maids, and related to 'em the Night's Adventure. But they brought me
Word, that Mrs. Susan was not to be found. I sent to examine her Room, but I
was informed all her things were gone. We all concluded, that she was the
Occasion of the last Night's Plot. I did not think fit to send after her,
rejoicing I had escaped such a base Conspiracy; till going up into my own
Chamber, I found a Diamond Necklace, a Ring, my Gold Watch, and about sixty
Guineas in Money taken away; my Escritore broke open, and a Bill of five
hundred Pounds that was due, taken away. I immediately sent to Bristol to stop
Payment, but was told, that my Maid had come, as from me, for the Money, and
had received it several Hours before. We made the strictest Search we could for
her, but all to no Purpose. So I gave it all for lost. Six Weeks passed on, and
no News concerning my Maid. One Morning as I was walking in my Garden, a Sailor
brought me a Letter, which was to this Purpose.

Madam,
I Heartily repent of my Infidelity to you. When I committed that base Action,
I took Shelter on Board of a Ship that belongs to my Brother, and now lies
about six Miles off; where the Bearer will conduct your Ladyship, if you will
be so good to come away immediately. The Reason of my Repentance, and Sorrow
(though a sincere one) is at the Approach of Death, by the Accident of a Fall
down the Hold of the Ship, where I broke my left Leg, and fractur'd my Scull,
so that I have been senseless for two Days. But God granting me my Senses again
(though with the Information that I cannot live four and twenty Hours) has,
through his Mercy, convino'd me, that to expect Pardon from him, is to restore
what is yours, with a sincere Confession of the fatal Night's Adventure, that
corrupted my Honesty, and will be the Cause of my Death. And farther, if Heaven
will grant me the Blessing of seeing you, I may put you in a Way to prevent
something of Ill that may happen to you.

Your Repenting Servant, Susan Prichard.
P. S. I beg you to keep it Private; and to amuse your Servants that you bring
with you, you may tell 'em, you are going on Board the Turkey Ship, to see the
Present the Turkey Merchants are sending to the Emperor of Constantinople. The
Bearer will conduct you.




Now I had heard of one of the Turkey Fleet, that was obliged to put into the
Road by a violent Storm: And that it had a Sedan, made with Looking-glass, of a
very curious Workmanship, designed for a Present to the Turkish Emperor. I
asked the Sailor several Questions concerning the Letter, and he answered me
bluntly, he could not tell any thing about it; but that there was a young
Woman, who had fell down their Hold, and had almost killed her self; and that
they did not expect she could ever recover. I resolved to go along with him,
but to take two Men Servants and a Maid with me. I walked to the Waterside,
which was about a quarter of a Mile from my House, and there I found a Ship's
Boat with eight Oars, and very handsome. I stepped into it, with my Servants,
without any Hesitation, and put off. In about an Hour and a half we came along
side of the Vessel, they manned Side for me, and I was handed up, and led into
the Cabin, where I found my Maid upon a Pallat-Bed in one Corner of it. As Soon
as she saw me, she attempted to rise, but seemed not to have Strength enough,
and fell down again. I desired she would not put her self to any Pain, but
compose her Thoughts, that she might be the better able to inform me of what
she had promised me in her Letter. O! Madam, she cried (with Hesitations,
Sighs, and ready to faint every Moment) you do not know what I feel at the
Sight of you. You bring into my Remembrance the Transaction of that fearful
Night, but I hope your Goodness will forgive me. I shall put into your Hands
what I have wickedly robbed you of; and since I am going out of this World, I
am assured your Goodnature will prevail for my Pardon. I told her I forgave
her freely, and I hoped Heaven would do so too. She thanked me, but said, she
found her self so Ill, that she entreated leave to rest from speaking a Minute
or two, to gather a little Breath.

I waited with some Impatience, but she remained so long silent, that I really
thought she was expired. Upon that Supposition, I called to her, and she
answered me but faintly. Well, Madam said she, as I find you impatient to know
what I have promised you, I will tell you, as well as I am able.

Captain Bourn had for many Months a great Passion for you, but finding you
averse to Matrimony, he tampered with me, and offered me such large Sums of
Money, that beat down all my guard of Honesty, and overcame it quite. He gave
me a hundred Pounds, besides other valuable Presents, to admit him into your
Closet, before you went to-bed, which accordingly (dazzled with the luster of
the Gold) I did. You know what followed, and if he had not been prevented by
the sudden Appearance of another Person out of the other Closet, would have
compassed his Design. Said I (eagerly) pray do you know who the other Person
was? Yes Madam, returned the Wench, it was Mr. Lawrence Kendrick, your former
Suitor and Guardian, conveyed there for the same base Intent by your Ladyship's
Woman. How! cried I amazed, are you assured of that? Madam (pursued she) when
you got out of the Door, Mr. Kendrick seized upon Mr. Bourn, and they struggled
together some time; but Mr. Kendrik's Mask falling off, Captain Bourn knowing
him, cried, Is it you! In short, they soon came to an Ecclaircisement, and went
down Stairs unperceived by any of us in the Hurry. Where he declared to the
Captain, that he had prevailed upon Mrs. Ellis (your Woman) for a good Sum of
Money, to convey him into the Closet, which she did unperceived of any. Thus,
(said I) may ill Intentions be ever frustrated.

When she had finished, she begged me to have a little more Patience, while she
got a little more Strength, and she would restore me my Money and Jewels. I was
unwilling to wait long, yet thought fifteen hundred Pounds too much to lose;
for my Necklace, Ring, and Watch, were valued by my Father at a thousand
Pounds. I believe I had been full three Hours on Board, and wanted to be at
Home again; and after she had kept silent some time, I made bold to disturb her
once more. I called to her, and told her, I had a great Way to go, and I was
afraid of catching cold. She begged I would ring a Bell that hung by my Hand,
which I did, and the Sailor came in that brought me the Letter. Pray, said the
Maid, is my Brother ready to come in? Yes, answered he, and has been on Board
this half Hour. It Is very well, said she. Upon that she raised her Hand, and
unpinn'd a Shutter, that fell down, and let Light enough into the Cabin, which
was dark before; but I thought her Illness was the Reason of that. But to my
eternal Amazement I saw her rise from the Palate, as well as ever I saw her in
my Life. Before I had Power to speak, Captain Bourn entered. I could not
presently dive into this Mystery. I hope Captain (said I, at last) that you
repent of your rash and bold Attempt. Yes Madam, (answered he) that I did not
succeed in it, but I hope I have it now in my Power to finish my Design. I asked
him what he meant. He told me I should soon be informed, and if I would not
consent to his Embraces, he would certainly ravish me that very Night. Upon
this Treatment, I began to call for my Servants; but the faithless Susan told
me they were taken care of, and safe ashore. Yes Madam, returned the Captain,
they are twelve Miles behind us by this Time; and desired I would look out of
the Cabin Window, which they had just before opened. I cast my Eyes behind me;
and too soon perceived that we were a considerable Distance from the Land. I
did not look long, for the Sight took away my Senses, and I fell down in a
Swoon, and when I came to my self it was far in Night; but I was so faint and
ill, that my feeble Limbs would not support my Body. Grief attacked me so
violently, that it was thought by every body it would soon overcome me. By next
Morning a strong Fever seized me, and all that I remembered for six Weeks was,
that I was put to Bed, with the Wretch that betrayed me to attend me. But the
Condition I was in really wrought upon her, and produced a true Conversion. She
lamented more than I; and cursed her self a thousand times.

When I had recovered my Senses, I was wore away to a Skeleton. And sure never
any one in my Condition found any Relief but Death. But it pleased the Divine
Being to work another Miracle, and insensibly restore me to my former health of
Body, but a Mind involved in the most cruel Torture past Imagination.

When I found the Maid's Repentance real, I freely forgave her. The Captain in
all this Time had never come near me, but only to enquire after my Health, as
Susan informed me. But when he perceived I had regained my former Health and
Beauty, (as he called it) I was tormented with his beastly Addresses. He told
me, if I would consent to marry him, and forgive the Crime he was guilty of, he
would immediately steer for England, which he could reach in a few Days. I
considered I was in a Wretch's Power, who, by what he had done already, would
stick at nothing to gain his Ends; I therefore resolved to flatter him, by the
Advice of my Maid; who, notwithstanding she had brought me into these
Distresses, I had taken into my former Favor. In one of his troublesome
Visits, I told him, if he would immediately restore me to my Liberty, I would
upon the Instant make him my Husband, when we could procure a proper Person to
tie the Knot. He answered me, that the only way to secure me to him, was to
have Possession of my Body beforehand; and, continued he, if you think the
Action criminal, I Will soon cure your Conscience, by the License of the Church.
For, said he, if you intend what you propose, you will easily comply; and
nothing else will convince me of your Sincerity. I Will give you one Day to
consider on it; but, (continued the Wretch) if you refuse to submit by fair
Means, I tomorrow by Force will enjoy you. So I leave you to consider on it;
and saying this, left us in the Cabin. I had desired Susan to conceal our
Reconcilement from the Captain, which she artfully had done; and in his
Discourse, would often throw in a Word or two in his behalf.

When we were alone, I gave my self over to my Sorrows, and thought of nothing
for several Hours but my unhappy Circumstances. We both continued silent, a
considerable time. Nor indeed had I Power to speak, though Heaven had indu'd me
with that Fortitude, that I had resolved sooner to die, than to submit to his
cursed Proposals. I told Susan, that I had determined to put an end to all my
Sorrows by Death; and when that fatal Hour arrived of his limited Time, I
would plung a Knife, I had concealed for that Design, into my Bosom. This
Resolution once more renewed our Griefs, and we mingled Tears together. We wept
so much, that the Fountains of our Eyes were dry, and we again remained silent.
At last Susan broke it, with a Speech to this Purpose.

Madam, in the Confusion of my Thoughts, I have chose out one that has some
Probability of Success; but it will at least convince you of my Repentance, and
the Desire I have to restore you that Peace I have barbarously broke. The
Captain yet thinks me in his Interest, and if we can contrive it, I Will submit
to his loathed Embraces in your Room, which shall be managed in this Manner.
(You shall treat with him upon it tomorrow Morning) The Articles shall be
these; First, that he come in the Dark, and stay no longer than one Hour with
you; and last, that he shall not repeat your Familiarity, till you are joined
by the Priest.

I must confess, this Proposal gave me a dawn of Hope; and if we could but
succeed in it, I should not fear his farther Passion, when we were landed. For I
knew it was easy to find Protection, when once on Shore in England, and I
thought the Contrivance feazible enough; for we were much of the same Age, and
no perceived Difference in our Make, at least in the Dark.

She left it to me to manage: And I resolved to put on a more composed
Countenance at the Captain's next Visit, which was soon after, though he had
given me longer Time to consider. When he came in, he begged my Pardon for
interrupting me, but he came to make me a Present, he said, and put a little
Box in my Hand, desiring I would open it, which I did, where I found my Jewels
and Money. I restore you that, Madam, (continued he) and would not willingly be
obliged to you for any thing but your Person; and even all your Fortune shall
be at your own Disposal, and the Moment you consent to my Desires, I Will deliver
you a Paper that shall oblige me to sign whatever Terms you shall think fit to
make me. I paused a short time, but indeed it was to think what my Tongue
should utter so foreign to my Heart.

Captain, said I, you take the only Way to gain your Point; and I must confess,
this Show of Generosity (though it is in your Power to force 'em from me again)
seems a little to lessen the ill Opinion I have Reason to bear against you: If
you will please to allow me one half Hour to think a little, I Will give you my
final Answer tonight. He seemed very much overjoyed at my Discourse, and
showed it in an extravagant unpolite manner, thanked me, and went out.

I did not want that time to prepare what I had to say, but I thought it was
better than to come into it on a sudden. The time expired, the Captain came in
with an expecting Face. I bad him sit down, which I found by his Countenance he
took as a good Prologue. Sir, said I, I have fully considered every thing, and
if you will comply with a few Articles, you shall have Possession of what you
desire tonight. Articles; Madam! I Will sign to a Blank (replied the Brute) if
you please. I told him they were only verbal ones: First, said I, I Will have no
Light in the Room; secondly, you shall stay with me but an Hour; and lastly,
never to expect any more Favors till we are lawfully married. Madam, returned
the Captain, you so overjoy me that I don't know where I am: I Will comply with
all your Articles, and you have made me the happiest of Mankind. He said a
great deal more fulsome Stuff, that was as nauseous to my Ears as a Plague Sore
to the Sight. He left us, with a Hope I would not long defer his Happiness. It
was well I was in a dark Corner of the Cabin; for had I been in the Light, he
would have perceived the Confusion in my Countenance.

The hated Hour drew near, and Susan with a sincere Grief, and Tears running
down her Cheeks, laid her self in the Captain's loathed Bed. I was really
grieved at the Sacrifice she was going to make me, for I was convinced she had
no loose Desires about her. The Captain entered in the Dark, and was as happy
as a false Imagination could make him. I must confess, I was in a thousand
Frights and Fears lest the Girl should have been discovered; but every thing
succeeded too well, and the Captain rose within his limited time, and went out.

As Soon as he was gone, the poor Creature got up from her guilty Scene. Well,
Madam, (said she, all drowned in Tears,) I hope I have convinced you (though to
my eternal Cost) of my Repentance and Sincerity; but I hope Heaven will pardon
me, and not lay the Crime to me or you, when fatal Necessity was the only
Cause. I gave her all the Comfort I was capable of, and told her I did not
think it impossible to oblige him to marry her, when we had him in our Power on
Shore, and that Formality would obliterate all melancholy Thoughts. How!
(replied Susan) No Madam! though I have done all this, yet it was only to serve
you; and before I would be his Wife, (or indeed any Man's Wife) I would submit
to the most servile Offices of Life to support it: And if the Captain knew how
we had deceived him, and would offer to marry me to atone for his Fault, I
could not consent, for I loath the very Thoughts of him. Well then, Susan, said
I, when we have overcome all Difficulties, and worn off the Remembrance of our
Sufferings, I will settle a Competency for Life, that shall put thee above all
Fear of Want. Madam, replied Susan, that is all I shall desire; and then I Will go
to some Corner of the World, live retired, and repent of all my past Crimes and
Follies. I told her she needed not do that, she might, notwithstanding what was
past, live with me. No, Madam, that can never be, returned Susan; for you must
of necessity, to clear your own Reputation, divulge the Secret, and then with
what Confidence shall I be able to look upon any one? I told her, it would be
esteemed as an Action wholly virtuous, without one Spot or Blemish. All I was
capable of saying could not alter her Resolution; but she persisted in retiring
from the World, and living recluse, and I desisted from speaking any more upon
the Subject.

It had been much happier for us both, if we had never entered upon the
Argument; for we had not remained silent a Moment, before the Captain entered,
with a Light in his Hand, and the utmost Fury in his Countenance. Thou Devil!
said he to Susan, and have thou betrayed me, Wretch! after what I have done for
thee? but I shall study some way to have ample Vengeance on thee: And for you,
Madam, I shall give you still the same Terms and Time I first proposed; but
that past, expect not the least Hope, for I will enjoy you, though the Moment
after Death should seize me. When he had done speaking, he went out: But it was
a considerable time ere we came out of our Surprise.

We were convinced that he had listened and overheard all our Discourse, though
we spoke but softly; and we feared to utter our Thoughts to one another, as
imagining he would overhear us still. But Susan at last broke out in these
Words; Good Heaven! I hope the Punishments I am bound to suffer will atone for
all my Offenses! If it will make my Peace with Thee, I Will undergo all the
Torments in the World in that blessed Hope! I had not Words to comfort her, for
the thoughts of my own Condition tied up my Tongue; but the Pain of Thinking,
nothing could exceed. I prayed to God to bring me out of this Misfortune, or
give me Force of Reason to suffer with Patience a Dissolution from this World.
When Susan heard me, she told me, she could see no Path to lead us through this
Labyrinth of Misfortunes, but through the Gate of Death; and, added she, since
we must die once, the sooner we leave this troublesome World, the sooner we
shall find Rest.

Death still bore to me a frosty Sound, however I soon resolved upon it; but the
manner of it was what most confounded me: At last we both thought of Drowning,
and had resolved, whenever the Captain came to accomplish his wicked Intent, to
throw our selves out of the Cabin Window. Will you so? said the Captain, (who
had overheard us again, for Grief had taken all Caution from us) but I Will soon
prevent that. He immediately took Hammer and Nails, and nailed the Shutters so
close that it was not in our weak Strength to undo them. After he was gone, we
spent the Night in Prayer; and just before the Morning dawned, we understood by
the rocking of the Ship, the Noise of the Sailors, and the Loudness of the
Wind, that we were in a prodigious Storm. This gave us Hopes that the Ship
would be cast away, and that God had heard our Prayers, and would not let us
lay violent Hands upon our selves. Nay, deceiving Hope was ready to enter our
Thoughts, that we might be cast away upon some Shore, and receive Assistance
when we least expected it. The Storm lasted the whole Day and part of the next
Night; but as it sensibly abated, so our Fears increased. The Captain gave us
another Visit: Well, said he, Madam, I hope you have had sufficient time to
consider of my Proposals, and I am now come for my final Answer. Said I, Heaven
has given you an Answer by raising the Storm; and if you have the least Notion
of a Divinity, you will find 'twas his Voice that spok to you in that Tempest, to
desist from such a base Attempt. Nay, Madam, if you imagine you can preach me
from my Design, preach on a God's Name. Wretch that thou art! said I, how can
thou mention that sacred Name, and yet have such Thoughts as He abhors? I
fancy, Madam, returned the Brute, your Ladyship feels the Influence of the
Moon, and for fear I should catch the Infection, I Will leave you for a while;
but with a Word by the by, If you don't consent the next time I come, by Hell!
(since you will not let me mention Heaven) I Will not only ravish you, but every
Sailor in the Ship shall do so too, if they think fit; and I believe they are
sharp enough set to fall too upon worse Food than I shall set before them.

He said a great many more gross things, that would only become his Mouth to
utter: And to convince you, Madam, that I will do what I say, said he, I shall
begin with Mrs. Susan: Come Mistress, said he to her, now I have had the first
Cut of you, I Will let my Sailors go to Dinner. With this he forced us both on
the Quarter Deck, and called all the Seamen about him: Here my Lads, said he, I
have but two dainty Bits, and I Will give you one among you, that you may not
think I am over greedy. The Sailors star'd upon one another, and did not well
know what he meant, till he told them in Terms plain enough, with Promises of
Reward to him that would prove the greatest Rogue. Susan fell upon her Knees,
and entreated them not to take Pattern from their barbarous Captain, but to
pity a poor unfortunate Woman, reduced to the fatal Necessity of living no
longer. Some of the Sailors made Sport with her Misery, while others began to
pity her. One blunt Fellow cried, Damn it! I love a Woman well enough, but
don't care to have her forced upon me: It Is like eating against one's Stomach.
Beside, said another, I suppose there is some Reason of the Captain's
Liberality, or he would not part with her. I observed one of them that stood at
some Distance, taking Notice of what was done, without seeming pleased. I
thought I knew his Face too, and he appeared above a common Sailor by his Looks
and Cleanliness. I had not till now appeared publicly. I was determined to
speak to him, and to crave his Assistance. As Soon as he saw me, he seemed
amazed, and cried, Bless me, Madam! how came you here? I told him I was
betrayed by the Captain. I was informed, said he, that he had two Ladies,
Passengers for Zant, but I little thought you were one of them, for I was not
on Board till an Hour after you arrived. I begged he would take me under his
Protection; which he swore with a great Oath he would, or the Captain should
cut his Throat. Madam, added he, I am Mate of this Vessel, put in by your
honorable Father; and had been Captain, if it had not been for the Tricks of
that Rascal; (pointing to the Captain.)

The Sailors were so divided between themselves, that they had not proceeded to
any Violence with Susan; and she remained leaning upon the Side of the Ship,
all drowned in Tears. The Captain had all this time been laughing at the
Disputes of the Sailors; but perceiving the Mate in Conference with me, came up
to him, and with a faucy Tone, asked him what Business he had with me. I have
no other Business, answered the Mate, but to protect her from your ill Usage.
You impertinent Coxcomb, cried the Captain, I Will teach you to intermeddle with
my Affairs; and upon saying this, he lifted up his Hand and struck him: But the
Mate soon returned his Blow with Interest, and knocked him down upon the Deck.
The Sailors came and parted 'em; but the Captain swore that Blow should cost
him his Life. He upon the Instant ran into the Cabin for some Instrument to
dispatch him, as was supposed; but the Mate followed him close, and, knowing
his violent Temper, barred the Door of the Cabin, so that the Captain remained
a Prisoner.

The Mate took from his own Cabin, which was near the Captain's, a Cutlass, and
put himself against the Door, and swore he would be the Death of him that first
attempted to release him; and bad none of them offer to stir, till they had
heard what he had to say.

The Sailors had cast off all Thoughts from Susan, to hear what the Mate could
say; who declared who I was, and by what Means I was betrayed on Board. When
the Sailors found I was their Mistress, and Owner of the Ship, they soon began
to repent of what they were going about, and declared they would serve me with
their Lives. When I found I had gained most of 'em on my Side, I told 'em my
Story at length, only concealing Susan's Affair with the Captain; and they
seemed all prodigiously amazed, and stood gaping upon me like so many Statues.

The Captain in the Cabin was all this time swearing, cursing, and making a
Noise at his Restraint. I told the Mate, if he thought fit, we would release
him. Yes Madam, if you please, said he, out of the Great Cabin, but we must
confine him somewhere else; well knowing his turbulent Spirit would never be
easy. I told him I would be guided by him, and if he pleased to accept of the
Command of the Vessel (if it was in my Power to give it him) it was at his
Service. He returned me a great many Thanks, and told me he would be very
faithful in his Commission. We released the Captain out of the Cabin, but as
soon as he came upon the Deck, he was seized, with a great deal of Difficulty,
Iron'd, and confined to another Cabin. He raged like a Madman at this
Treatment, but all to no Purpose. I told him he should want nothing but his
Liberty, neither would I prosecute him, as his Crimes deserved, when we arrived
in England.

I desired the Mate to make for Bristol with all the Expedition imaginable;
with a Promise that I would recompense every common Sailor with double the
Wages they expected for their Voyage. They all huzza'd at the News, and one and
all promised to serve me with their Lives. The Mate told me the Wind was
against us in our Course, but that he would ply it to Windward (as they call
it) in Expectation of its Changing. I asked him whereabouts we were, and he
told me, very near the Streights of Gibraltar, and should have been at Zant by
that time, but that they were hindered by contrary Winds, and drove back by the
late Storm. I told him how the Captain had deceived me, in telling me we were
not six Days from the English Coast.

Susan's Joy cannot be expressed at our happy Deliverance; and you may he
assured I was as well pleased as she was, though it did not appear outwardly so
much: Besides I considered the Mutabilty of the things of this World; and we
were soon taught, by Experience, the Uncertainty of humane Affairs; for before
the Evening we were chased by a Rover, who soon came up with us, and took us
after an obstinate Resistance; though we did not lose one Man, but the barbarous
Captain, who was killed in the Place of his Confinement, without being in the
Action.

The Captain of the Rover was the same we have now made our Escape from. He
never would tell me what became of Susan and the Crew. Madam, said Mustapha, I
can inform you: They and all the Crew were ransomed for a thousand Pound, and
their Ship given them again. They did their Endeavor to ransom you, but to no
Purpose, for they could never learn what was become of you.



Mrs. Villars thus ended her Relation; only added, that the Captain fell
desperately in Love with her, and would never hear of her Ransom; though he
treated her with Decency, allowing her every thing but Liberty; with the
convenience of a Study of Books, which the Captain had procured by his Piracy;
and ever left in her Closet, her Jewels, and other things of Value, that he had
taken out of the Ship.

WHEN Mrs. Villars had finished her Story, I returned her Thanks for the
Trouble I had given her. Sir, returned she, Thanks will not recompense me for
the Pains I have taken. I shall demand the same Satisfaction from you. I told
her I should readily obey her Commands; but I begged leave to give her the
Relation in French, that our Italian might partake; for I design, with your
leave, to insist of the same from him. Sir, replied the Lady, I would have
related my unhappy Story in that Language, if you had given me the least Hint.
But however, I Will go once more over again, if you please, in French; at least
the chief Circumstances, that we may more engage the Person to declare, how he
has shared the same Fate with us. I begged she would give me leave to take that
Trouble, if it were only to let her see, I had imprinted in my Memory what
concerned her so strongly, that I could repeat every Circumstance. She gave me
leave to proceed, on which I told her Story over again in French, to the
Italian. When I had finished, she gave me Thanks, for the Pains I had taken.
Though I had not been so long in the Relation, yet I made up the Time in
descanting upon her Danger, and hard Fate. That a Lady of her Birth, Beauty,
and Estate, should be so far forsaken by Fortune, as to be reduced to wretched
Slavery.

I then began my own Story, from my Birth, to our present State. Though in what
related to my Passion for the Lady, I did not directly explain; yet I gave her
Hints enough to understand, she was the Idol of my Soul, and (though Love like
Hope does often deceive us) I thought my obscure Declaration did not displease
her.

We then desired the Italian to proceed in his Relation. He sighing, told us,
he was too much obliged to me, to refuse me any thing, though it would call to
his Remembrance Transactions, that would bring Tears into his Eyes. After some
Pause he began to this Effect.

THE STORY OF THE ITALIAN SLAVE.
I Was born at the City of Rome, renowned for its Grandeur and Antiquity, and I
may say without boasting, of a noble Family; but had the Misfortune to come
last into the World, and the youngest, of five Sons and two Daughters. My
Father had a plentiful Fortune, but before his Death he had much weakened it,
in giving Dowries to my two Sisters, who were both married far above their
Fortunes, though not equal to their Birth. But Riches now balance every Thing,
and weigh down Birth and humble Virtue, and he that has most Gold, is the
greatest Man.

We lost our Mother in our early Days; and my Father followed, before I was ten
Years old, having settled all his Estate on his eldest Son to keep up the
Grandeur of the Name, and left three Brothers of us to depend on him.

My Father in his Lifetime gave us an Education suitable to our Birth and
Family; and my Brother, to give him his Due, completed us. Two of my Brothers
he procured Posts in the Army for, who both lost their Lives in one glorious
Campaign. The other dyed young.

It was imagined by every body that had the Privilege to think for me, that
their Deaths would be of no small Advantage to me; and it had for some Years
the Appearance of it. My Brother had attained to his thirtieth Year, without
once ever thinking of Marriage. But an advantageous Match being proposed, it
was thought convenient for him to pursue it. The Lady that was designed for him
he had never seen; but he was informed she was young, rich, and beautiful. He
was brought to the Sight of her, and fell violently in Love with her at the
first Visit, and his Passion increased every Moment. The Day was fixed for their
Nuptials by the Father of the Lady, which was to be the Easter following. I had
attained to my eighteenth Year, and no Provision made for me; and it was
thought that this Match would not bring me the least Advantage.

One Day my Brother told me, he had procured me the Post of Captain of the
Pope's Guards; and though it was far beneath my Birth, yet I was pleased with it,
that I might have the Means to subsist, without being subject to the Caprice of
Fortune, and the Dependence of a Brother of an uncertain Temper. My Brother
having some urgent Affairs, that called him hastily out of Town, he gave me a
Letter to deliver to his Mistress, which was to excuse his sudden Departure.

As Soon as he was gone, I went to execute his Commission; and being known to be
the Brother of the intended Husband, had the Liberty of presenting the Letter
to the Lady's own Hands. But what Misfortunes did that Interview cost me! I no
sooner saw her, but I lost my Heart, and the Regard I owed my Brother was of no
Force against her Charms. I observed she perused the Letter with Indifferency,
which did not displease me. Yet I so far overcame my growing Passion, as to add
something to the Excuse my Brother had wrote. I observed, in our Conversation,
that the proposed Alliance was not very pleasing to her; and she at last
frankly told me, Duty, more than Inclination, would make her comply with it. I
told her, were my Brother's Condition mine, and I had been acquainted with her
Sentiments, I should not have the Fortitude to support my ill Fortune; yet
should have so much Regard to her, whatever were my Troubles, not to be obliged
to Duty, but Inclination.

She told me, with a rising Blush, those Espousals never prosper'd, where the
Hand could not bestow the Heart. I agreed with her Sentiments; but added, I
feared her Heart was already given, where she could not bestow her Hand.

Sir, said she, I have ever been a Friend to Plaindealing, and Truth appears so
amiable to me, that I neither will, nor can deny it to you. O happy Man, cried
I, who-e'er thou art! Fortune has shed her happiest Influence on thee, and it
is not in her Power to make thee miserable, when blessed with so much consenting
Beauty. Sir, returned the Lady, the Person you esteem so happy, is ignorant of
my Inclinations for him, and Fear will make me conceal the Secret. And the
chief Reason why I disclose it to you, is, that you would inform your Brother;
for (added she, with Tears) if I am forced to wed him, I shall be for ever
miserable. Her Grief touched me to the Heart, and she observed the Sorrow in my
Face. I perceive, said she, the Love you bear your Brother affects your Breast.
Madam, said I, since you have made me this frank Declaration, I also will be
free, and utter all my Heart. The Grief you see rising in my Face, is owing to
the Torments of my Soul. The very Moment I beheld your Charms, Love shot me
with his sharpest pointed Dart, and all the Hope I have is cold Despair. She
observed my Declaration with a great deal of Satisfaction, and remained silent
some time, viewing me steadfastly: Upon which I cast my Eyes upon the Ground.
Sir, said she (with an unconfirm'd Voice) I hope you are sincere in what you
say, for the Supposition of it will draw another Secret from me, which is this;
The Reason why I cannot love your Brother is, that I have long since given my
Heart to -- you: The first time I saw your Face, it left its peaceful mansion
of Repose, and fled for Shelter to a Stranger's Breast. The Joy I felt at this
free Declaration so transported me, that I knew not whether I dreamt or no; but
being convinced of the Reality, I threw my self at her Feet, and uttered all my
Tongue could express, slowing from a sincere Heart. She told me she had
resolved on Death, before she would consent to wed my Brother: And informed me
also, that her Passion had been increasing upwards of two Years. The first time
she saw me, was taking my leave of my Brothers, when they were going to that
Campaign, from which they never returned. In short, we were as much in Love, as
ever any two were.

We agreed to meet the next Day, at the same Place, where I had the Liberty of
coming, as her Brother-in-Law that was to be.

I was Impatient for the next Day, imagining Time to have no Wings. But the
happy Moment came at last. We talked of nothing for several Hours, but our
mutual Love; at last we fell on the ungrateful Subject of the approaching
Nuptials, and how we should prevent 'em. I proposed to her, running away, and
tying our selves fast by the sacred Bond of Wedlock. Though, said she, I will
never be any one's but yours, yet we must consider of Futurity: I know your
Fortune is but small, and mine, though a large one, depends upon my Father: I Will
find some Means to defer the Marriage; you may do your Endeavor to dissuade
your Brother, for I fancy Fortune more than Beauty has gained his Heart. I
assured her to the contrary, and that he was very much in Love with her. We
both wished it had been otherways, but resolved to love on. We parted, though we
had not resolved on any thing, and appointed to meet the next Day, in a private
Corner of the Town, at an Acquaintance of mine, that I could confide in; though I
would not trust him with the Secret, well knowing a Matter of Importance
inslaves the Person that discloses it. I told him I had an Intrigue with a
Person of Quality, that I must be obliged to carry on at his House; which he
consented to very willingly. We met according to our Appointment, but an Hour
before the time prefixed, not willing one should be before the other. She came
alone too, for she would not trust any of her Servants. We met there every Day;
and one time above the rest, Love being pregnant in both our Eyes, I took the
happy Opportunity, and was blessed in the Possession of all I wished on Earth:
But Enjoyment was so far from palling my Desires, that it rather increased 'em.
We lived in all the Delight of Love for a Month, but then came the Bitter to
all our Sweets. My Brother arrived, and the fatal Day appointed for the
Marriage aproach'd. We had given our selves up so entirely to Love, that we did
not think of what was to come; or if the intruding Thought did creep in, we
would immediately lull it to Rest like a froward Child.

When we parted, it was with such a Regret and Sorrow, that foreboded our ill
Fortune. The Father of my Mistress had ordered every thing for the Nuptial
Solemnity, with the greatest Magnificence; but two Days before it was to be
solemnized, it was reported all over Rome that Don Antonio Grimaldi's only
Daughter (who was my Mistress) was taken dangerously ill. I was not displeased
at the Rumor, as guessing her Design. My Brother was never from her, and I was
pretty well assured the Sight of him gave her a great deal of Pain. One Day
finding my Brother very melancholy, I asked him if it was the Indisposition of
Grimaldi's Daughter that occasioned the Gloom I observed in his Countenance. He
replied she was the Cause of what he felt: He farther added, that he thought
her Sickness counterfeit, only to avoid him; and that he had many Reasons to
believe she had given her Heart to another. I used many Arguments with him to
leave her, and that she was not worth his farther Thought. But he assured me it
was not in his Power to hate her. I began to reflect with Reason on the Conduct
of my Love, and found I had involved my self in a very dangerous and
troublesome Affair: But notwithstanding all my Reasonings, I found my self more
and more in Love; and Absence, which cures a light Passion, added Strength to
mine; for I had not seen her in fifteen Days. I was resolved at last to visit
her, and took the Opportunity when my Brother was with the Pope in his Closet.
I found it no Difficulty to gain Admittance, knowing who I was: But
notwithstanding all my Endeavors, could not get an Opportunity of speaking to
her, there being a great many Visitants. I took an Occasion of feeling her
Pulse, and we had the Happiness of moulding our Hands for a Moment. I durst not
stay long, for fear my Brother should come while I was there; and yet I had
resolved to inform him of my Visit, which I did the first time of our Meeting;
but added, that it was Curiosity, and to oblige him, that I gave my self that
Trouble. He thanked me, and asked me what I thought of her Indisposition. I
told him I could not answer for the State of her Heart, but I was assured that
her Body was in a violent Fever. This I said, a little to undeceive him; for
since he could not be persuaded to abandon her, I thought it would be more to
our Advantage to make him believe it was a real Indisposition. He went to make
her a Visit that Evening, and at his Return told me I had given him true
Information, for the Physicians had ordered her to be let Blood, and that she
was in a dangerous Fever, and her Father designed to send her into the Country
the next Day. I was mightily pleased that he was deceived as well as the
Father, and I did not doubt but she had persuaded the Physicians to favor the
Deceit.

Accordingly the next Day she was conveyed in a Litter, to a Country House of
her Father's, two Leagues from Rome upon the River Tyber. I flattered my self,
that her being in the Country would give me a fairer Opportunity of conversing
with her: But though I tried all the Methods imaginable, I could not find the
least Glimpse of Hope in above six Weeks time. I was perfectly like a mad
Creature, and all my Friends (particularly my Brother) took Notice of my
Uneasiness. But I kept the Cause of it entirely to my self.

Any one that is a Judge of Love, and has ever been in my Circumstances, may
guess at what I felt. All I could learn of my Mistress was, that she continued
very ill. My Mind was tortured with a thousand Imaginations: Sometimes I
thought her false, and that it was her own Desire which kept me from seeing
her; at other times I fancied she was really indisposed.

A Month more slipped away, and I was as unlikely to see her then as at first.
One Morning my Brother came into my Chamber, before I was dressed. He seemed
over-complaisant to me, and expressed a Concern for the Alteration of my
Temper. I fancy (said he) Brother, that Love has forced himself into your
Breast; and that the Object of your Passion has no Regard to the Torments you
endure. I excused my self to him, that Love had no concern in my Humor, but
rather an inward Indisposition of Body. He said many kind things upon that
Occasion, promised to assist me all he could, and left me.

As Soon as he was gone, I dressed my self, and got on Horseback, in order once
more to try my Fortune; and I had taken a Resolution to see my Mistress,
whatever Hazard I should run.

When I came upon the skirt of a Wood, within half a League of the Place where
I was going, I was surrounded by a dozen Men on Horseback, who (notwithstanding
the Resistance I made) got me down, bound me, and carried me into the Wood. I
imagined 'em to be Thieves, by their Proceeding; but they never once attempted
to take any thing from me, which altered my Opinion, and I began to think they
had a Design upon my Life.

The State and Uncertainty of my Love made Death look like a Friend.

They kept me in the Wood till the Dusk of the Evening, then clapped me into a
Litter, and traveled hard all Night. The next Morning I was put into a Boat,
and hurried on board a Vessel that lay a League off at Sea. As Soon as they had
received me, they weighted and set Sail; and the Person that seemed to have
Command in the Boat, proved to be the Captain of the Vessel.

They carried me bound into his Cabin. When we were alone, he gave me a Paper,
which I soon knew to be my Brother's Handwriting; and in it an open Letter,
whose Hand I could not tell by the Direction. Upon this the Italian took 'em
both out of his Bosom. See, said he, the fatal Scroll, which has robbed me of
all Joy in this Life, and which I have kept during my Captivity.

The first Letter he read was to this Effect.

I Will not call thee by the Name of Brother; That thou have basely forfeited.
But know, the Hand of Heaven hangs over thee, to punish thy unfaithful dealing
with one, who thinks it the greatest Curse on Earth, that our Parents should be
the same. The enclosed Letter came into my Hands, by the Honesty of her that
was commissioned to bring it to thee; who abhorring thy guilty Commerce with
her ungrateful Mistress, has discovered thy Scene of Villainy. Know, after thou
have read this, prepare to suffer for thy Ingratitude. An Hour's Space is the
Length of thy Life, and I think Death too small a Revenge, for the Wrongs thou
have committed against

Hernando Alvares.


The other was as follows.

To Antonio Alvares.
LIFE of my Life! I have resolved to hazard every thing to let you know the
State of my Body and Mind. Though Body, Life, and Heart are entirely thine, yet
I fear Death will rob thee of 'em. My counterfeit Illness, that Day you saw me,
(without having the Happiness of speaking to each other) brought a real
Distemper upon me, and my Fever took away my Understanding. I hope I have not
in my Ravings declared the Secret of my Soul. The Sight of your Brother retards
my Health, and the Hopes I have of my Recovery, is once more to see thee, thou
Darling of my Heart. I have prevailed upon one of my Women, with Presents and
Promises (whom I hope is honest) to deliver this to thee. Our private Meetings,
I fear, will prove fatal to me; for I find our Commerce, if I survive, will
make me a Mother; but for fear it may touch me more in what thou art to suffer,
if known to be the Father, Death shall release thee from that Danger.


Upon the reading of these two Letters, different Passions swelled in my Soul.
My Heart was torn with Agonies for her I loved, and my Breast was fired with
Revenge against my unnatural Brother: For as he had shook off all Brotherly
Love, I thought it was but Justice I should do so too.

I sat a considerable time in the utmost Agony, not for fear of Death; for I
must confess, I had not the least Thought about it. The Captain of the Vessel
seeing me in that Condition, spoke to me after this manner. Sir, though I am well
paid by your Brother, to end your Life, yet I have so much Compassion for your
Sufferings, (knowing your Crime to be only Love) to mitigate your Sentence,
I Will put you into a Boat, with two Men to conduct you, and every thing that
shall be necessary: Upon this Condition, that you will give me your Word and
Honor, not to appear at Rome in forty Days.

I thanked him for his Kindness, gave him my Word, and told him it was not in
fear of Death, but only to disappoint my barbarous Brother. Immediately a Boat
was hoisted out, and every thing that was needful for a Month's Voyage. My two
Men were paid for the Voyage beforehand, and we left the Ship. I I ordered 'em
to steer for Leghorn, because there I could be furnished with every thing that
I wanted, from my Sister, who had resided there two Years with her Husband, a
Nobleman of Florence. But the Wind not proving favorable, we were drove out of
our intended Course, and had it not been for a French Vessel, bound for Malta,
who took us up, we had certainly perished. And happy for me, had it been my
Fate to have had a Wave for my Winding Sheet; for two Days after we were
received on Board, a Corsair of Barbary met with us, and took us all Prisoners.

I made no extraordinary Appearance, being I was always disguised when I went
to the House where my Mistress lay indisposed. Hamet (the Name of our Irish
Renagado) valued my Ransom but at two hundred Pounds. I wrote to both my
Sisters several times, and laid before 'em my unhappy Condition, but never
could hear from 'em. So that I either feared my Letters had miscarried, or they
were willing to forget an unhappy Wretch like my Self. Though, to say Truth, I
never received any hard Usage from Hamet; therefore if the Divine Being will
favor us in our Escape, I Will faithfully send him my Ransom.



WHEN he had ended his Story, we condol'd with one another, for our Misfortues
had a Resemblance. By this time the Day began to dawn, and Mustapha told us we
should reach Magazan before Night. We were all mightily overjoyed, because we
expected to be a Day longer in our Voyage. I begged the Favor of Mrs. Villars,
to let me cleanse her Face from the Ombre; which she consented to. I was filled
with Contemplation of her Beauty, but was roused from those pleasing Thoughts,
by the Appearance of several lowering Clouds that seemed to threaten us with a
Hurrican, frequent in those Parts; and though they seldom last long, yet they
might prove dangerous to our small Vessel.

Mustapha advised to make to Shore, but I could by no Persuasion agree to that,
but ordered him to hold on his Course for Magazan. But the Tempest rose so
suddenly, and so violent, that we were obliged to leave our selves to the Mercy
of the Waves; and we did not know which way we drove, for the dark Clouds had
almost formed another Night.

Our Boat was a new stout Boat, and bore the Weather very well, but it
frightened Mrs. Villars very much; and I had no other Regard but for her. The
Tempest continued for near half the Day, and when it grew Calm, and cleared up,
we were not in Sight of Land. By good Fortune I had provided a Compass; and I
ordered Mustapha to steer due South, the same Course we kept before the Storm
began, which was before the Wind. But though we had sailed several Hours South,
we could not discover any Land. Mustapha advised us to put to Windward back,
for he did not douht but we had over-shot Magazan in the Storm.

We were preparing to tack about, when we discovered a Sail, within half a
League of us; for it was hazy Weather, notwithstanding the Storm was over, or
we should have perceived her time enough to have avoided her. We kept upon a
Wind, and it freshning upon us, our Sail split, and we found it was impossible
to avoid the Ship, who gained upon us every Moment. We thought it our wisest
Course to lie by, and wait for her. Now all the Hope we had was, that the
Vessel would prove a Ship of Europe. I desired Mrs. Villars to conceal her Sex,
and begged the Favor of the Italian and Mustapha to keep the Secret. The Ship
was near us, and to our surprising Joy, hoisted French Colors. We immediately
put on Board, because they lay by on purpose.

We were soon informed Monsieur Pidau de St. Olon was on Board, the Ambassador
from the King of France to the Emperor of Morocco, to treat of Peace between
the two Crowns. I immediately begged to be brought to the Ambassador's
Presence, who received us very kindly. I told him all our Stories, but
concealed that of Mrs. Villars, for fear of any Accident. He used us very
civilly, and promised us his Protection. He said his Affair would not detain
him long, and he would be sure to gain safe Conduct for us into our own Country.

I returned him Thanks for his generous Proffer, and begged he would command my
Life, to see how readily I would obey him. He told me, since I was willing to
oblige him, he would soon put it in my Power to serve him.

I have, said he, lost three of my Retinue in the Voyage, two by Sickness, and
one drowned by Accident. You Will just make up that Number, and you need not take
any Care for Habits; I will provide for you. The fourth Person in your Company
I believe you will be satisfied should be taken Care of on Board our Ship, for
his Landing on the African Coast may prove prejudicial to your Affairs. I was
mightily pleased with his Proposals, and communicated it to Mrs. Villars and
our Italian Gentleman. Mrs. Villars told me, she was entirely under my Conduct,
and the Italian thought he should have a better Opportunity of getting into his
own Country from Mequinez, than France. I would not suffer Monsieur St. Olon to
cloth us as he proposed; for I had procured of the Jew four rich Suits of
European Clothes, for a Trifle, which I designed for Mrs. Villars, and my self;
for we intended she should put off her Moorish Dress, the first Opportunity.

The Ambassador provided a Cabin for Mrs. Villars and me; and he seemed
mightily taken with her Youth and Beauty, (as a Boy;) and he would often say,
Nature had mistaken her, designing her for the fairest of the softest Sex.
These Encomiums made me very uneasy, fearing he should find out the Truth. But
I understood afterward, he had not the least Mistrust.

He treated us very splendidly at Supper, considering we were at Sea. When the
Ambassador went to Rest, Mrs. Villars and I retired to the Cabin allotted us.
What a sensible Pleasure did I feel, to have the Happiness of her Company
alone, without the Fears and Terrors of offending any one! She perceived a
Satisfaction in my Countenance, that spoke the Joy of my Heart; and by her
Discourse that ensued, she was in some Fear, lest a guilty Thought had worked
that Change.

Mr. Boil, (said she) I hope you know what Regard to pay my Sex, and do not
wrong the good Opinion I have conceived of you. I own the greatest Obligation
to you, and I am not displeased I am in your Power, while you use that Power
with Moderation. I had hardly the Patience to hear her out. Madam, returned I,
be assured, your own Soul shall not be more pure than my Thoughts. But yet, I
will take the Freedom to declare, no Person in the World has that Command over
me as you have. I must own you have it in your Power to punish me, by slighting
a Heart full of the most tender Regard for you; and all I ask, is only leave to
hope; if I am denied that, the utmost of my Resentments to you, shall only be
in hating Life, which will be a Burden not able for me long to bear. It would
be base in me, (returned Mrs. Villars) to give Tormens where I am obliged; I
think to disguise our Thoughts, is an Art better lost, than learnt: And to deal
frankly with you, I cannot find in my Heart any Aversion for you; which is a
Declaration, if you knew my Temper, ought to satisfy you. I said all the
tender things I was capable of, in return for this great Blessing, and our
Conversation lasted several Hours. I told her at last, I was well assured she
wanted Rest; and whatever Pleasure I took in her Company, I would deprive my
self of it, and leave her to her Repose.

She seemed very much concerned, that I was obliged to leave her alone; well
knowing I should not get the Convenience of a Place to rest my self.

I told her there was not any Fatigue I would not undergo for her with
Pleasure. I left her, and Night soon slipped away in pleasing Imaginations. I was
surpised to see her, who was ever in my Thoughts, come out of the Cabin
dressed. Madam, said I to her, I hope you have had nothing to disturb your
Sleep. She obligingly answered me, Nothing but the Thoughts of your waking; and
therefore she desired I would go and repose my self in the Cabin, and I think,
said she, it is my Duty to watch now. I excused my self, and told her it was but
for one Night more, for in all Probability we should land the next Day, and
provide our selves with better Accommodation.

We went into the Cabin together, and our Conversation chiefly centered on
Love. She told me at last, she would leave her Acknowledgments to me, till she
was more at Liberty, and in her own Country, for fear I should imagine the Need
she had of my Service should make her declare her self in my Favor. When I
found so fair a Beginning, I was resolved to push my Fortune; till with many
Entreaties, Vows, and Oaths of my Fidelity, she owned to me she had a tender
Regard for me when she saw me first, for she was convinced of my Love at our
first Conversation; not, continued she, that I had any Understanding in the Art
of Love, but I knew the Hazard you had put your self in to serve me, could have
no other Motive but that Passion; and the more I thought of it, the more I
found my Heart inclining to believe you.

Those Persons that have felt the soft Passion, may make a Judgment of the
Transports I was in at this Declaration. I kissed her Hand a thousand times,
and pressed it to my Heart. She begged me to curb my Transport, for fear of
being overheard or observed; for, continued she, you may remember, in my
Relation of my Misfortunes, how near we were suffering by such an Oversight.
This kind Caution bridled my Tongue, but could not command my Eyes; they spoke
the Language of my Soul.

Our silent Conversation was disturbed by the Joy of the Sailors in discovering
Land; and we thought it prudent to wait on the Ambassador, and congratulate him
upon it. He received us very kindly, and told us he was pleased upon our
Accounts, that we might recover on Shore the Fatigue of the Sea and our
Captivity. The Captain told us we should come to an Anchor before Dinner in the
Port of Mammora. I was mightily surpised to find we were got to the South of
Sallee, and found that the Tempest had drove us back beyond Sallee several
Leagues. This we still esteemed a greater Happiness, and if Mustapha had not
been guided by me, we had missed the good Fortune of meeting with the French
Vessel, and of course made the Port of Sallee whether we would or no. Upon this
Thought, I began to imagine that Mustapha, as understanding the Mathematics,
knew where we were, and consequently had designed to betray us. I communicated
my Thoughts to Monsieur St. Olon, and he came into my Sentiments. He
immediately called the Captain of the Ship, and ordered Mustapha to be strictly
guarded in his Absence; and if any Moors came on Board, to prevent his seeing
of them; but desired that he might want nothing but his Liberty. When we came
to an Anchor, the Captain was sent on Shore to acquaint the Moors with the
Arrival of an Ambassador from France; and presently the Fort saluted him with
one and twenty Guns, which was returned from the Ship Gun for Gun. The
Governor of Mammora in an Hour's time came on Board attended, who saluted our
Ambassador, and begged he would have Patience to stay in the Ship, till he had
acquainted the Emperor his Master with his Arrival. The Ambassador invited him
to an Entertainment; and though I observed he refused Wine, yet he and his
Retinue swallowed the Punch so fast that their Heads proved as light as their
Heels. When they went on Shore again, the Cannon of the Ship gave 'em a Salvo,
which was returned by the Fort as soon as ever they were landed. The next Day an
Order came from the Emperor that we should immediately repair to Mequinez, the
Place where the Emperor resided.

The next Day the Ambassador set forward with his whole Retinue, among which
were Mrs. Villars, the Italian, and my self, dressed richly after the European
Fashion. We were provided with Dromedaries to carry us, all but the Ambassador,
who was presented with an Arabian Courser. Within a Mile or two of Mequinez we
perceived the King at the Head of his Army in a great Plain. At first I thought
it a Mark of Respect to the Ambassador of France; but found it was purely
Accident, for our Guide led us out of the Way to avoid 'em.

When we arrived at Mequinez, we were led to a House belonging to the French
Consul, or rather a House he had hired for that Occasion. Before we were well
entered the House, a Guard of Moors was fixed upon us, and strict Orders given
not a Soul should stir out, not even the Ambassador nor Consul. I thought this
an odd Proceeding, and sometimes imagined it was upon our Account, (as Fear is
an expeditious Painter.) But my Timerity vanished, when Monsieur St. Olon
informed me, it was the Moorish Custom not to let a Foreign Ambassador give or
receive Visits till after his first Audience.

Mrs. Villars and I had one Apartment allotted us, with but one Bed in it, after
the Moorish Manner. She told me, she could not bear the Thoughts of my watching
every Night, and begged I would go to Rest with the Italian; but we found he
was provided of a Companion, one of the Retinue, and there was no help for it.
I always retired when my Mistress undressed herself, and gave her time to go
into Bed: I then with a Quilt laid my self down on the Floor, but was far from
taking any Repose. The Thoughts of the Woman I loved being so near me, naked in
Bed, kindled such a Desire in my Breast; and the Pain I took to smother it,
perfectly burnt me up. I would have my Readers excuse me, if they are
disobliged at any Part of my Story, because I am only relating Matters of Fact.

The next Day, when I rose from my boarded Bed, I retired to give the Loadstone
of my Desires time to dress her self: When I entered the Room again, she
observed my Countenance very attentively, and told me she was grieved to find
in my Features something that spoke a disordered Body; which I am sure, said
she, is for want of Rest: But, added she, I beg it as a Favor, you will
immediately undress your self, and go into Bed, and try to repose your self,
and I Will make your Excuse to the Ambassador. I refused it a great while, but in
short she forced me to comply with her Commands. I went to Bed, but new
Thoughts again attacked me, and drove Sleep away. Mrs. Villars had retired, and
staid about an Hour. When she came in again, she stole softly for fear of
disturbing me. My Mind was so violently agitated, that I really began to be out
of Order, and feverish, which she observed, and came to the Bedside, and with
a tender Inquietude asked me how I did. I took hold of her Hand, pressed it to
my Lips, and thanked her for her kind Care of me. Alas! she cried, you are very
much indisposed, and I am the Cause of it. Upon this the Tears ran down her
Cheeks, like Morning Dew on Roses. Her Tenderness gave me all the Joy
imaginable; and as she leaned her Head over me, weeping, I pressed her soft
Lips close to mine, which plunged my Soul in Ecstasies of Joy. She blushed at
my Freedom, yet still begged I would try to sleep. I told her it was
impossible, while she was there; upon this she was going to retire in haste,
but I caught her by the soft Hand, and told her if she went out it would be a
greater Impossibility for me to rest. She conjured me by that Love I professed,
(if it was not a Falsehood) to declare to her the Torments of my Mind. She
insisted so much upon it, that I told her the Secret of my Heart. She fell upon
her Knees, and begged I would not mention it any more, for she owned her self
so much obliged to me, there was not any thing in her Power she could refuse
me, but that. I begged her Pardon, and had resolved to suffer Death sooner than
to have disclosed my Malady; but I would be ever silent upon that Theme, till
she commanded me to speak. My dear Boil, said she, (I am not ashamed to call
you so) stay till we arrive in England, and I here vow to make you mine,
whenever you shall command me. Upon saying this she joined her Lips to mine,
not considering that in endeavoring to suppress my Flame, she poured Oil upon
it, and made it burn the fiercer. I told her, true Love was above nice
Formality, and that Marriages were made in Heaven. Said she, I hope they are,
but beg by both our Loves to drop this Theme. I told her I would, though Death
should follow. I remained silent for some time, while Tears stopped her Speech.
We were interrupted by a Messenger from the Ambassador, who came to invite us
to Dinner, (for he always did us the Favor of dining at his Table.) I begged
to be excused, for I found my self a little indisposed. The Messenger had not
been gone a Moment before the Ambassador came in to enquire after my Health,
and brought his Physician with him, who feeling my Pulse, told him I was in a
Fever, but Bleeding he did not doubt would give me Ease. I told him I should be
better in the Morning, if not, I would take his Advice. The Ambassador would
have Mr. Villars, (as we had named her) to Dinner with him, who had endeavored
to compose her self while they had been in the Room. As she was going from me,
she squeezed my Hand, and said, Endeavor to compose your self to Rest, and
you will soon be better.

They retired and left me to my own Thoughts, which were various and
disjointed. Mrs. Villars did not stay long; she came in softly as before,
expecting that I might have been asleep. When she found I was in the same
Disorder, she burst into Tears, and cried, Will nothing satisfy you but my
Undoing? No Madam, said I, I will fight with my Desires, and am resolved to
conquer or die. She staid with me till Supper, and our whole Discourse was upon
the Passion of Love. When she came back from Supper, I had got up and had dressed
my self; but the Combat in my Mind had really disordered my Body, which she
soon saw: She begged I would go to Bed again, and she would watch me. I told
her, the World should not prevail upon me to break her Rest; nor even she her
self, who was more to me than the World. I had sat me down upon the Bed, and
Mrs. Villars came and sat down by me. We remained silent a considerable time:
at last she took my Hands in hers, and pressed me by the Fingers.

Mr. Boil, said she, I have overcome my self: I cannot see you in this Torture
of Body and Mind, and not contribute to your Ease. Here solemnly swear to be my
Husband, and do with me what you please: I hope you are a Man of Honor, and
that is what I rely upon. Nothing in this World could have transported me so
much as those few Words did: I fell upon my Knees, kissed her Hands, and did I
know not what! Madam, said I, you have made me the happiest Man the World
contains; and if I thought my Heart and Tongue did not agree in what I am going
to say, I would pull 'em both out this Moment. When I had said this, I fell on
my Knees, and made this short Vow. Thou God that know the Heart of Man; I do
beseech Thee punish me with Eternity of Torments, if ever I prove false to this
Darling of my Soul, who before Thee I take (as the greatest Blessing) to be my
lawful Wife. And here I swear (said she, kneeling) to take no other to my Bed
and Heart; and with this Kiss, said she, I seal the sacred Union. I told her
nothing could be more binding, and the Priest could but confirm what we had
done already.

Now the tender Moment was approaching to crown my Joys with all I wished on
Earth, Kings on their Thrones to me seemed poor and base, and I Would not have
changed to be the Monarch of the Universe. I begged my dear Bride I might be
her Bride-maid as well as Husband, and that she would give me leave to undress
her. Said she, My Love, my Life, my Husband, I am to obey you in every thing
that is in my Power, and when I fail in my Obedience, may I be miserable in the
Loss of you. I was too eager to say any thing in Return, but I undressed her,
put her to Bed, and you may be sure I did not stay long behind. The Veil of
Night was drawn round us, and I plunged into a Sea of Pleasures, too delicate
for Words to express.

The next Day, the Ambassador saw Contentment in both our Faces, and
congratulated me for the Recovery of my Health. Never was there so tender a
Wife; and the longer I had the Happiness of Enjoyment, the more my Love was
raised. The next Day, the Ambassador was to have his first Audience, and we
were all to be in Readiness by Seven in the Morning. I got up early, and
dressed my dear Wife in a new Suit of Clothes, on purpose for this Occasion.
The Governor of Alcassar, Hamet addo Riffy, was to be our Master of the
Ceremonies, who attended us with several Moors of Quality, and a Troop of the
King's Blacks, as Guards. We set forward about eight a-clock, in this Order. 1.
Twelve of the Moor Guards. 2. Several of the Nobility, two by two. 3. The
Ambassador, with Hamet addo Riffy on his Right Hand, preceded by two Trumpets
and Kettle-Drums, (the Post of Honor is on the Left among Moors, because you
have the Command of their Sword.) 4. Twenty-four Gentlemen of the Ambassador's
Train, two by two. 5. Twelve French Slaves that carried the Presents. 6. Twelve
more of the Guards: And the Order was closed by a Moorish Mob, that abused us
with their Tongues all they could; nay some of them attempted to throw Stones,
but were bastinado'd by the Guards. We were all on Foot, though the King's
Palace was a Mile from the Place where we set out.

I was mightily concerned at the Fatigue my dear Wife underwent, for it was
violent hot; though we had the best on it, for going next the Ambassador (who
ordered we should do so) we had some Shelter from the Umbrella that was carried
over his Head.

We entered the Palace through the Marble Gate, (so called from two Marble
Pillars that adorn it) and from thence, immured with white Walls and black
Guards on each Side, we arrived at a stately Pavilion; where a Halt was
commanded 'till the King was acquainted with our Arrival. We waited some Time,
but at last saw him coming, mounted on a white Horse, through one of the
Avenues that led to the Pavilion. His Guards (who had lined that Passage on
each Side) bowed down to the Ground as he passed along. He made but a very
indifferent Appearance. As Soon as he came to the Portico, he gave a Lance that
he bore to one of his Guard, got from his Horse, and squatted down upon the
Floor without any thing under him. He had nothing in his Dress to be
distinguished from the rest of his Subjects, but was muffled up to the Eyes
with a Chocolatecolour Handkerchief, that did not seem over clean. His Legs and
Arms were bare: As to his Age, he seemed to be about Fifty; of a very tawny
Complexion, and very lean; his Hair black, inclining to gray; of a middle
Stature, with hollow Cheeks, and Eyes black, a small hooked Nose, and thick
Lips. Some of his Courtiers sat down on each Side of him, barelegg'd and
bare-headed; and behind him stood a Black with a great Fan in his Hand, not
only to cool him, but to keep off the Muskito's, a small Fly, very troublesome
in most Parts of Africa.

Mahumet ben Addo Otar, his chief Minister and Favorite, was the only Person
that stood.

As Soon as the Emperor had squatted down on the Floor, he repeated these Words
in Arabic three times, Tay buon, which is as much as to say, You are welcome; a
common Expression when they are addressed to by a Foreigner. Then our
Ambassador made a long Speech in French, prepared for that Purpose; which was
only a Panegyric upon both Kings, fulsome enough; but the French deal much in
wordy Compliments. The Interpreter, when the Ambassador had done, read the same
in Arabic to the Emperor. The Speech was very long in French and Arabic, but
the Emperor heard it out patiently, which was reckoned a good Omen; he also
excused himself that he did not admit him sooner to his Audience, it being
their Ramadan, or Easter. When the Compliments were over, the Ambassador
presented all his Retinue to the Emperor, but I observed he took a particular
Notice of my Wife, and eyed her several times, which gave me a great deal of
Uneasiness; for it is as dangerous to be a handsome Man as a handsome Woman in
Morocco, if the Brute of an Emperor should have a Fancy for 'em.

I longed to have an end of our Audience.

After we were presented, the Ambassador ordered his Presents to be opened and
spread before the Emperor; which consisted of fine Arms made at Paris, several
English Watches and Cloth, two Persian Carpets, and two Pieces of Gold and
Silver Brocade. The Emperor, in return, gave the Ambassador four young Slaves,
three of 'em French, (though he took 'em all for the same Nation) but the other
was an Englishman, and the same Person I mentioned in the Beginning of this
Relation, who went in the same Boat on Board of the Success. I was very much
confounded at seeing him, well knowing he was on Board when I fell out of the
Ship. I longed for an Opportunity to confer with him, though I could not perceive
by his Looks that he knew me; but that might be from my Change of Habit, and
the Sun's tarnishing my Complexion.

The Emperor rose, (when he had given the Slaves) mounted, and rode off; and we
went home in the same Order as we came there; only the chief Minister, Mahumet
ben Addo Otar, accompanied the Ambassador as far as the Marble Gate. I informed
my dear Wife, when we came to our Lodging, the Anxiety I was in when the
Emperor eyed her: She told me she had made the same Observation with much
Uneasiness; for, said she, I had not the Presence of Mind, upon the Instant, to
imagine my self a Man. However, we both wished our selves on Board, and the
Embassy well over, and then we might make ourselves merry with our Fears.

The next Day our Fears were much increased; for hearing a Noise in the Street,
we went to look out to know the Reason, and discovered Hamet, our Irish
Renegado, with several Prisoners manacled. We soon retired again, but learnt by
other People, that they were going to the Emperor, that he might make his
Choice. The Sight of him renewed our Fears, as I said, and we resolved
immediately to get Leave to go on Board, for fear of some unlucky Turn of
Fortune.

I upon the Instant went to wait on the Ambassador, and declared to him what I
had seen, begging Leave at the same time we might be suffered to go on Board.
He told me he would comply with my Request for Mr. Villars and the Italian, but
begged it as a Favor that I would stay with him, for he should have great need
of my Assistance; and if any thing should fall out, he would engage for my
Liberty. Though the Request cut me to the Heart, yet it was neither Prudence
nor good Manners to refuse him. I gave him my Promise to obey his Commands, but
begged he would not insist upon my going abroad but as seldom as possible. I
went to my Wife, (my Readers, perhaps, may smile at my calling her Wife, but I
will assure 'em we thought our selves as much married, as if the Parson had
executed his holy Function; nevertheless we did not intend to neglect that
Ceremony the very first Opportunity) and told her the Ambassador's Request, and
my Promise. She agreed with me in the Reasonableness of it, but yet could not
forbear shedding Floods of Tears at our (we hoped) short Separation. The next
Day was designed for their Journey; but the ensuing Night was spent with Sighs,
Tears, and a Lowness of Spirit that looked ominous. Yet we parted; and for
several Hours I could not bring my Mind to any peaceable Form to wait on the
Ambassador: But he sent for me at last, and told me the Reason of his desiring
me to continue with him was this: --

The King his Master had commanded him to make some Observation of the Customs
and Manners of this Part of Africa; and, added he, I have observed in you a
Capacity fit to assist me in the Design. I told him he might command me in any
thing that lay in my Power, and that I took it for an Honor he would think me
worth his Employment.

We had Notice the next Day from the Person that attended my Wife with the
Camels, that he saw them safe on board, which gave me some Comfort. I begged
the Ambassador to give me Leave to speak a Word or two with one of the Slaves
that the Emperor gave him. He ordered him to come before him, where I desired
he would tell me how he came into the Hands of the Moors. He was prodigiously
surpised to see me there, and could hardly believe his Eyes; for it was
thought by every Body that I had either been killed or drowned; as indeed it
was very improbable to think otherwise. He informed us, that three Days after
the Success parted with the Spanish Man of War, another Algerine Rover met with
them, and took 'em after an obstinate Fight; the Captain and several others
being slain in the Battle. It was his good Fortune to be bought for the
Emperor's Use; I call it good Fortune, said he, because I was presented to the
French Ambassador, and am now in Hopes of my Freedom.

I told the Ambassador in French what he said; and he was pleased to say, that
to oblige me he would take him into his Protection. I remembered Mahumet ben
Addo Otar was Ambassador in England; He came to visit the Ambassador often, and
understanding English, I gathered several good Hints for his Design; for he was
courteous enough, though an Enemy in his Heart to the English.

I think it will not be much amiss here to give the Reader a succinct Account
of the Customs and Manners of the Moors of Fez and Morocco; and we will first
begin from their last Revolution.

Muley Ismael, the present Emperor of Morocco, pretends to derive his Birth
from Mahomet himself. He was Son to Muley Xerif, King of Taphilet, but was
succeeded by Muley Archyd, who died with a Debauch he made among his Courtiers.

His unexpected Death in 1672 gave room for many of his Family to raise
Rebellion in their several Provinces: But Muley Ismael being the greatest
Favorite of the People, and of an enterprising Temper, proclaimed himself King
of Taphilet, and seized his Brother's Treasures, which are the Sinews of War.
His Nephew, Muley Hamet, gave him the most Trouble; for he had gained a Party,
and declared himself King of Sus and Morocco, had several Battles, but at last
was overcome as well as the rest, and Ismael was settled the peaceful King of
Taphilet, Morocco, and Fez. I have given a Description of his Person already.
His Empire spreads from North to South four hundred Leagues, from East to West
upwards of a hundred and fifty.

There are three strong Places possessed by the Europeans on the Coast of
Afric. First Magazan on the Ocean, by the Portuguese; and on the Mediterranean,
Melissa and Ceuta by the Spaniards. They had two more strong Holds, Larache,
and Mammora; but the present Emperor drove them out shamefully. And Tangier
once belonged to the English, who abandoned it a few Years ago, first
demolishing the Fortifications.

The Emperor has but nine Seaports in his whole Dominions, viz. Sancta Cruz,
Safy, Sallee, Mammora, Larache, Arzilla, and Tangier, on the Afric Ocean;
Zaffarina and Tetuan on the Mediterranean; though Tetuan is two Leagues within
Land. To begin in Order as they are named; Sancta Cruz (or the Holy Cross) is
the first Port to the Southward. The Town is about a Mile in Length, and a
Quarter broad. The chief Merchants are Jews, who trade with England and
Holland. Their Vent is Hides, Dates, Copper, and Beeswax.

Safy, or Sophia, appears next, a Town situated on a Hill; but drives a larger
Trade than Sancta Cruz.

Sallee, situated 35 Leagues S. W. of Cape Spartel. It is divided into two
Towns, the old and the new; (it is called by the Natives Arbat.) There Is a very
good Harbor, and a strong Castle well stored with Guns, if the Moors knew how
to make use of them. The Town is large, and well inhabited, but the Walls are
all demolished. I observed the Ruins of a Church, the Steeple yet standing, a
noble fine Gothic Building. The chief Trade of this Town consists in the Prizes
that are brought in by their Galleys.

About seven Leagues more to the North stands Mammora, once possessed by the
Spaniards. It stands in a Bottom surrounded with Mountains, which renders the
Air very unwholesome, by reason of the excessive Heat; but the Bay is fine,
large, and secure from all Winds. This Town is generally the high Road to
Mequinez, the present Capital of Morocco.

The next Port Northward is Larache, a Town of a pleasant Situation, and
strongly fortified; but, to the eternal Infamy of the Spaniards, delivered up
to Ismael after a Siege of five Moons; two thousand Soldiers and a hundred
Officers taken Prisoners: a sufficient Force to have defended it against the
whole Powers of Muley Ismael, for they neither wanted Provisions nor
Ammunition. But we shall leave them and their Cowardice, and go on to

Arzilla, or Azilath, about twelve Leagues more North. A Place only famed for
Tobacco, which they seldom trade abroad for, having sufficient Vent for it
among the Natives of Morocco; and as we have but little Business with it, we'll
come to

Tangier as fast as we can, a fine, large, wellfortified City, when in the
Hands of the English; but since they have left it, and razed the
Fortifications, the Moors have not thought fit to repair it.

The next, Zaffarina, is a Place of very little Note, and therefore we shall
make no Observation concerning it.

The last is Tetuan, a Town six Miles within Land, without any Fortification.
The Inhabitans came originally from the Province of Andalusia in Spain, as
indeed did most of the Moors on the Seacoasts of Africa. They are white Men,
pretty well civilized, very kind to Strangers and Christians, and pay but
little Regard to the Emperor of Morocco.

As to the Nature of the Inhabitants, they are most of a tawny Complexion, of a
lazy, idle Disposition, and cursed with all the Vices of Mankind; mistrustful
to the last Degree, false, jealous, and the very Picture of Ignorance. They
style themselves Mussulmen, or true Believers, yet their Word is not to be
relied upon on any Occasion. The Moors are generally but indifferent Soldiers,
and but seldom brave. They are often famed in the Spanish Histories for Men of
Gallantry, but I could never find them inclined that way. They manage a Horse,
it must be confessed, with a great deal of Dexterity. They abominate the
Christians, for the very Word signifies in their Language, Dog; and are
continually seeking Means to destroy them. Mahomet has taught 'em in his
Alcoran, that all of his Faith who dye fighting against the Christians,
immediately enter into Paradise in Triumph; nay, even their Horses, if they did
in Battle, are immediately translated into Heaven; for they hope to have the
Pleasure of Riding there, as well as on Earth.

Though Poligamy is allowed, yet they must marry but four Wives, and must
settle a Dowry upon them; and if they ever put 'em away, they must return their
Dowry along with 'em: But they may keep as many Concubines as they think fit;
though they have this Privilege, when they can please 'em no longer, they sell
'em to the best Bidder; so that the Women of Morocco, in my Opinion, have but a
sad Time on it: yet the Husband is obliged to keep all their Children. They
esteem Idiots and Naturals to be Saints, if they are Men; for they believe the
Women have no Souls, and are only formed for Propagation. They will not allow
'em to enter their Mosques, because they esteem 'em incapable of being received
into Heaven: Yet they say their Prayers at home, and on Fridays resort to the
Places of Burial, to weep over the Graves of their deceased Friends, clothed
in Blue, which is their Mourning. They hire professed Mourners to grieve and
cry at the Graves of Relations, and howl over them, as I have heard the Irish;
asking them why they would die when they were provided with every thing that
was necessary in this World. Their Time is spent in Eating, Drinking, Sleeping,
Dallying with their Women, Horses, and Prayers (for they never learn to read,
and are forbid Gaming) and even their Prayers are hurried over so slothfully,
as if they were asleep.

They have usually a String of Beads in their Hands, like the Roman Catholics;
and to every Bead they have a short Prayer, which as they repeat, they drop
through their Fingers. The Prayer consists only in the different Attributes of
God, as, God is great, God is good, God is infinite, God is merciful. The
Emperor of these Wretches only differs from his Subjects in a larger Propensity
to their ill Qualities, with the Addition of a degree of Cruelty and Avarice. I
was told, that during his twenty Years Reign he had murdered with his own Hands
twenty three thousand Men: Nay I am apt to believe the Truth of it, for he put
forty seven to Death in the one and twenty Days we were at his Court.

Every Nation is amazed to find his Subjects so submissive and patient under so
excessive and cruel a Tyranny: But they should understand (bating their Want of
Power) that they are taught to believe, if they fall by the Hand of a King who
is a Xerif, (which signifies Mahomet's Successor) they immediately go up to
Heaven; and if there is any that would not willingly be sent to Heaven before
their Time, they are sure to fly him when he is clothed in Yellow, which is
his Color of Murder; and he generally dies it of a Blood-colour before he goes
to Sleep.

As I was viewing some new Buildings one Day, near the King's Palace, I
perceived him giving Directions to some of the Workmen. There were several
Carts drove by his Slaves with Materials for his Building; and as they passed
him, he bastinado'd some for going too fast, while others, thinking to mend
that Fault, were drubb'd by him for going too slow; one poor Creature,
trembling for fear of what would follow, went bowing before his Cart; but the
Emperor wounding the Horse in the Flank, he gave a Spring, tumbled the Wretch
down, and drove over him. Another following him, ran to assist his Fellow, but
the Emperor threw his Dart, and struck him in the Shoulder. The Slave drew it
out, and upon his Knees presented it to him again, which the Emperor (when the
Man had got some Distance from him) darted into his Chine. The Fool drew it out
once more, and, covered with Blood, gave it to him back again; but as he was
stooping, he fell down with loss of Blood at the Barbarian's Feet, who did him
the Favor to pin him to the Earth through his Back.

I was so shocked at the Sight, that I could not recover my self for a good
while afterward. I thought the poor Fellow was a Fool; for if it had been my
own Case, I would have returned it through his Body the first Time, for he was
sure of Dying, and I think it would have been some Satisfaction to have sent
the Author of my Death the same Journey.

This King used to murder his Slaves upon the least Complaint from the Moors,
which they would make out of hatred to Christians. But the Wretch finding his
Slaves decrease too much, took another Method; and when the next Complaint was
made, he killed the Slave, the Person complained against, but ordered the
Complainant immediately to pay him double the Price he cost him, or find him
two more Slaves in his Room that Instant, which he was obliged to do; but this
Proceeding stopped their Mouths for the future.

They say he has a great deal of Wit and Courage, is very active, and expert in
riding, and hurling the Dart. He drinks no Wine, because his Religion forbids
it: but when he takes Opium, or drinks a certain Mixture that he makes himself,
compounded with Brandy, Cinnamon, Cloves, Anniseed, and Nutmegs, woe be to him
that comes in his Way. He Is much addicted to Women, having no less than four
hundred Concubines. He has one hundred and eighteen Male Children alive, and
about two hundred Females. One of the Males whom he designs for his Successor,
(and which he had by a Black, who advises him in every thing, and is reckoned a
politic Woman) he has named Muley Zeyden. His Revenue consists in Presents from
the Governors of his Provinces, and the Arabians who live in Huts about his
Dominions. When he has a mind to squeeze, he sends for a Governor from his
Province, who knows well enough what he is sent to for, and therefore provides
accordingly; so that the Emperor fleeces the Governors, and they fleece the
People. So that there is no one rich but himself, and yet he does not know what
Use to put his Treasure to, but hides it in secret Places; and the Person that
assists him in the Concealment is sure to lose his Life for his Assistance.

Mequinez, the Capital, and the Place of his Residence, was formerly but a
small Village, but now it contains six hundred thousand Inhabitants, and the
Streets are so crowded, there is hardly any passing along. It is but a mean
City, very ill built; and, if there falls any Rain, the dirtiest Place I ever
set my Foot in; for there is no Pavement in the Streets; and when it is dry the
Dust is ready to choke one. The King's Palace is indeed a very large Place,
almost four Miles round, including his Gardens; but it is very ill contrived.
Here you shall see a fine Pillar added to support an old ruinated Place, and
yet he employs most of his Time in Building. In short, it looks like gold Lace
upon a Hop-sack.

His Stables are the most regular Building in all his Palace. But that is no
wonder, for the Moors even reverence Horses; and one that has been a Pilgrimage
to Mecca, has as much Veneration as the Pilgrim himself. The King had one of
these Horses, which I have seen always finely caparison'd, and a Slave to
attend, who carried a Pot and a Cloth to keep him Clean. All the Horses that
are thus sanctified are usually freed from all manner of Service, and if the
Owner cannot afford to keep it, which often happens, there is a Pension settled
upon 'em by the Mufty.

The Jews drive a great Trade here, but they pay sufficiently for that
Privilege; for they are obliged to wear black Caps, that they may be
distinguished; and notwithstanding their great Trade, they are but scurvily
used, for if a Child insults 'em, it is as much as their Lives are worth to
resist.

The Women of Morocco, I mean all that I had the Fortune to see, were very
handsome, fine large full Eyes, round Faces, and every Feature exact. They are
very amorous, and dexterous in contriving Methods to satisfy their Desires.

A Gentleman of our Retinue told me, he had got an Intrigue with one of the
Moorish Women, Daughter to a Governor of a Province; and his manner of going to
the Appointment was in Disguise. She sent him by a French Slave of hers a
complete Woman's Dress, which are generally all alike; and their Faces are all
muffled up to their Eyes, so that they are often met by their own* Husbands in
the Street, without being known; by this Dress he got Admittance as a Lady
coming to pay a Visit, and then they are very secure. For it is the Custom,
whenever a Man, even the Husband, finds a pair of Women's Sandals, at the Door
of his Wife's Chamber, he must retire; for it is the greatest Affront they can
put on a Woman, to enter her Apartment when they have that Warning to the
contrary. He told me she was a delicious Creature, and Mistress of the whole
Art of Love. It is no wonder if they give themselves up to Love, when perhaps
there are twenty, or more, (according to the Capacity of the Person that keeps
'em) Sharers in one single Man; and they must be contented to stay for due
Benevolence, till their Tyrant pleases to send for 'em.

The Habit of the Men is generally White, (which is a Color they extremely
delight in) with a red Cap on their Heads; that is the married Men; for all the
Youth, from the Prince to the Beggar, before Wedlock, go uncovered. They are
close shaved under their Caps, excepting one Lock upon the Crown of their
Heads, which they never cut off; being they are taught, by that Lock, Mahomet
is to draw 'em up to their imaginary Paradise. They only shave under their
Chins, but suffer their Beards and Mustachoes to grow, which they take a
particular Pride in the Length or Largeness of; and he that is well bearded,
must be a wise Man.

Their Shirts are made like Shifts, only the Sleeves are so long that they hang
down over their Hands. Under the Shirt they were linen Drawers, that reach down
to their Knees, for their Legs are always bare; their Shoes are made without
Heels, like Irish Brogues. Over the Shirt is a Vest without Sleeves, which they
surround with a silk Scarf, of what Color they please (except Green, which is
a Color sacred to Mahomet, their Emperor, and the Clergy;) in this they thrust
short Daggers, or Knives. Over all, is a Garment, which they call a Hayick,
about five Else long, and four broad, which they wrap round 'em, as we do our
Cloaks. Some of the meaner Sort, especially in the Country, wear Straw-hats of
their own Make. Their Dresses are all a-like, only some add a gold or silver
Fringe round the Border.

As for Religion, they rise early and late to Prayers; but only like Children,
do it because they are ordered. Their Mufti, or Head of their Religion, is
reckoned the first in the Empire, and disowns the Emperor's Authority; but yet
he finds means to fleece him, as well as the rest of his Subjects, who obey him
out of Fear; for if there was one Person found to love him, it would be as
strange a Sight as one of their Monsters.

I could not forbear smiling to see the Providence of the Moors. Walking one
Day about a Mile from Mequinez, it began to rain prodigiously; I got under a
Tree to shelter my self from the Tempest. But I observed several of the Natives
undress themselves with a great deal of Precipitation, make up their Clothes in
a Bundle, and sit on 'em stark naked; and all their Care was to keep 'em from
the Wet, leaving their naked Bodies exposed to the Fury of the Storm. When it
ceased, they walked a little Way till their Bodies were dry, and then dressed
themselves. If a Man were to do so in England, he would be counted a Madman, or
a Fool, yet I must own I thought 'em in the right; for be the Storm ever so
violent, yet when it is over, they pursue their Journey with dry Clothes on
their Backs. But they have one Convenience, they are dressed and undrest in half
a Minute. Nay, I am informed, those that travel on Camels, or on Horseback,
have a Convenience covered with an oiled Cloth, in which they thrust their
Clothes on the like Occasion, and ride naked. I fancy, to meet an Army in a
Storm would create a terrible Fright, and do as much Execution to an Ignorant
Body, as their offensive Arms, and force 'em to seek for Safety in their Heels.

The Emperor is able to raise an hundred thousand Horse, and fifty thousand
Foot. When they are to make War among themselves, they go very unwillingly into
the Field; but when they oppose the Christians, they do it with a great deal of
Cheerfulness; because they expect Indulgences for the Expiation of their Sins.
When they are ready to give Battle, they range their Armies after this Manner.
They divide their Horse into two Bodies, and place one at each Wing, the Foot
is in the Middle, so that the whole forms a Crescent or half Moon. Before they
begin the Battle, they give a great Shout, then make a short Prayer, and fall
on without much Order very furiously; so that they soon overcome, or are as
soon put to flight. Break but their foremost Ranks, and you put their whole
Body into Confusion.

I have said before, that no Person is rich but the Emperor; neither do they
take the Methods to be so; or if they are, their greatest Wisdom will be to
conceal it; for if once known, they are sure to lose all their Wealth.

No Foreign Coin is current in Morocco, except Spanish Pieces of Eight, which
are only received by Weight. But the Jews will secretly take any Coin, and I
suppose dispose of it again with the same Circumspection they receive it. They
have but three sorts of Coin current among 'em. The first a Ducat, of Barbary
Gold. Second a Blanquile, of Silver. And last a Felowze, of Copper. The Image
of the Emperor is not allowed to be put on their Money, being expressly forbid
by Mahomet, in his Alcoran; but they stamp 'em with Arabian Characters. Their
way of reckoning is by the Ounce.

These are the Heads of what I observed in my small Stay among 'em. The
Ambassador informed me, he was in some fear that his Embassy would not succeed;
for he said, he found little else but Delays, Excuses, and nothing of Sincerity
among 'em. We were informed, that the Emperor designed to go speedily upon an
Expedition against the Moors of the Province of Oran, who had newly revolted,
and put to Death their Governor for his Avarice; he having extorted from 'em
vast Sums of Money; and the Inhabitants after his Death, chose one of their own
Province to command 'em. This hastened our Ambassador in his Legation, to get
an Answer one way or other. But we were informed, the King designed to set out
the next Day upon his Expedition, and yet the Ambassador had not his Audience
of Leave. This made him, and us, very uneasy; for we could not stir from
Mequinez, without the Emperor's express Leave. But about seven in the Evening,
the Ambassador had Orders to come and take his last Audience, which was the
ninth of June 1693: We went in the same Manner, as we did at first. But we were
informed by our Interpreter, that the King was in a very ill Humor, and that
he had but an Hour before killed two of his chief Blacks, by stabbing 'em with
a Dagger he continually wore at his Girdle.

We entered the Palace further than the first Time, where we waited a full half
Hour. At last the Emperor approached richly dressed, and finely mounted upon a
white Barbary; the Saddle and other Accoutrements wrought with Gold and
precious Stones in several Places. He was this Day in his Yellow, or Fatal
Vest, and sprinkled in many Places with the Blood of those he had slain; and I
thought his Countenance had something more of Horror in it, than at our first
Audience. He had a Spear in his Hand, set round with Pearls on the Top, and a
Cap with Estriches Feathers waving in the Wind. All his Attendants had fled his
Presence, at the Notice of his having on his yellow Vest; and he had only about
a dozen of his Guards waiting upon him trembling, but the Alcaydes and other
great Men crept about us during our Audience.

The Emperor begun with his old Compliment of You're welcome, but his Looks
and his Words I thought did but ill agree. The Ambassador used many Arguments
with him to bring his Embassy to a happy Issue, but to no Purpose. The
Ambassador told me, the King was a Person that had not the least Regard to his
Word, and even disowned a Letter he had written to his Master the King of
France. Therefore, said he, we'll take our leave of this Country of Monsters in
two Days: for the King had signed his Departure, with all his Retinue.

I was very well pleased with this his Resolution; for now I should once more
see that Treasure of my Soul, whose Absence had robbed me of all Joy. I even
thought these two Days the longest of my Life; but at last they were past, and
we set out very merrily; at least I did, and all the rest of the Retinue. Though
I must own I could not answer for the Ambassador, for I believe the ill Success
of his Embassy had a little chagrin'd him. I did my utmost Endeavor to divert
his Melancholy upon the Road, which he took very kindly. We lay in Tents the
first Night, which the Ambassador had taken care to provide us, and Provision
likewise; for there is never an Inn between Mequinez and Mammora.

We rose the next Day very early, that we might avoid the Heat of the Sun. When
we came within a League of the Town, we saw coming toward us our Italian, and
by the Melancholy in his Looks, I began to tremble with Apprehension of some
Accident. As Soon as he approached us, after paying his Obedience to the
Ambassador, he addressed himself to me. Said he, in French,

I wish some one else would have taken my Commission upon 'em, for what I have
to tell you will cut you to the Heart. The various Troubles in my Breast locked
up my Tongue, so that I had not Power to ask him any Questions. In short, said
he, your Mistress is forced away from us, through the Treachery of Mustapha. At
hearing this fatal News, I dropped senseless from my Camel, nor came to my self
till we arrived at Mammora. I was a thousand times going to destroy my self;
and I believe I had done it in the height of my Despair, if I had not been
withheld. In short, the Ambassador was no longer ignorant of my cruel Loss: For
in my Ravings, I had called her my dear Wife. He seemed amazed at the
Discovery, and reproached me in a handsome Manner, for not trusting him with
the Secret. I was not in a Condition to beg his Pardon, neither was there any
one could give me Comfort. I was carried on Board, where I inquired in what
manner she was taken away.

The Captain informed us, that Mustapha had made his Escape out of the Cabin
Window, by swimming. I did not tell any one of it, said the Captain, because I
thought it would be to no Purpose; for I imagined there could be no other ill
Consequence to attend his Escape, but merely the Loss of him. He had been gone
three Days, when on the fourth there came on board us the Governor of Mammora,
the Fugitive Mustapha, and one hundred Soldiers, who immediately seized on the
young Gentleman, whom they said was a Woman, and Wise to a Renegado of Sallee.
It was in vain to oppose 'em, especially when I found by her Breasts, that she
was really a Woman. They took her on Shore, notwithflanding all her Cries,
Shrieks and Lamentations, which pierced our very Hearts. They put her on board
a Saick, and set Sail immediately, steering South, as we suppose for the Port
of Sallee. This Gentleman, (meaning the Italian) took it upon him to acquaint
you with the unhappy Accident; but, added he, I believe it is not possible to
regain her. The Ambassador was so good as to offer his Assistance, in what lay
in his Power. I begged he would be pleased to lend me a Boat, with some Hands
to work her. He very willingly granted my Request; and told me, he would lend
me the Ship, but he feared it might occasion a more public Quarrel.

He lent me ten Hands, four Patareros, and sufficient small Arms, with every
thing that was necessary. My kind Italian would accompany me, and the rest of
the Company went Voluntary. We spent but little time in fitting out; and the
Wind proving favorable, we set Sail, and made very good Way. The Saick had not
pursued her Voyage above five Hours before us, so that we had hopes of getting
up with 'em. I encouraged my Companions, who labored incessantly. We sailed
and rowed all Night, and when the Morning dawned, we gained Sight of a Vessel,
which we did not doubt was that we sought for. We labored hard to come up with
her, and gained upon her every Moment. Before eight a-clock we came a long side
of her, and I soon discovered Mustapha giving Orders about the Engagement. I
drew out a pair of Pistols, and shot him dead. The rest fired upon us, but
notwithstanding all their Opposition, I jumped into their Vessel, followed by
the Italian and five more of the Men: And though they were superior in Number,
yet we soon made 'em ask for Quarter. I upon the Instant inquired for her that
was always in my Thoughts; but, to my great Grief, was informed by an English
Slave at the Oar, that she was taken on board of a Galley by Captain Hamet, our
Irish Renegado; and they assured me, it was impossible for 'em to be overtaken.
Unspeakable was the Sorrow I felt, at this Relation; and all the Satisfaction I
felt was, that I had rewarded Mustapha for his Treachery. We steered our Course
back, but I was more dead than alive in the Voyage.

When we came on Board, the Ambassador condol'd with me for my Misfortune, and
entreated me to take Comfort. I told him Death was now my only Comfort, and I
hoped he was not far off.

Our Italian had agreed for his Passage on board a Vessel in the Bay, bound for
Rome: He begged that I would accompany him into Italy; and when he had settled
his Affairs, he would (if it lay in his Power) come back to Sallee, and do his
Endeavor to find what was become of Mrs. Villars. I thanked him for his Offer,
and told him I would accept of it. I had Effects enough, having all the Money
and Jewels we brought from Hamet's Country House. We took leave of the
Ambassador, and gave him abundance of Thanks for his Civilities, and went on
board the Vessel that waited for us; we set Sail immediately, and in two Months
safely arrived at Rome; where our Italian did not care to go publicly on
Shore, but stayed till the Darkness of the Night favored our Landing.

We had all our Goods disembark'd, and took a Private Lodging in an obscure
Part of the City, where we were sure of being concealed. We asked our Landlord,
(who was a Frenchman) about the News of the Place. He told us a great deal of
idle stuff, which signified nothing to us; at last, by the Advice of the
Italian, I inquired of him, if Hernando Alvares were in Town, or no? He
answered me, that he had been dead above two Months, and had left a noble
Estate behind him. I asked him if he had not left a Wife to possess it. No,
said he.

About three Years ago (continued our Landlord) he was to have been married to
a beautiful young Lady, an Heiress to a vast Fortune; but his Brother stepped in
between, and gained her Affection. Some say they were married, and others not;
but she was delivered of a fine Boy. Don Hernando took a barbarous Revenge of
his Brother, as it is reported: He bribed a Captain of a Vessel to put a Weight
about his Neck, and drown him in the Sea. But to make amends for this inhuman
Act, he has left his vast Estate to the Son his Brother had by the Lady, and
has chosen his Holiness the Pope for his Guardian. Pray, said I, what is become
of the young Lady? He answered me he could not tell; but it is supposed she was
gone into a Nunnery.

The Italian, while our Discourse lasted, had turned his Face to the Window,
that we might not perceive the Disorder of his Countenance. As Soon as our
Landlord was gone, he turned to me, and embraced me; said he, My dear Friend,
let what will happen to me, I shall have it in my Power to serve you with my
Fortune; and so much I think my self obliged to you, that if half will buy your
Mistress's Liberty, you shall command it. I returned him the Acknowledgments
his kind Proffer deserved, but told him, I could not expect to be so happy. He
bid me not despair. I begged he would not mention any thing of my Affairs, till
his own came to a lucky Issue.

The next Day, we procured our selves Habits after the Mode of Rome, and
resolved to go to Grimaldi's Country House, to hear, if it were possible, some
Tidings of Isabella.

Antonio had dressed himself in a mean Habit, and appeared as my Servant. It
being but six pleasant Miles, we had resolved to walk it. We entered a Village
within half a Mile of the Place, and resolved to dine at a poor Inn, there to
gain some Intelligence. I went for a French Merchant, and Don Antonio passed
(as I said) for my Servant, and Interpreter, and informed me of the Discourse
that past between 'em. That Gentleman, (meaning me) says he to our Host, has
some Business to communicate to Don Antonio Grimaldi, (for we knew of his being
there). Our Innkeeper told us, it would be a difficult Matter to talk to him
about Business now, for he was that very Evening going to set out with his
Daughter, in order to put her into a Nunnery at Naples; for all his Persuasions
(added he) cannot prevail upon her, but she is fixed unalterably in her
Resolution: This News, you may be sure, hastened our Departure; but we did not
well know how to disclose the Secret we had to unfold.

Don Antonio, as not doubting Isabella's Affection to him, was fearful lest an
abrupt Discovery should have some strange Effect upon her: We therefore
resolved, that I should first appear and break the Matter by degrees; for he
had informed me that she spoke French very well. When we approached the House,
Antonio stood at some Distance, while I went up to the Door alone. The Porter
and I not understanding one another, I had like to have returned as wise as I
came. But at last a Servant in the Family happening to understand French, came
and ended our sputt'ring at one another. I informed him I had a Secret of the
greatest Importance to declare to Donna Isabella. He told me he would acquaint
his Lord with it. The Servant went in, and immediately returned with a grave
old Gentleman, that seemed to have been weeping. He asked me in French what I
had to say to his Daughter, for she did not care to speak to any one. I begged
that I might be brought to her Presence, and did not doubt but that I had
something to say to her which would not displease her. Don Antonio Grimaldi
gravely smill'd, and shook his Head; No, no, Sir, said he; you have nothing to
give either her or me Comfort, unless you could revive the Dead. I answered
him, he did not know what I could do. But I told him, the longer he delayed my
seeing her, the longer he deferred their own Happiness. Well, said he, I have
no Hopes; but you shall see my Daughter, to convince you that nothing in this
World can make us Happy.

He led me through several stately Apartments all hung with Black. And though
it was high Noon, yet the Sun's Light was excluded, and dim twinkling Lamps
usurped his Room. At last we entered a Chamber, where sat the fair Forlorn. I
stopped a Moment to behold her, and notwithstanding a fixed Melancholy on her
Countenance, Beauty triumphed there. She was caressing an Infant she had in her
Arms. The Father entered first, and told her in French, that a Gentleman of
France had a Secret to communicate to her, that would banish her Melancholy.
The Gentleman (returned the Lady) may promise Impossibilities, but rather than
expose him, I would beg him not to open his Mouth upon that Subject. Madam,
said I, I own my self a Physician, but I pretend to cure the Mind as well as
the Body; and to acquaint you with what you know already, you mourn the Loss of
a Gentleman, that you imagine was drowned at Sea: But I can assure you he
escaped that Danger, and is now a Captive in Barbary, pining under the severest
Want; and all the Hope he has of Freedom, is through your Means.

The Lady upon this looked wishfully upon her Father, and said, Dear Father,
don't endeavor to deceive me any longer; you know I have your Promise, and my
Time's expired. My dear Child, I am amazed as much as you can be, returned the
Father; for by all that is Holy, I never saw this Gentleman in my Life before,
and am so far from believing him, that (begging his Pardon) I fancy there must
be some very great Mistake in it. Upon this I related to them all his Story,
from the beginning, to our meeting in Barbary.

I found my Relation had staggered her Faith a little, for a pleasing Hope,
rectified by powerful Fear, rose in her beautiful Face; and she threw her self
at my Feet, notwithstanding all my Endeavors to the contrary. Dear Sir, said
she, do not show me this light of Comfort, to put it out, and plunge me into
eternal Darkness. Madam, said I, by Heaven, and heavenly Powers, I have seen
him within these two Months, and what I have related to you, his own Mouth
informed me; and having gained my Liberty, I made him a Promise to see his
Friends in Italy, and inform them of his Condition. The Transports and
Ecstasies that took Possession of both their Souls cannot be expressed by
Words; they embraced me, kissed me, called me their Preserver. Unlook'd-for
Happiness! (said Isabella) Heaven, thou have heard my Prayers! and does my dear
Antonio live! I Will immediately imbark for Barbary, and fetch him thence my
self: Even all that I am worth, my precious Boy shall sell his Fortune too, to
redeem his Father. O my young Antonio, Heaven has restored thy Father from the
Dead, (said she to her Child) and I hope we shall see him again. The pretty
Innocent mingled his Tears of Joy with theirs. After their first Transports
were over, they again embraced me, and begged I would put 'em in a way to pay
me the Obligations they owed me. Then they proceeded to enquire which way they
must go about to accomplish his Liberty. I told 'em, I had a Servant waiting
without, that I intended should accompany the Persons they would send to manage
the Affair. They seemed to reproach me for letting him wait without, and were
immediately sending for him in. I begged they would give me leave to go for him
my self, being he was a Foreigner, and they would find it a hard matter to make
him understand them. Upon this I ran out, and called to Antonio, and told him
in few Words how things stood. He followed me close at the Heels: I went into
the Room first, and as Antonio Grimaldi was giving him his Hand to lead him in,
he fell upon his Knees before him. Isabella casting her Eyes upon him, gave a
Shriek, and cried out, It Is he! it is he himself! my dear Antonio! Joy took away
her Speech, and she fell down in a Trance. He ran and caught her in his Arms,
kissed and embraced her, and at last brought her to herself. Imagination must
make up the Discourse between 'em. He told her at last, when Words of Sense
took Place, that he was obliged to me for his Liberty; for he had sent several
Letters to his Sisters, but never could get any Answer. They informed him, that
both his Sisters were gone to reside at Venice with their Husbands, and that
was the Reason his Letters never came to their Hands. Now, said Antonio, if my
Friend (meaning me) was but happy, it would complete my Joy. But to find a
Wife, a Son, and Father kind, when I had many Reasons to think the contrary,
must have some Alloy, or it would not be possible for me to bear it.

Antonio upon this related my unhappy Story, and they all lamented my hard
Fortune. He afterward inquired of his dear Isabella concerning her own
Sufferings. Which she readily began.

Said she, that Day you left me, the Troubles of my Mind wrought so much upon
my Body, that the Physicians declared I was in a violent Fever, and advised my
Father to send me into the Country, which he accordingly did the next Day. The
Thoughts of being so far from my dear Antonio increased my Malady, and my
Father had little Hopes of my Life. My Fever, after having brought me to the
brink of the Grave, left me: And my Father imagining it was the approaching
Marriage had wrought this sudden Illness, told me one Day, that if it was that
which lay so heavy upon my Spirits, he would remove it, by giving me the Power
of refusing to be the Wife of Hernando Alvarez. I thanked him, and told him he
had taken the only way to restore my Health; and that if I was forced to wed
him, I should be for ever miserable. He was the tenderest of Fathers, and
informed me he would never force my Inclinations. The Kindness my Father showed
me worked so much upon me, that I began to recover.

Your Brother used often to visit me in my Illness, which retarded my Health.
My Father seeing it would never be in my Power to like him, very frankly told
him so, and begged that he would discontinue his Visits; for he was resolved
his Daughter should never give her Hand, where it was not in her Power to give
her Heart. They parted with many Words between them, but my Father persisted in
his Resolution.

I began to discover that I was with Child, and a new Sort of an Illness seized
me. I knew this was an Accident that could not long be concealed, therefore I
resolved to let you know my Condition; and I gained my Woman, by several
Promises of a Reward, to deliver a Letter to you: But she betrayed me to your
Brother, which I suspected from her not appearing. I therefore declared the
Truth to my indulgent Father. He was very much enraged at the Discovery; but
paternal Love prevailing over his Passion, he forgave me, and promised to make
me happy with my dear Antonio. These Promises made my Sickness vanish, and I
had no other Disease but what attends breeding Women. My Father went to Rome to
enquire for Don Antonio, but could not get the least Information of him. This
gave me a new Shock. But what bitter Agonies did I feel, when I received a
Letter from your Brother, with a Copy of that I had written to you enclosed;
which was as follows.

UNgrateful Woman! Yet I will no more upbraid thee, but let thy Crime be thy
Punishment. He that betrayed me I will not call by the Name of Brother: He has
paid for his Ingratitude with his Life. I only give thee this Notice, that thou
may feel some of those Pangs thou have thrust into the Breast of

Hernando Alvares.


The Reading of this Letter sunk me down, and I called for Death, as my last
and only Hope. I resolved to refuse all Food, and had starved my self to Death,
if a good Priest had not convinced me by his Arguments my Soul was in Danger,
and I should be guilty of a double Murder, my self, and Infant. I lingered on in
a restless State of Unhappiness, till the Time of my Delivery came, which I
prayed to Heaven to end with my Life: But it pleased the Almighty Power to
spare me to be happy.

The Sight of my precious Infant called to Mind the Loss of his Father; but I
resolved to banish all Thoughts of Death, that I might take Care of his tender
Years. But I begged my Father to give me leave to go into a Nunnery. With much
Importunity he granted my Request, on this Condition, that if I continued in
that Mind at the End of two Years, I might do as I thought fit. Though I thought
the Time an Age, yet I unwillingly consented.

My Father used Means with the Pope, to have your Brother called to an Account
for your Death; and it had gone hard with him, if we could have procured any
Witnesses; but for Want of that he was acquitted. In a little time a heavy and
deep Melancholy seized him; and he professed so sincere a Repentance, that even
I almost forgave him. He begged he might see the Child; which my Father made me
comply with. He shed such abundance of Tears over it, that my Father wept for
Company; and spoke so tenderly of the Loss of his Brother, that wiped off all
Suspicions of his Repentance. Since thou have lost a Father, said he, through
my Barbarity, it is but just that I should prove a Father to thee. He
frequently came to see him, though I could never be prevailed upon to accept of
a Visit. At last his Grief seized him so violently, that he was given over by
his Physicians. When he was upon his Deathbed, he made his Will, and
bequeathed my little Antonio his whole Estate; leaving the Pope his Guardian.
He died full of Repentance for his Crime, and no doubt his Soul took her Flight
to Heaven.

The generous Antonio could not refuse some Tears to the Memory of his
repentant Brother; but Joy succeeded Sorrow. The Pope was acquainted with the
Story, who sent to congratulate their happy Meeting. Nothing but Mirth and
Pleasure ran through the Villa; which increased my Sorrow.

Don Antonio told me one Day, that he did not think he had a Right to rejoice
without me; and now, said he, I have nothing to afflict me but what you feel,
therefore will bend my Thoughts if it be possible to relieve your Grief. I can
procure a Friar of my Acquaintance to go to Sallee, one that knows the Nature
of the Business we shall send him about, being he has often gone to redeem
Captives: We'll send for him, and you may give him what Instructions you think
fit. I thanked him, and was very sorry for the Trouble I should give him, but
was resolved to accompany him my self. He told me he would not have me go by
any means, for I could be of no manner of Use in the Affair, but rather a
Hindrance; and if I should be once discovered, might fall into the same State
we both lately escaped from; and perhaps meet with much worse Usage than I had
before. His Advice was so reasonable, that I resolved to take it, whatever
Violence I did my self. The Friar was sent for, bad his Commission and
Instructions given him, and withal to spare no Cost. Antonio told him whatever
he gave should not be thought unreasonable.

He was to have a thousand Crowns for his Expenses, and two thousand more if he
succeeded.

The Friar undertook his Voyage with a great deal of Alacrity, and gave us
great Hopes of his Success by his Willingness; and he embarked the next Day for
Genoa, that Port being the properest Place to get a Vessel for Barbary. We
wished him a good Voyage, and recommended him to Fortune.

Don Antonio did all he could to divert my Melancholy: We often went a hunting,
shooting, fishing, and visiting the Ladies. In short, he made me partake in all
the Diversions Italy could afford. But though I seemed often to be diverted,
yet I had always my Condition too much at Heart to be merry. We viewed all the
Rarities and Antiquities of ancient and modern Rome. I must confess, these
Amusements lulled my Sorrows often, but when I had Time for Reflection they
rushed upon me with the greater Force.

I shall not trouble my Reader in describing Places treated on by Pens far
above my weak Capacity; but only give a short Description of Naples, whither
Don Antonio would have me go. I was not much averse to the Journey, though a
pretty long one; and we set out with a very handsome Equipage. Donna Isabella,
with her little Son, accompanied us; but Don Antonio Grimaldi was obliged to
attend the Pope, to settle the Affairs of his Son-in-law's Estate. I was
obliged to appear cheerful, if it was but in Complaisance to Don Antonio.

We arrived at Naples in three Days, without meeting any thing extraordinary
upon the Road. Certainly, never any City in the World can boast a finer
Situation: Add to that, their Buildings are sumptuous, every private House
seems a Palace, and every Palace looks like the Court of a King: The Streets
spacious; a mild Air and free from Tempests; strong, both by Art and Nature. In
short, if I was obliged to live out of my native Country, (which every Man is
fond of) Naples should be the only Place. It has a Wall kept in very good
Repair, with three Castles almost impregnable. The chief is seated on Mount
Erasmus, so called from a Chapel dedicated to him: But if it is Erasmus
Roterdamus, I cannot imagine how the Roman Catholics came to have such a
particular Regard for him, when it is very well known he was no great Friend to
them; at least he was a Scourge to their Absurdities in his Writings.

This is not only a Safeguard to the City and adjacent Country, but might prove
its Scourge. In 1587 it was blown up by Lightning, penetrating to the Powder
Room, which mightily damaged the whole City. The second is Castello nuevo, or
the new Castle, built by Charles, King of Naples. This Castle commands the
Haven, and is generally the Viceroy's Dwelling. The third stands on the
South-east Corner of the City, built upon a little Rock, joined to the
Continent by Lucullus the Roman, and is sometimes called by his Name, but
oftener Castello del Ovo, or the Castle of the Egg, from its Form. They have
also a fine Arsenal for their Galleys, very well kept, and furnished with great
Store of Ammunition. But I think the Mole the most extraordinary Piece of Work,
being it defends the Haven from the stormy South; lined of each Side, and paved
on the Top with noble square Stones, and in the middle a fine large Fountain of
Marble; the whole Extent is five hundred Paces, and ten in Breadth. The
Inhabitants often boast of the Antiquity of their City, founded twenty years
after Troy's Destruction, and called by the ancient Poets Parthenope, which
Virgil does sufficiently testify in his Georgics, Ille Virgilium me Tempore
dulcis alebat
Parthenope, studiis florentem ignobilis oti.


This City has suffered many Revolutions, but none more extraordinary than that
in 1640, when a poor Fisherman, without Shoes to his Feet, in five Days time
commanded the whole Power of Naples; and might have lived in that Grandeur, if
his Mind had changed with his exalted State; but he was still a Fisherman. His
short-lived Fire blazed too fierce to last, and he fell a Victim to the Rage he
himself began.

Their Churches are noble Structures, and beautified with Paintings by the best
Hands. Their Women are most of 'em beautiful, but my Heart had no Room to think
of them.

The City is governed by very wholesome Laws, but one particular Article adds
much to the Quiet of it; none are suffered to wear Swords but those of the
Garrisons; so if there is any Rencounter in the Streets, a Bout at Fisty-Cuffs
generally ends the Dispute: Though Bravo's are to be hired to do a Murder here as
cheap as at Rome, and Men of Honor too; for we heard of a Quarrel between two
Neapolitan Gentlemen, where one, according to Custom, hired a Bravo to murder
the other, and gave him his Reward beforehand. But it so fell out, that some
Friends to both Parties reconciled the two Gentlemen. The Person that had
bargained with the Bravo for the Job, sent to him, and told him of their
Reconcilement, but that he might keep the Money. The other told him it was not
in his Power to return it him, but he was above receiving Money without doing
his Work, and therefore the Gentleman must of necessity suffer Death. He
entreated him, and used many Arguments, but all to no purpose. When he found
nothing would prevail, he told him he would immediately acquaint the Gentleman
with his Design, which he did accordingly. Notwithstanding, the Bravo the same
Evening found his Opportunity, and left the other Gentleman for dead upon the
Mole; though he recovered after a lingering Illness. But the Bravo had the
Impudence to go to the other (when he found the Gentleman was in a fair way of
Recovery) and told him he begged his Pardon that he had not been as good as his
Word, but he would take Care and mend his Hand very quickly. In short, he was
found so resolute in the Matter, that the Gentleman was obliged to hire another
of the same Trade to give him a Cast of his Office, and dispatch the Bravo
before he could execute what was designed; and the next Day he was found dead
at the very Door of the Gentleman's House he had intended to assassinate;
waiting, as it was supposed, for an Opportunity to do his Business.

After we had viewed every thing within the City, we went to see the much
famed- Vesuvius, or the burning Mountain, a League and a half East of the City.
The Neapolitans call it the Bedchamber of the Sun, because he appears to them
first from the Top of that Mountain. Round the Bottom of it is the richest Spot
of Ground in the Universe, I Will not except even the Mines of Potosi; for the
yearly Vintage produces twelve hundred thousand Ducats. The Middle of the Hill
is very pleasantly shaded with Chestnut, and several other Fruit Trees. The
Mountain has a double Top; that to the North terminates in a Plain finely
cultivated: The other toward the South, which is the Volcano, rises much
higher.

When we had gained the Summit, we descended gradually into its Bowels, by
large Steps cut on purpose. It has, in Times past, done much Damage to the
Country round it, by its sudden Eruptions; but now it forebodes nothing but
Rain, when the Top is envelop'd with Clouds.

When we had sufficiently satisfied our Curiosities at Naples, we took a Tour
to Putzol, or Posuolo, through a Hollow of a Rock, a Mile in Length, and no
other Light but what came in at both Ends, and one in the Middle from the Top
of the Rock. This subterraneous Passage is paved with Stone all through, and
the narrowest Part of it is ten Yards over. About the Middle is a small Chapel
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. We visited all the Rarities of the Place,
particularly Virgil's Tomb, which is almost covered with Ivy. They told me of a
Laurel Tree that sprouted naturally out of it, but (not to take from that
incomparable Man, whose Works are ever-living Laurels) I could not see any such
thing. We also viewed the Lake Agnano, so called from the multitude of Serpents
or Snakes that fall into it from the pendent Mountains. The Water is of two
different Qualities; that tasted upon the Surface is sweet or fresh, but that
taken deeper is of a brackish Taste, supposed from some Minerals that inviron
it.

On the South Side of the Lake stands a natural Stove, which is called St.
German's Stove; but we had not Curiosity enough to enter it, nor Faith enough
to believe a ridiculous Fable that is told concerning it, (though it is reported
a Saint declared it for a Truth) which I shall put down here, and leave my
Reader to judge of it himself. St. German was advised to repair to this Stove,
to cure him of a dangerous Malady: When he came there, he found the Soul of a
very pious Man that he knew, tormented with the Heat of the Place. St. German,
as understanding the Language of Souls, asked him how so good a Man as he was
in his Lifetime, came to be condemned to such a severe Punishment. The Soul
very civilly answered him, that it was for siding with Laurentius, who opposed
Symacus in the Popedom; but he was convinced that his Prayers would fetch him
out of that Hot-house. St. German prayed heartily, you may be sure, and got the
Soul of the Man from out thence; but where it went after, no one could tell.
But the Place was called ever after St. German's Stove.

To the East of the bordering Mountain is a Place they call the Cave of Death;
for whatever Thing of Life ventures to the farther End, they say immediately
drops down dead: Though a Person that lived in a neighboring Village ventured in
often for a Reward. When he came out again he was all of a Sweat, and hardly
able to stand for five or six Minutes. When he had recovered himself, he took a
Dog out of a Bag he had brought with him, and by the means of a wooden
Instrument made for that Purpose, thrust him in to the very End, and drew him
out dead to all Appearance. When he had remained some time for us to view him,
he took him up by the fore Legs, and threw him into the Lake Agnano; where he
recovered immediately, swam out, and ran away from us. Don Antonio told me it
was a hard matter to get a Dog there; for as soon as ever they saw a Stranger,
they would run away into the Woods, and sneak home again when they were gone;
which was the Reason the Person that went in, always secures one for the
Occasion.

A Mile farther we went to the Court of Vulcan; a Place unpleasant enough,
continually smoking, and such hot Vapors arise from the Pores of the Earth
that it almost overcame me. In some Places Water bubbles out of the Cavities;
and if we threw a Stone into it, it rebounded back as if you had struck it
against a Pavement. But the Place is reckoned to cure a great many Distempers;
especially to make Women pregnant, and to cure Diseases of the Head and Eyes.
Donna Isabella was carried over it in a Sedan; but I believe she did not want
it upon the score of Barrenness, as you may understand in her Story.

We spent six Weeks in this not unpleasing Entertainment, and Don Antonio being
pretty well satiated as well as my self, we went back again to Rome.

And now my Melancholy gained such Ground upon me, that it was not in the Power
of Dissimulation to hide it. Don Antonio and all the Family expressed a great
deal of Trouble for my Sorrow; and I am well assured there was not any thing in
their Power they would have refused, to have given me Quiet: But the Mind's
Disease baffles the Physician's Art. At last a Letter arrived from the Friar,
which gave us no other Account, but that he was safe returned to Genoa, and
intended to embark for Rome in a few Days. This lame Account quite disheartened
me, for now we had not the least Hope, being we all agreed if he had succeeded
he would have been forward enough to have acquainted us with it. The Knowledge
of this cast me quite down, and my Body was forced to submit to the Troubles of
my Mind. A strong Fever seized me, and brought me to the Brink of the Grave:
And though I wished for Death, yet, like common Friends, he fled from me in my
Neeessity.

Don Antonio and his Lady seldom went from my Bedside, and had I been a
Brother to 'em they could not have regarded me more. But Nature, in spite of
my Misfortunes, prevailed; and I gathered Strength even against my Will. They
had informed me in my Illness (by my Importunity) of the Fryar's Arrival, and
that he had not succeeded in his Negotiation: But yet they had not told me all
the Particulars. I desired the Friar might be sent for, and conceal nothing
from me of what had past. Accordingly he came, and gave me the following
Relation. Sir, said he in French, as soon as I arrived at Sallee, I met with
Hamet the Irish Renegado. He received me at first after a brutish manner, but
when I declared I came to pay him his Demand for one of his Slaves that had
made his Escape, he began to be less sour in his Treatment. He said a great
many handsome things concerning Don Antonio; but when I began to mention you, he
fell into a violent Rage, and vented bitter Reproaches against you; saying you
were a vile Impostor, had basely deceived and robbed him doubly, of his
Mistress and his Money. I told him I came to ransom the Lady, and pay for
whatever Damages you had done. As for the Lady, said he, she is Food for Fishes
long ago; for rather than she would submit to me, she threw her self overboard,
(before we had gained the Port, when I had taken her out of a Saick one of my
Slaves had brought her in from Mammora) and, in spite of our Endeavors to the
contrary, sunk for ever to the Bottom. And is she gone! said I: O Proof of
virtuous Love! Happy had I been to have embraced the same Fate!

The Relation of this killing Disaster took away my Senses for some time; but
when I had recovered, he went on. I had some Hope at first that this was only a
Fiction of his own; but I found in the Town that it was no Secret, and every
body declared that it was Truth. A Jew confirmed me in it, whom you had bought
several Things of for your Voyage. He told me that Hamet arrived without any
Woman with him, for he saw him land in a very ill Humor, and had complained of
him for assisting you, to his Superior at Mequinez, and he received a
sufficient Check from him. I was too well convinced of the Truth, and therefore
hastened my Departure, and am very sorry I could not succeed; but it was not in
Fate, and I hope you will calmly submit to the Will of Heaven, who sends these
Afflictions for Trials.

The good Friar gave me a great many wholesome Admonitions: But I was not in a
State much to observe 'em. I now began to be careless of the World, because
there was nothing in it (since the Death of my dear Wife) worth my Notice. I had
no Thoughts of returning to England, though I had Opportunities enough; but took
a Resolution of going to some remote Part of the World; imagining, the farther
I was from my native Country, I should be the further removed from my Anxiety.
But alas! Sorrow is too constant a Companion, and there is no parting with it,
but by Death.

I begged Don Antonio, if he heard of any Ship bound for a long Voyage, he
would acquaint me with it, which he promised me to do, (after finding
Persuasion had no Effect on me.) Two Months passed away, and no news of a Ship;
when I began to be very uneasy, and told Antonio, I would even make a Voyage to
Genoa, where I could not well sail of a Vessel. When he found nothing could
stay me, he asked me to what Part of the World I would choose to go? I told him
I did not much care where. Why then, said he, if you please, my Father, and I
will fit you out a Ship of what Burden you think fit, either for War or
Traffic. I thanked him, and told him I would have it for both, if he pleased,
and I would be their Supra-Cargo, if they thought fit to give me so great a
Trust. In short, a Ship of two hundred and fifty Ton was bought of an English
Merchant at Naples; a stout new Vessel, that mounted six and twenty Brass Guns,
and we manned her with a hundred Hands, most English; who understanding I
intended for the South Sea, were glad of the Opportunity. Don Antonio took care
to provide every thing necessary for Traffic; and I was made Captain, and
Supra-Cargo. I told him, I hoped I should in a few Years bring him a good
Account of his Lading. He obligingly answered me, that he hoped I would come
Home reconciled to my self, and he should think himself very happy. The worst
of it was, we had no Commission, neither would I suffer Antonio to procure me
one: For we resolved, like Englishmen, to fight only with the Enemies of our
Country.

I christened my Ship the Isabella, out of Respect to Antonio's Lady, and
hoisted English Colors on Board. When the Day came I was to go on Board, there
were Tears shed on both Sides. I could not, without some Regret, part with so
good a Friend as Antonio had proved to me; and I am very well convinced that
they were as sincere in their Sorrow,

We set Sail from Ostia, (where our Ship lay ever since she came from Naples)
the second of March 1693, with Intention to steer our nearest Course for
America. Our Ship proved an excellent Sailor; and we made the Streights Mouth
in twelve Days from our first Departure. When I beheld the Coast of Africa, it
brought fresh to my Memory past Transactions; and I longed for an Opportunity
to be revenged on the Moors. The next Day our Men discovered two Sail bearing
down the Wind upon us. We thought our selves too well provided to run away;
though we kept on our Course; and perceiving but one of 'em that followed us, I
asked my Men if they were willing to speak with that Vessel, and they cried one
and all, they would with all their Hearts. We prepared for an Engagement with
all the Expedition imaginable, for fear she might prove of Barbary. We hoisted
our English Colors, and they did the same. When we found that, we lay by, that
we might be informed of the News in England. But as soon as ever they came
a-long Side of us, they plucked down their English Colors, and hoisted those
of Morocco in their Room; calling to us to surrender that Instant, or it should
be worse for us. We were a little surpised at first in being disappointed; but
notwithstanding this, my Men desired I would begin the Fight. We had not opened
our Ports yet, and I ordered my Men not to do it till I gave 'em the Word. I
sent a Man to busy himself about the Halliards of our Ancient, that the Rover
might imagine we were going to strike. We were well provided with small Arms,
and all manner of warlike Stores. I ordered every Man to their Posts, but not
to appear till they heard a Whistle; upon which they should open their Ports,
and fire both great Guns and small Arms. The Rover thought us long in striking
our Colors; he therefore called out to us again, and told us if we did not
strike that Instant, they would pour a Broadside into us. Just upon that, I
blew my Whistle; my Men obeyed my Orders punctually, they burst open our Ports,
thrust out their Guns, and gave 'em a Broadside, with a Discharge of their
small Arms. This put 'em in much Confusion, as not expecting any Opposition,
and I am certain we killed a great many of their Men; for imagining we should
be their Prize without fighting, they had crowded upon Deck all their Hands.

I had tacked about, and given her another Salute, before they returned us the
Favor. But they were not long backward, but poured in upon us very fast. My
Men did their Business very well, and the Fight continued half an Hour with the
utmost Fury. I began to fancy we should have but dry Meat (as the Sailors say)
and looking upon their Quarter Deck, I soon spied the Renegado Hamet giving
Directions. At the Sight of him I was both surpised, and pleased; but my Soul
was filled with an unusual Fury. We were so near, that I could hear every Word
he said, though I could not understand him, because he spoke in the Moorish
Tongue. As we were tacking about, and charging again, I showed my self to him:
I told him he was the only Man in the World that I hated; and that very Day he
should be in my Power, or I in his, or Death should put an End to both our
Lives. He seemed surpised, but gave me a great deal of abusive Language. I
encouraged my Men, and desired 'em to fight bravely; for if we fell into their
Hands, we should have no Mercy. I had fired my Piece at Random before, that is,
at the first Person I saw; but now I levelled all at Hamet, and he the same at
me. At last I had the good Fortune to fetch him down. At this Sight I could not
forbear giving a Shout of Joy, which so affected those that were near me, and
understood the Business, that they fought like so many Furies; and after an
obstinate Fight of two Hours, they struck to us. We gave God Thanks for our
Victory; and I immediately went on Board 'em, where we had made a terrible
Slaughter, they having lost by their own Account ninety seven Men.

I asked some of the Men, what Ship that was which stood aloof from the
Engagement; and they informed me it was a Prize they had taken a few Days
before, laden with Wine and other Commodities. I then thought of a Stratagem to
get her into my Power. I ordered our Ship to strike her Colors, and then we
hoisted those of the Moors, and took our Ship in Tow. When the Prize saw us in
that Posture, she imagined the Moor had conquered, and made all the Sail she
could to come up with us; so that we soon came near enough to send our
Longboat armed on Board her.

There were but twelve Moors on Board, besides Prisoners that were put under
Hatches. When our Men had taken care of 'em, I went to 'em, and ordered the
Prisoners to be released, desiring the Person that was the Master to come upon
Deck. The Moors had not taken any of the Lading out of her. She was a Ship of
ninety Tons bound for Leverpool, laden, as I said before, with Port-Wines, and
several Jars of Oil. I told the Master, he was at Liberty to pursue his Voyage
when he thought fit. The poor Man was some time before he could believe what I
said to be real: But when he was convinced, he returned me the Thanks suitable
to the Present I had made him. Yet he would make me a Present of a couple of
Hogsheads of Wine, two Jars of Oil, and two of Raisons; besides six of each to
the Ship's Crew. I had lost seventeen of my Men in the Engagement, and eleven
wounded; which I supplied, by taking as many of the Slaves they had on board of
Hamet's Ship, all by their own Choice; and the rest that did not care for so
long a Voyage, I recommended to the Master of the Prize, who promised me to
land 'em all in England.

We pillaged the Corsair, and found very good Booty. We had out of her to the
Value of two thousand Pounds in Goods, which I entered in the Ship's Books for
the Use of the Company. We did not know well how to dispose of her Crew; and
though they deserved Death, yet in cool Blood I thought it was inhumane; and I
considered they never had injured me. So I released 'em by the Consent of the
whole Company, with this Agreement; that they should make a Present from me to
Mirza the Eunuch of fifty Pound in their Moorish Money, which he that had
Command over the rest swore by Mahomet to perform. When we had taken every
thing that was needful for our Voyage out of her, we let her go, and pursued
our Course.

We touched at the Canaries (or Fortunate Islands) to take in Fresh Water, and
turned the Lading we had taken out of the Corsair into Money: And I shared it
among the Sailors, reserving a fourth Part for my self and Owners, as I called
'em. I gave the Men by Lotts leave to go ashore, where they soon disposed of
their Money for things they wanted; but the chief of their Commerce was for
Wine and Brandy, knowing we had a long Voyage to make.

We were obliged to leave the Place sooner than we designed, by reason our
Pilot had unfortunately killed a Portugueze, and the Governor threatened to
have our Ship stopped if we did not surrender him up. I understood that the
Deceased had been in the Wrong, and therefore rather than run the hazard of
losing him, we set Sail from thence the tenth of April. The Castle fired
several Guns with Shot to stay us, but we did not regard it, but kept on our
Voyage.

We met with nothing worth Notice till we made the Island of St. Vincent, one
of the Cape Verde, and came to an Anchor in ten Fathom Water, in a fine
gravelly Bottom.

These Islands are the Hesperides of the Ancients. The Natives are Blacks, a
poor miserable People. They brought us a few Tortoise, which we exchanged any
Trash for, and they were contented. The Rivulet of fresh Water would hardly
supply us, it being almost dried up. But we had Wood enough. The whole Island
is not above two Leagues and a half in Length, and half a one in Breadth; very
barren of Fruit, Grass, or Roots, and even Animals. I saw only a few wild
Asses, and some Goats, which were too nimble for us, or so far off that they
were not worth our wasting Powder and Shot.

The Island of St. Anthony, about two Leagues to the North, is a well-inhabited
Island, belonging to the Crown of Portugal. We resolved to go and Anchor there;
but the Wind proving fair, we pursued our Voyage, passed by the Island del Fogo
in the Night, and we could perceive the Volcano burning like the Flame of a
Glass-house. Twenty Days afterward we passed the Aequinoctial Line, with the
usual Ceremony of ducking all those Persons that had never been there before.
But I bought off the best Part of the Delinquents for an Anchor of Brandy.

The next Day we buried two of our Men, who died of the Wounds they had
received in the Fight; but all the rest happily recovered. We gave 'em three
Guns, and committed 'em to the Waves.

In the Latitude of twenty two, we saw a great Number of Fowls, and therefore
judged we could not be many Leagues from Land, which we discovered soon after
to be The Island of Ascension, about two Leagues to the North; but we passed by
it, and in two Days more anchored in six Fathom Water at the Island of St.
Catharines, about half a Mile from the main Land of Brasil.

This Island lies in twenty seven Degrees thirty Minutes of South Latitude. It
is almost a continued Grove of Trees, and but thinly inhabited by Portugueze,
and a few Blacks. They are in want almost of all the Necessaries of Life,
besides Provision, which is plentiful enough, such as it is. The Inhabitants
are courteous enough, and would not take Money for any thing we had of 'em, but
Linen and Woollen. And after I had got every thing that was necessary for the
Ship, I sold 'em Goods to the Value of four hundred Pounds, which I received in
pure Gold. They never have Peace with the Indians of the Continent; and being
so very near, they have often formerly made Inroads, and carried off the
Inhabitants. But they have prevented such Attempts for the future, by building
several Redoubts, where they keep constant Guard.

They pay no other Taxes but the Church-Tythes, (which they will be sure not to
lose;) and for Religion, they had but one Friar when I was there; and all his
Business was, as I was informed, only to receive his Tenths.

A Frenchman told me a pleasant Story of one of the Inhabitants, an industrious
Fellow that had ten Children; but, notwithstanding his Industry, found it a
hard Matter to bring both Ends together at the Year's End: Though the worst of
his Grievances was the Priest's Tithes, and his Money. He often endeavored to
persuade the Father to forget him a Year or two, but all to no Purpose. One Day
the Father paid him a Visit, in order to receive his Dues. The poor Man told
him ingenuously he had it not in his Power to give it him. But he still
insisted. At last he told him he had but one Way to procure it, and that he
feared the Church would not allow of. The Friar told him he was the best Judge
of that, if he would tell him what it was. Why, said the Man, a Person that
lives on the Continent has several fat Pigs, of a very fine Breed. Now, said
he, I could bring one over with me unperceived of any one, as I come from my
daily Labor; and such a one (naming a Neighbor) will give me a good Price for
it. The Friar paused some time, but at last gave him this Answer. It is
certainly a Sin to steal, but yet it is a greater Sin to rob the Church of its
Due, and therefore I will absolve you. But bring the Pig to me, for if it is
worth so much to your Neighbor, it is worth as much to me. The Man told him he
would be sure to bring it him that Night, and the Friar said if he was not at
Home, he would leave Word with his Servant to take Care of it. Now the Friar
had no constant Dwelling here; for they are sent from Lagoa, a Town upon the
Continent, about ten Leagues to S. S. W. and their Tithes were usually sent
there in a small Bark kept for that Purpose. The Priest took care to be out of
the way (that he might swear he knew nothing of the Matter, if it was found
out) at the Time when the Man was to come with his Pig; but gave his Servant a
strict Order, whatever was brought should be immediately carried on Board, and
taken a great deal of Care of.

When the Time came, the Man was as good as his Word, and brought to the
Priest's House his Promise in a Hand-basket. The Servant obeyed his Master's
Orders, and went to carry it on Board; but before he could get to the Harbor,
what he had in his Basket began to cry out. The poor Fellow was very much
frighted to find he had got a Child in the Basket; but fearing, by the Charge
his Master gave of it, he was deeply concerned in the Affair, made all the
haste he could on Board: And the Vessel setting Sail that Night, he went with
his Charge to Lagoa, where he very secretly delivered it to the Brotherhood.

The Priest at St. Catharines thought his Man had robbed him, and made his
Escape, being he was missing so long; for he had carried a great many other
things on Board before the Child. The Imagination of this made the Father very
uneasy; and the Wind continuing fair, he embarked on board a Vessel, and
arrived at Lagoa the Day after his Man. But what was his Surprise, when he
found he had got a sucking Child, instead of a sucking Pig! He told the rest of
his Brethren the Affront that had been put upon him; and they resolved to send
the Bantling back again: but either for want of due Care, or through the
Fatigue of the Sea, the Child died. When the Friar came back to St. Catharines,
he ran open-mouthed to the poor Man, and swore he should be excommunicated for
playing Tricks with the Church. The Man told him, he was forward enough to have
his Tithes; so having ten Children, and finding nine too many to keep, he was
resolved he should have his Due, and have the Tenth. And farther added, if he
offered to make any more Stir about it, he would acquaint every body with his
encouraging him to steal from his Neighbors.

The Father finding the Man had too much Understanding to be Priest-ridden,
thought it his best way to hold his Tongue. But the Secret was disclosed, and
the poor Priest led a sad sort of Life: For whenever he came for his Tithes,
many would merrily ask him if he would have his Tithe Pig. In short, the Friar
was shamed out of the Island, and the Fraternity were obliged to send another
Man in his Room, who very often hears the Story of the Child, though much against
his Will.

We anchored at first within a Bow-shot of the Island of Parrots, in seven
Fathom Water: But we were informed the best Place to water our Ship, was two
Leagues beyond the Island of St. Catharine. We had our present Wants supplied
from the Continent, though not enough to water the Ship; so we resolved to steer
for the watering Place, in the Bay of Arazatiba.

We steered between the Island and the Continent, and all the way on each side
we discovered a beautiful Prospect of Houses, environed with natural Woods and
Groves, which gave the Eye a vast Delight. When we approached the Bay of
Arazatiba, we perceived a Ship, with English Colors, with her Anchor a-peak,
in order to discover who we were. I immediately hoisted English Colors, but
prepared for an Engagement, as imagining her to be French, (or some English
Pirate;) for there was War between the two Nations: But I found it was a
Privateer, commanded by Captain Dampier, who made me a Visit, after having
hailed us. When he was on Board, he used many Persuasions to engage me to
consort with him, and follow the Business of Privateering; but I told him, I
had other Affairs to manage. After I had treated him handsomely with what the
Ship afforded, he took his Leave, and invited me to dine on board his Vessel
the next Day. I gave him my Promise to wait on him, and I accordingly went,
where I was very handsomely treated; and there we agreed two Days after to make
an Entertainment jointly for the Officers of both Ships on Shore; and the Day
after that, for the rest of the Crew.

In order to this I commanded a large Tent to be pitched, capable of holding
fifty Persons; and we strove who should send the most Materials on shore for
our Feast. We had the Music of both Vessels; but mine proving to be the best,
as being Italians, gave the most Delight: not but they joined in Consort, and
agreed very well.

After Dinner, Captain Dampier told me, though he could not oblige me with
Italian Music, yet he had an English Eunuch that sang admirably; he added, he
could not answer for his Judgment, but he was very well convinced he never
heard a finer Voice in his Life. The Person was brought in; but my Readers may
guess at my Surprise, when, in the Person of the Singer, I discovered my
Mistress's Lawyer, whom my Master and his Friend had equipt for a fine Singer.
I knew him as soon as ever I saw him, but I perceived by his Behavior he had no
Knowledge of me; neither was it very possible he could have known me, because
he had never seen me but once, and then he had too much Concern to make any
Observations: But the Occasion had imprinted in my Mind a lively Idea of him.

He sung admirably well, and with good Judgment. I asked the Captain how he
came to be an Eunuch; he told me he could not inform me, neither could he ever
prevail upon him to let him know it. We were very merry for several Hours; and
I may safely declare that during that Time I had buried my inward Malady.

I told the Singer, I believed I could let Captain Dampier into the Secret of
his Castration, if he would not be offended at it. He seemed very much
concerned, and blushed; but imagining I knew nothing of the Matter, he gave me
his Consent to say what I thought fit; yet with the utmost Chagrine in his
Face, as believing he was only going to be the Jest of the Company.

But when I began to name my Master, and entered into some Part of the Story, I
found him in the utmost Confusion, insomuch that I pitied him, and told him I
would not proceed any farther, without his Consent. He told me in bad French,
(for he had observed that the Captain and I sometimes talked to one another in
that Language) that I was very welcome to tell his unfortunate Story, but not
to so many Auditors; for, added he, I perceive you know it very well. I gave
him my Word only to tell the Captain, for which he thanked me; but I told him,
in return, that he must let me into the rest of his Story; which he promised to
do. The Captain and I, with my quondam Lawyer, took an Opportunity of leaving
the Company, and walking a little way up the River Side, where I informed him
that I came to the Knowledge of his Story, by the Porter that dogged him, (for
I did not think it convenient to let him know that I was a Person concerned)
and that seeing him go into the Coach in Lombard Street, I remembered his Face
again. He gave us his Story in the following manner.

I was bred up to the Law by my Father, an Attorney of Lincoln's Inn; who dying,
left me a small Estate, which I soon spent in none of the best Company. I had
no Thoughts of Business, 'till drove to it through the utmost Necessity. But
finding Want approaching began to open my Eyes, I took Chambers in
Cliffords-Inn, and resolved to stick to Business. I soon found Clients enough
through the Credit of my Father; and understanding the rough as well as the
smooth Part of the Law, I got Money enough to supply even any Extravagance. I
had ever been a very great Admirer of the Female Sex, and had the good Fortune,
or rather the Ill, to succeed in most of my Amors.

The first time I ever saw the fatal Cause of my Misfortune, was at St.
Dunstan's Church; (which, to my Shame I must own, I too often frequented
without Devotion.) Our Eyes often told us the Language of the Heart. I got the
Opportunity of sitting in the next Pew to her, but had never once disclosed my
Passion.

One Sunday, as the Clerk had set the Psalm, she begged I would lend her my
Book; saying she had left hers at Home. When she had done, she returned it me,
and thanked me. I had resolved with my self to have waited on her out of the
Church, but was prevented by the Person that was afterward her Husband. When I
came home, I pulled my Prayer Book out of my Pocket, but perceived it would not
shut as usual, which put me on examining it. I found a Note pinned to the last
Leaf, which I had not observed before: The Contents were to invite me to an
Assignation that Evening at Six.

I was very punctual, and found her there before me. I begged her Pardon for
making her wait, which she easily granted with a gentle Reproach; and we soon
came to a right Understanding: for that very Night, before we parted, I had
what I wished; the Sweet which was followed by the worst of Bitters.

She told me she had long had a Passion for me; which, though she resisted all
she could, got the better of her Modesty, and forced her to declare it. She
informed me too, that she was speedily to be married to the Man that led her
out of Church, though it was much against her Inclination; but she was obliged to
comply with her Mother's Commands.

We had many Meetings: sometimes at my Chambers, till I was taken too much
Notice of by some of my Neighbors: And when she was married we often met at
different Places, and she as often made me handsome Presents. He then related
how he was discovered at my Master's House by one of the Prentices, (meaning
me; but as he concealed his Face by turning it to the Window, he could not
remember him.) He also related all that I have declared in the former Sheets;
and added, that when the Operation was over, his Mistress, as knowing him of no
farther Use to her, left him without speaking a Word. When I had recovered
Strength, said he, to write, I sent for some of my intimate Friends, and among
the rest a Surgeon. I told him my Misfortune, and was examined by him; but I
was obliged to stay at the Inn several Days. At last (though almost a Miracle) I
was perfectly cured, and returned to my Business; but my Story getting Air, I
was made the Scoff of every Body that saw me; till in short my Life became a
Burden to me, and I took a Resolution to go to some Part of the World where no
one should know me; and getting acquainted with Captain Dampier, he favored me
so far as to enter me Steward. I had learnt to sing when I was young; and my
Voice, growing clear by my Loss, is much improved. I had kept my Misfortune a
Secret to all the Crew, if I had not received a Wound in my Thigh by an Indian
Arrow on the Coast of Florida, a Year ago; for the Surgeon coming to dress me,
when the extreme Anguish had taken away my Senses, perceived my Condition and
disclosed it to the Company: But I have the good Fortune not to be flouted at.

When the Story was finished, we joined our Company again, and ended the Day in
Mirth and Jollity. The next Day my Crew went on Shore to regale themselves; for
Captain Dampier and I had altered our Resolution of sending both Companies
together, for fear of Quarrels and Disorder. And his Crew went on Shore the
following Day.

About Noon, as I was reading in my Cabin, I heard the Report of several
Pieces; upon which I ran out, and went my self to the Topmast Head, where I
perceived my Men, who were filling our Casks at the River of Parrots,
surrounded by a multitude of Indians. I upon the Instant let slip our Cables,
and having a strong Sea Breeze, steered full into the River's Mouth at all
hazards, ordering every Man to his Arms, and to load all our great Guns with
Musket Ball. By good Fortune the Tide was almost at the highest, so that we
came on broadside the Rivulet where our Men were defending themselves. They had
made a Rampart with the empty Casks, and had kept off the Indians with their
Pieces; but just as we came, they had spent all their Ammunition, and had
resolved to submit to the Indians. But as soon as they perceived us, they took
to their Heels, and ran toward our Ship, and the Indians after them; but we
soon stopped their Career, by firing our double and round, which killed 'em
above fifty Men, and put the rest to Flight. We took our Men on Board, and
intended to fall out of the River, but found the Tide turned; and before we
could get out our Ship ran a-ground, so that we were obliged to wait till the
next Tide. I was very uneasy at this Accident, and ordered my Lieutenant to
take the Boat, and acquaint Captain Dampier with it.

In the mean time, not to be idle, I armed twenty Men, and ordered them to
guard the rest while they filled our Casks; which was accordingly done, and
with the Longboat brought on Board. I would not let them be hoisted into the
Ship, for fear of hurting her now she lay aground; though it proved to be a
clayie Bottom.

An Hour before Night we perceived an Indian running very swiftly to us, who
called to us in Portugueze to fetch him aboard. As Soon as he was in the Ship,
he told a Man that understood Portugueze, that the Indians, to the Number of a
Thousand, designed in the middle of the Night to attack our Ship, and that they
would come down in Canoes; for they very well knew we could not get out till
Tide of Flood.

This Man, whom we took for an Indian, was a Portugueze the Indians had taken
Prisoner a Year before, and understanding their Language learnt their
Resolution; and while they were calling their Number together, he took his
Opportunity to make his Escape. I ordered him to be told he should be rewarded
for his Intelligence. I immediately called all the Officers together to consult
about the Danger, and we agreed to send to Captain Dampier for Help, who came
with fifty Men well armed: And by his Advice, as soon as it was dark, we landed
six of our Cannon, and raised a small Battery without any Noise or Bustle;
these were pointed up the River slaunting. Two of our Guns were loaded with
double and round, in the Stern of our Ship. The rest of our Men were ordered in
close Coverts on each Side the River, with Directions to let the Indian Canoes
pass 'em, and not to fire till they were all gone by.

Every thing was concerted and settled, and every man ordered to his Post, to
expect the Charge; and we had contrived it so well, that none of our Fires
could hurt one another.

About one a-clock in the Morning we could hear their Paddles in the Water, and
soon after perceive 'em silently falling down the River, to the Number of two
hundred Canoes. We let them come within fifty Yards of our Ship, before we
fired; but when we began, we made such a terrible Slaughter of 'em, that I
pitied 'em. We took one Canoe with twelve Indians, and their Chief among them.
When the Morning dawned, we were amazed to see what Havoc Death had made; the
very Shores were stained with Blood, and we had not lost one Man of either of
our Crews. The Portugueze, who gave us Notice, I rewarded with a hundred Pound,
and two new Suits of Clothes, both Linen and Woollen; and we made Use of him
for our Interpreter. He told us we had one of their Caciques among the
Prisoners, and a Man of great Power among the Indians. I ordered him to ask him
the Reason of his Enmity to us, since we had never offended them. He told him
that he took us for Spaniards, or Portugueze, Nations they hated from the
barbarous Usage they had met with from them: But he was sorry he had molested
us, being he was convinced we were Englishmen, and Enemies to the Spaniards as
well as themselves: But however, he would pay sufficiently for his Ransom, if
we would spare his Life; and accordingly we agreed for a hundred Weight of Gold
Dust, and twenty in Ingots, and he ordered one of his Retinue to fetch it. In
the mean time, we took the Advantage of the Tide, and fell down to our old
Station.

The next Day at Noon two Canoes arrived, one with the Gold, and several
Persons of Quality that came to wait on their King; and the other laden with
Fruits and Provisions, which I had equally parted between both Ships Companies.
I took the Ingots for my Sharers, and the Dust was divided among us according
to our Allowance. Captain Dampier and his Crew were mightily pleased with their
Dividend, and once more pressed me to accompany them: but I gave 'em a flat
Denial for the present, with this Hope, that when I had visited several Places
in the South Sea, I would return to St. Salvador, and wait two Months for them
there.

We put the Indians on Shore, and the next Day weighed Anchor again, saluting
Captain Dampier with 11 Guns, who returned the like Number, and we steered our
Course with a fresh Gale, for the Streights of Magellan, I intending to pass
through those Streights into the South Sea; for I was of Opinion it would shorten
our Voyage; and then my Curiosity strengthened that Opinion: But I was advised
by my Lieutenant to venture up to Buenos Airs, a Town belonging to the
Spaniards, where he assured me we might drive a very good Trade underhand with
the Merchants. I communicated the Matter to the whole Company, who unanimously
agreed it was the best Course we could steer. So we kept in with the Shore, and
steered for the Rio de la Plata, or the River of Plate, which we reached in
twenty Days without any Accident. As we had War with France and Spain, I had
hoisted French Colors, that we might have the Liberty to trade with more
Safety.

Buenos Airs is situated above fifty Leagues up the River of Plate, which
above the Town receives the Name of Paraguay; and takes its Rise many Leagues
up the Country; which is possessed by a numerous Nation of Indians, who
sometimes trade with the Spaniards, but oftener murder 'em when they can meet
'em conveniently; for the Spirit of Revenge is sucked in with their Milk, and
handed down from Father to Son; so that they imagine it to be a very
meritorious Deed to dispatch one of them; and they are generally rewarded by
their Cacique for it.

The Town of Buenos Airs takes its Name from the excellent Temperature of the
Climate, and its pleasant Situation. They have Commerce with the Ships of
Europe not above once a Year, which bring 'em the Necessaries they want, and in
Return ease 'em of their Gold; that being a Metal less esteemed than Iron,
which proves more useful to them. When we were within two Leagues of the Port,
we came to an Anchor in a little Creek in eight Fathom Water, a sandy Bottom.
We did not care to go nearer the Town, for fear the Governor should have taken
it in his Head to have hindered our going out again.

Though we were not in Sight of it, yet we had Canoes on board of us in an hour
after our anchoring; and some of Note came incognito, to be informed what we
dealt in. One of them told me, he believed it would be no difficult thing to
dispose of my Cargo, if I thought fit to make the Governor a small Present.
Accordingly I took his Advice, and sent my Steward in my Name, with a Piece of
Holland, and half a dozen Pieces of Italian Silks; which he received as a very
valuable Present, and sent me Word he would not in the least molest me,
provided I did not deal too barefaced. I understood him, and therefore was very
cautious, selling but to one at a time, nor would I suffer another to enter my
Ship, till the former was dispatched.

In two Days I got rid of all the Cargo that I intended to part with, to a very
great Advantage; and then I allowed my Men Liberty to do what they thought fit
with what they had, which gave them a general Satisfaction. The next Day I
invited the Governor on Board, with some of the principal Merchants, and
entertained them in my Cabin; and in return, I was to dine on Shore at the
Castle. But I left a strict Order with my Lieutenant how to behave himself if I
should be stopped; for I knew the Spaniards to be unfaithful People.

When we landed, I observed the Town made but a mean Appearance, consisting
only of two Streets built in the Form of a Cross, and surrounded with a Mud
Wall. The Castle it self made but an indifferent Figure: but however I was very
elegantly entertained. The Governor seemed to have less of the Formality of the
Spaniard, than ever I met with in any of them. When I took my Leave of him, he
made me a Present of two Indian Slaves, and a Bar of Gold that weighed three
Pound two Ounces. When I came on Board, I called a Council, to know what Course
we should steer next; for as to Traffic, I had no Pretense to go to the
South Sea, being all my Cargo was already disposed of. We debated for some
time, and at last we all agreed to go for the South Sea upon the score of
Privateering. We communicated our Intentions to the Company, and they all
seemed very much rejoiced at the Resolution I had taken.

Now I began to repent I had not joined with Captain Dampier; for I wanted Men
for any notable Exploit, but I did not despair of meeting with him in the
South Sea. We weighed Anchor, and steered for the Streights of Magellan with a
fair Wind. One Morning my Servant waked me, and told me that a Sail bore down
upon us, and the Lieutenant desired to know how to behave himself. I rose upon
the Instant, and, by the help of my Perspective, saw it was a Vessel with
English Colors; but I imagining they were put up only for a Show, I caused
French Colors to be hoisted, which soon was answered by the same in the Ship
that pursued us. I ordered every thing to be prepared for an Engagement without
any Hurry, commanded my Men not to appear upon Deck, and kept on my Course with
crowded Sail, that our Pursuers might imagine I was willing to get from them;
yet I ordered it so by false Steering, that they gained upon us. About Three in
the Afternoon they were within half a League of us, firing every Quarter of an
Hour a Gun to Leeward, to let us know we were to take them for Friends.

I ordered our Men to tack about, hoist up English Colors, and bear upon 'em.
We soon perceived we had much surprised 'em, but notwithstanding they kept up
their French Colors, and seemed to prepare for the Engagement, though they were
much inferior to us. When we came along Side I haled 'em, and (after owning
they were French) commanded them to surrender; but was answered with a
Broadside, which we returned so fast, that they soon struck, and called for
Quarter. I ordered the Captain to come on Board, who informed me that his
Vessel was called the Felicity, belonging to Monsieur de Gennes, and had been
separated from the Fleet three Days before. I used the Captain very handsomely,
for the Sake of Monsieur St. Olon the French Ambassador. I gave him a Letter
and a small Present for that Gentleman, and dismissed him without taking any
thing from them. I found this Action did not please some of my Men; and not
caring to have them uneasy, I summoned them upon the Deck, and told 'em the
Obligations I had to the French Ambassador; acquainting them, as this was a
Ship of War, there was not much to be expected from 'em, therefore I told 'em I
would share five hundred Pound among 'em to make 'em Amends for their
Disappointment. But not one of them would accept a Penny; and in return I told
them, I did not intend to make any more such Compliments to the French, if ever
they came into my Power again. They were very well pleased with my Declaration,
and some of them praised my Generosity; for though most Sailors are rough and
blunt in Speech, yet they can in their way admire a generous Action as well as
other Men.

Our Officers were under some Apprehensions of meeting with the Squadron of
Monsieur de Gennes, which being a Fleet of five Sail would certainly be too
hard for us; and we were informed by the Captain of the Felicity that they were
sailed for the Streights of Magellan. I found their Fears very reasonable, and
it would be a foolhardy Action to encounter a Force so much superior: For
though Life was burdensome enough to me, yet Humanity obliged me not to hazard
the Lives of so many Men that were not out of Love with this World. So I
resolved to wave my Curiosity, and make for Le Maire's Streights; which in five
Days time we discovered, known to Sailors by three Rocks, called the Three
Brothers from their Likeness to one another.

We found a strong Current setting Northward, and an unusual Tossing of the
Ship; but we got through the Streights in two Days with Safety, and made for
the South Sea.

The next Day we discovered the Magellan Clouds, so well known to Sailors,
which convinced us that we were over against those Streights that run into the
South Sea. These Clouds are always seen in the same Degree, and the same
orbicular Form. We kept on our Course, not intending to come within Sight of
the Continent for fear of a Discovery; and the Weather favored us, it
continuing very hazy.

About an Hour within Night we heard the Sound of a Trumpet, which we
conjectured must be on oard of some Vessel, because we were well assured we
were not near enough the Land; upon which I immediately gave Orders to put out
all our Lights, and steer our Course that Way we heard the Sound; which
Sounding often gave us true Notice of their Course; and in half an Hour, though
pretty dark, we gained Sight of 'em: But their Mirth was soon changed when we
got up with 'em, thrust out our Guns, and hailed 'em. We understood they were
Spanish, and I ordered 'em to be told if they did not upon the Instant lie by,
and send their Commander on Board, I would immediately fire upon 'em. They very
readily complied with my Orders, hoisted out their Boat, and the Captain came
on Board me, whose Name was Don Juan Villegro, and his Ship the Wildfire. He
was employed by the Viceroy of Peru, to carry condemned Persons to Baldivia,
which is the Residence of most of the Rogues of America. But we were also
informed they had the Real Situado on Board, which is a Sum of Money so called,
that is sent from the Viceroy of Peru to pay and cloth the Garrison, as well
as to repair the Fortifications of Baldivia. This Sum usually amounted to four
hundred thousand Crowns, but we could find no more than two hundred and fifty
thousand; but then, to make Amends for the Deficiency, we met with a great many
valuable East India Goods, brought from thence by their Manilla Ship; for the
Merchants always put their Supply for Baldivia in the Ship that carries the
Money to pay the Garrison, that being the only Time to dispose of their Goods.

This Prize made my Men mad with Joy, and I feared it would make 'em think they
should have enough, and consequently desire to return home. But I soon found it
had the contrary Effect, and they all expected, from this Earnest of good
Fortune, Riches enough in the Voyage we proposed, to make 'em for ever.

I treated the Prisoners handsomely, which were forty-six, including fifteen
Felons, who were well pleased to have changed their Masters; expecting better
Usage from us than from the Spaniards of Baldivia, where they were designed.
There was one Roberts, an Englishman, among them, who, I have been informed,
has been executed since for Piracy; him, two Frenchmen, four Spaniards and the
Trumpeter, I entered in my Books to reinforce my Crew; understanding their
Crime was only Suspicion of Piracy, therefore I was convinced they were good
Sailors. But I did not know how to dispose of the Ship and the rest of the
Crew. If I should give 'em their Liberty, they would of course alarm the
Country; and if I kept them with me, Provisions would fall short; for they were
victual'd but for a Month's Voyage.

The Spanish Captain being informed of my Fears, told me by an Interpreter,
that he had received such handsome Usage from me, that he would upon his Honor
steer to what Port I thought fit, and report if I pleased that I was sailed
back again for the North Sea. I told him, though I could rely upon his Honor,
he could not answer for all the rest. At last I thought of a Stratagem to
deceive the Spanish Captain as well as the other Prisoners, as follows. In the
first Watch of the Night (the Prisoners being all under Hatches) I came to our
Sailors upon Deck, and told 'em the ill Consequence of keeping or letting go
the Prisoners; and therefore concerted with 'em that they should pretend a
Mutiny the next Day, and all declare for going back through the Streights into
the North Sea. When the first Watch was relieved, I acquainted the other Moiety
of the Company, and then retired to Rest. But my Slumbers were broken with
Visions of my dear Mrs. Villars: I dreamt I saw her in the Arms of the Renegado
Hamet, struggling and calling out on me for Help, and before I could come to
her Assistance, Death had freed her from the barbarous Wretch. This Dream had
brought to my Mind all my Afflictions, and I cannot tell how long I should have
continued feeding upon my Sighs, if I had not been alarmed with Shouts and
Noises upon Deck. I ran out to see what was the Matter, and found my Men, as
was designed, in their feigned Mutiny. I had forgot at first, and was much
alarmed; but recollecting, I carried on the Cheat. And Grief had so seated
herself on my Countenance, with Thoughts of my Dream, that one of the
Quarter Masters told me afterward, my Looks were enough to deceive all the
World.

The Spaniards had leave to be upon Deck all the Day, and Care was taken to let
them into the Secret. At Dinner I told the Spanish Captain (for he and the
Merchants always eat with me) that I thought his Speeches yesterday were
prophetic, for I was compelled to comply with my obstinate Crew, and sail for
the North Sea again. He replied, he wished me happy wherever I went: And to
carry on the Deceit, we steered our Course back again.

In the Afternoon Roberts came to me, and told me that one of the Spaniards,
who was willing to stay with us, would undertake to bring me ten thousand
Pieces of Eight in ten Days, if I would let him have the Prize. Upon what
Roberts said, I sent for the Man, and had him examined by Roberts, who
understood Spanish very well. The Spaniard told me, he would not have me
enquire into the Matter till it was done; and for the better Security I might
send who I thought sit with him, provided he had one of his Companions that was
to help in the Design. Accordingly I ordered twenty Hands, and to obey the
Spaniard in this Expedition as if he were their Captain.

We agreed to wait for them the limited Time, in the same Degree we parted from
'em. I informed the Spanish Captain, by an Interpreter, that his Countryman was
gone upon some secret Expedition, and as soon as he returned we would pursue our
Course. He answered, whatever he had undertaken he was of the Opinion he would
succeed in it, for he had certainly as much Cunning as any Person in the World;
he had been condemned to Baldivia once before, and had made his Escape from
thence; and he did not doubt but he would get from them again, if he had been
carried there the second time; and farther gave me some Hints that he might
deceive me in this Undertaking.

I began to be in some fear of having a Knavish Trick played me, and would have
recalled the Vessel if it had not been too late; but hoping for the best, I
resolved to cruise till the Time appointed was expired.

I had clothed my two Indians, that were presented me by the Governor of
Buenos Airs, in European Habits very handsome; and instructed them in the
English Tongue: They very readily learnt; and I gave them all the tender Usage
imaginable, which they were obligingly sensible of; and I believe they would
have sacrificed their Lives to have served me. I found them very handy, and
docible, and very good-natured; which convinces me, if mild Methods were used
with them, they might be very easily wrought to be Friends to the Europeans,
especially the English. And I think it is great Pity such a vast Body of People
should be ignorant of the Divine Being that formed the Universe. Though the
Spaniards (it is true) send Missionaries among them to inculcate Christianity,
yet they generally neglect their holy Functions, and strive all they can to
enrich themselves, by laying exorbitant Taxes upon the poor Indians: And I have
been informed, that in some Parts of America all the Wealth they get is
delivered to the Mission, reserving to themselves only what is needful, and
that but from Day to Day. I had my two Indians made Christians; one by by the
Name of Robert, and the other Joseph; being mine and my Father's Names. And I
hope, in the Sight of God, Lay-Baptism will suffice; especially when we had not
the Happiness of the other Form. And it is not impossible, if they lead good
Lives, they may find the Road to Heaven as well as if they had been christened
in a Church, by an orthodox Clergyman.

Three Days before the Time I expected my Spaniard back, we discovered two Sail
making up to us, which made us prepare for an Engagement; but we soon perceived
it was our Prize, with another Vessel. The Spaniard came on Board, and informed
me that he had been something better than his Word, for he believed that in
Money and in Goods he had brought to the Value of 80000 Dollars. He gave us the
following Account, by Roberts. Last time I was Prisoner at Baldivia, I was
compelled to work for one Don Sancho Ramirez, a sordid, covetous, jealous,
malicious Wretch, one that used to deal in Merchandise. It was his usual Method
to wait at a Country House near the Sea, for the Arrival of the Real Situado
Ship, (which was the same I had taken) and then go privately on Board to deal
with the Merchants. The Knowledge of this made me undertake this Expedition, as
well to get Money, as to be revenged on the old Villain, for the Stripes he has
often given me without any Provocation. When we arrived within half a League of
the Place, we perceived a Bark riding at Anchor. I began to demur, as fearing
we might be discovered; but at last resolved to proceed, let what would happen.
The Bark weighed and made toward us, which occasioned another Surprise; but my
Fears were soon over, when I perceived Don Sancho upon Deck. He hailed us, and
desired we would slacken Sail, that he might come on Board. Accordingly we ran
into a small Creek, and came to an Anchor. I did not appear at first, but let
the other Spaniard that went with us personate the Captain, and instructed him
accordingly. As Soon as he came on Board, he inquired for Don Juan Villegro,
(for that Gentleman used to command the Real Situado) and was answered that he
was very ill, and could not sail this Voyage. Then he inquired for the
Merchants, telling him that the Governor had discovered his usual Practice of
Dealing first with them; therefore he had contrived to meet us in one of his
own Vessels, that was ready laden for Buenos Airs, and only staid for our
Arrival to set Sail. I was glad to hear of that, because I intended to make
Prize of it. The Spaniard invited him into the Cabin, while I went on board his
Bark with ten Men armed, and secured it, there being but five Men and a Boy in
it. The rest of the Crew were on Shore.

I cut her Cable, and our own, and made out to Sea again. When we were under
Sail, I came on Board, and showed my self to the old Don, and in a few Words
made him understand his Condition. I thought at first we should have been
obliged to have buried him, for he looked for a great while like one that was
dead. But I recovered him a little, by showing him the Box that contained his
Heart and Soul, (I mean his Money). He did his Endeavor to fly at me to be
revenged on me, but he was held; but to give him a little more Comfort, I read
over to him his Bill of Lading, and told him plainly, I would not deal with
him, if his Goods did not answer his Bill. When he found he could do no good by
Passion, he told me he would give me half his Money, if I would restore him his
Ship and Cargo. I was very well as I was, I told him; and since I had got it
all in my Possession, I would have no more Dealings with him, only the odd ten
thousand Pieces of Eight more for his Ransom. He was so thunderstruck at this,
that he did not so much as offer to open his Mouth to speak; but kept so long
silent, that I fancying he would never speak again, took him upon Deck, that he
might behold the lovely Prospect of the Water; for by this time we were out of
Sight of Land. His Heart then began to melt, and he fell down upon his Knees,
and begged he might have his Liberty, notwithstanding we had robbed him. I was
in a very great Passion, and ordered him to mollify the Word, and call it
Overreaching; which with much Chastisement he did. But I told him he was
obliged to make your Honor one Visit, and accordingly I have brought him to
wait on you.

I must confess, I could not help admiring the Spaniard's Ingenuity, and yet I
did not greatly relish the Action; for though it was lawful Prize to us, yet I
thought it was downright Robbery in him. However, I gave him the Thanks our
Interest required; and further told him (by Roberts our Interpreter) that he
should be very well rewarded for his Undertaking.

The old Spaniard was brought on Board us, more dead than alive; and
understanding we were English, he spoke to me in that Language, and begged he
might be set at Liberty. I told him he need not apprehend any thing, for he
should have his Liberty, and civil Usage. He thanked me as well as his Grief
would give him leave, and I invited him to dine with me, which he did
accordingly the same Day.

I ordered the Cargo out of the Bark, which was very considerable, and most of
the Provision, because I feared it would be what we should want. The other
Vessel, as belonging to the King of Spain, and one who could pretty well bear
that Loss, I intended to keep for our selves. The Bark I restored to Don
Ramirez, with several Bales of Goods that would prove of small Use to us, though
of Value to him; nay I would very willingly have given him all his Goods and
Money too, if it had not been for wronging my Crew; for, as I said, I looked
upon it as gained by Fraud. However, I ventured to give him back twenty
thousand Ryals, which did not amount to mine and my Owners Share. He returned
me his Acknowledgments, by giving me a very handsome Ring, that they had not
taken from him, and told me, he ever thought the English generous Enemies.

I caused all the Prisoners to be put on Board the Bark, and took my leave of
'em. They returned me abundance of Thanks for my kind Usage; and vowed, if ever
Fortune should send any of our Countrymen among 'em, they should fare the
better for my Sake. I must own, I was not displeased with their
Acknowledgments. A Man feels a secret Pleasure within himself, when he has done
a humane Action; when on the contrary, if a Person has been guilty of Baseness,
Horror and Remorse gnaw his Inwards.

The Day after I had parted with the Prisoners, I summoned all my Men upon
Deck, and told 'em what the Spaniard had done for 'em, and advised with 'em
what Recompense I should make him. We soon agreed he should have five thousand
Pieces of Eight, his Companion five hundred, and the rest of 'em entered to a
Share of the Booty we had before taken. Accordingly I sent for 'em, and told
'em what I intended. The Spaniard returned me suitable Thanks in French, for he
had been informed I understood that Language. I found in his Discourse a ready
turn of Wit and Humor, and of a Person that had read Mankind. He did not seem
to be above thirty Years of Age, of a free and open Nature, having nothing of
the stiff Formality of the Spaniard, though born at Sevil in Old Spain. I told
him, I expected a short Account of his Life; he readily answered, he should be
proud to comply with my Desires, but he begged I would defer it for some Time,
till he might be a little more used to my Conversation; for, said he smiling,
mine has been a very merry and odd sort of a Life, and therefore till I have
more Freedom, I shall desist, because I shall lose the Spirit in telling it.

We steered our Course toward Panama, depending that our Prisoners would
spread the Report of our going back again for the North Sea. In thirty six
Degrees, and forty five Minutes, we discovered a Vessel steering the same
Course; I ordered the Prize to chase her, and before Night she took her. It was
a Bark laden with Tallow and Hides, bound for La Conception. I repented the
taking of her, for we soon found she was but a heavy Sailor, and therefore
could not keep Company with us, and it was not proper for us to let 'em depart.

Don Pedro Aquillio, which was the Name of of our Intelligent Spaniard, told
me, he would undertake to dispose of the Cargo and Bark to a good Advantage, if
I could tell how to dispose of the Men, which were but four, that is three
Indians and a Spaniard. The Indians were very well pleased to be received as
Servants on Board; yet we allowed 'em a half Share in our future Purchases. The
Spaniard we intended to detain on Board till we had made our cruising Voyage,
and then release him. So depending on Don Pedro's Ingenuity, I let him go off
with the Bark, with three Spaniards to assist him, having his Promise to return
the next Day. We were then within five Leagues of La Conception, and therefore
resolved to remain in that Station till his Arrival, keeping Mamelles de
Biobio, or the Dugs of Biobio (two Rocks so called) in View.

The next Day we perceived him coming with a Pirogue, a small Spanish Boat with
one Sail. He brought me a handsome Present of Fruit, and enough besides for the
whole Crew. Well, said he, I have made but an indifferent Bargain; I have
brought you but twenty thousand Pieces of Eight: The old Rogue of a Governor
would not give any more. He told me that the Governor of La Conception
engrossed all the Tallow and Hides, and forced the Retailers to give him his
own Price; so he went boldly to him, and sold him Bark and Cargo.

Don Pedro advised us to cruise for the Manilla Ship, which was daily expected.
His Advice was approved on all Hands, therefore Orders were given to Wood and
Water the Ships for the Voyage; and accordingly we made for Juan Fernando, and
arrived there the fifth of September 1695. It being a remarkable Day with me,
it lives in my Memory; for the loss of my Journal by an odd Accident, hinders
my keeping a regular Account. We spent but two Days in wooding and watering,
and killing Goats, which are there in great Plenty.

There are three Islands that bear the Name of Juan Fernando, the first
Discoverer, though there are no other Inhabitants on them than Goats. There Is a
noble Bay on the North Side of the Island, capable of containing five hundred
Sail, where you anchor at sixteen Fathom Water, a sandy Bottom. We left it with
a favorable Wind for our Design, and made farther up the Coast January the
first; and it was feared we had missed our Booty, for the Manilla Ship
generally arrives at Acapulco about Christmas; however we resolved to coast
about for twenty Days longer, and if we failed of her, to return into the North
Sea, with a Design to cruize down the Coast.

We kept out of Sight of Land, for fear of being discovered.

On the sixth we perceived two Sail, and accordingly gave 'em Chase. Don Philip
assured me it was the Manilla Ship, and a Guard-Ship along with her. We called
a Council immediately; where it was resolved the Bark should attack the Manilla
Ship, while ours was to engage the Man of War: And this was the Reason Don
Pedro gave for it; that the Manilla Ship was so very unweildy, the Bark could
play round her, and being so small, she was out of the reach of their Cannon,
for they could make no Use but of those upon their upper Deck. The Man of War
seeing we gave 'em Chase, slackened her Sail to stay for us, imagining we
should both attack him, but he found himself mistaken. Our Pink past him,
without firing a Gun; but as soon as ever we came a-long Side, we gave him a
Broadside, with a loud Huzza. He soon returned it, but we plied him so close,
that he began to make off; but we followed him close at the Heels, and coming
under his Starboard Quarter, gave him another Broadside, which brought his
Mainmast by the Board; upon which he immediately struck.

The Sea being very smooth, though a handsome Breeze of Wind, we manned our
Longboat, and I went on Board with forty Hands, well armed. When I came upon
Deck, I ordered the Spaniards to be taken on Board, and secured under Hatches;
but I was much surpised to find but sixteen Men in the Ship, besides eight
that were killed, and not one that appeared like an Officer among 'em. But we
were soon informed, the Captain had ordered one hundred and fifty of his Men on
Board the Manilla Ship, as soon as they had discovered us in the Morning,
because her Crew were most of 'em sickly.

We imagined our small Vessel must have warm work on it, being not above thirty
five Hands in all. So we resolved immediately to cut off the Rudder of the Man
of War, and leave her; for having lost her Mainmast, she could not follow us
to do us any Damage; and six of her Men we took on Board us, who finding we
were English, seemed very willing to serve us; and I promised 'em their Share
in the Booty, if we succeeded. These six Men were old Christians, as they call
themselves, and they value themselves very much upon it, despising the
Creolians. We made all the Sail we could after the Manilla Ship, and soon
overtook her; for our small Vessel had kept her very well in Play, though she had
warm Work on it, and her Rigging was very much shattered, though they had not lost
a single Man, but she was obliged to fall a-stern to mend her Tackle. I ordered
'em to send me twenty Men on Board, which I was obliged to lie by for* I had
brought all my Guns to bear on one Side, and did not fire one till I came under
her Stern; and then I poured 'em into her, and tacked about to charge again. I
observed a Boat busy about her Stern, but could not imagine what they were
doing. However I resolved they that were in it should find a difficult Matter
to get on Board again. But I was much surpised to find it my own Boat with Don
Pedro in it, who had taken the occasion in the Smoke of our first Broadside to
nail up the Rudder, so that the Ship could not tack about. He made what haste
he could on Board the Bark, which had now mended all her Rigging, and got under
her Stern; and as fast as the Manilla Ship sent Men to clear her Rudder, he
prevented 'em with his Small-shot. In the mean time we ventured to come a-long
Side of her, notwithstanding her monstrous Bulk, and gave her such
Entertainment, that they called out at last for Quarter, and struck their
Colors. I ordered all the Officers to come on Board, which they did. I
received 'em all very civilly, and immediately after went on Board the Prize. I
was amazed at her vast Bulk. She had seven Decks, and built so strong, that not
one of our Shot had gone through; yet they had above sixty Men killed, through
their Ports, and other Vacancies; and what was very surprising, we had not one,
and but two wounded.

They had above one hundred Men sick on Board 'em, so that the Ship looked like
an Hospital. It was very richly laden, and valued at 1800000 Dollars, and
upwards. We found but little Money on Board, besides the Plate belonging to the
Governor of Luconia, one of the Philippine Islands, who was coming home to his
own Country, being a Native of Mexico.

Though this was the richest Prize that ever was taken, yet we did not know well
what to do with it. It would be an Impossibility to work her into the North
Sea, or back again to the East Indies, without farther help; for we had more
Prisoners by two to one, than we had Sailors on Board. So we once more advised
with Don Pedro, who counseled us to send to Acapulco, and have the Ship and
Men ransomed. We all thought it would be both difficult and dangerous. Don
Pedro told us there should be neither, and he would undertake to do it. But
however, as it was a thing of very great Consequence, we desired he would tell
us in what manner it should be done; Why as thus, (said he) I Will take the Bark,
with the Captain of the Spanish Man of War, the Quondam Governor, and one or
two more of the best Quality, who shall make the Case known to the City of
Acapulco, and no other way but by Letter; for I will suffer but one of them to
go on Shore, and I Will take care to order it well enough to give you Notice, if
they should send any Force against us, though there is no Danger they should.
For, added he, they have no Man of War within two hundred Leagues of 'em, that
which was taken being all they had to guard their Coast. We were well satisfied
with his Reasons, and gave him leave to proceed as he thought fit; and
accordingly the next Day he set Sail with those Persons mentioned along with
him. And by the Advice of all, we followed him, being very well convinced by
the Spaniards themselves, there was nothing of Force to be apprehended. I had
fitted up the Spanish Man of War again, and resolved to keep her, and dispose
of the Bark. Therefore, as soon as we came within Sight of Land, I ordered every
thing to be taken out of her, and put on Board the Spaniard, who we found was a
very good Sailor.

The Day following Don Pedro came on Board, with several Merchants and Persons
of Quality, to treat about the Ransom of the Prize; and we agreed for 1200000
Dollars, after we had taken several Bales of rich Goods out of her. The Money
was to be paid in six Days, and we were to stay where we rode; for I did not
much care to trust 'em too far.

In the mean time we sent all their sick and wounded on Shore. The Bark we
disposed of for Provision, and other Necessaries, and took the Opportunity of
waiting for the Money to Water our Ships. At the Time appointed, the Money
came, and we surrendered the Ship to the Spaniards. Now we agreed by joint
Consent to go home, for we were all rich enough, and every one of the Crew
thought so: Yet we resolved to touch at St. Salvador on the Coast of Brasil
(and make our Way through the Magellan Straits) as well to take in some
Refreshments, as to dispose of the rest of our Goods, and careen our Vessels.

Accordingly we put our Design in Execution, and made the best of our Way for
the Straits of Magellan, and discovered those noted Clouds, which are a sure
Guide to Sailors, the third of May. We found the Weather extremely cold, and
the Mountains covered with Snow; but we were well provided with good Liquors,
and all convenient Clothing. We anchored in Port Famine; formerly called
Knight's Bay, by the Dutch in a Voyage 1598, with a Fleet of five Sail; where
meeting with many Troubles, and to eternize the Memory of the Voyage, (it being
the first the Dutch made to those Straits) the Admiral knighted six of the
Officers, by the Title of Knights of the furious Lion. The Oaths they received
at the Ceremony were, never to do, or consent to do, any thing against their
Honors, or to prejudice their present Voyage, to expose their Lives for the
Service of their Commonwealth, and to do their utmost in driving the Spaniards
from their golden World. They were installed on Shore, with a Seagreen Garter,
and a Table built, with their Names engraved on it.

We saw several of the Inhabitants, who were easily prevailed upon to come on
Board us. But I could find nothing extraordinary in their Height, as is
fabulously reported. The tallest I could see among them did not exceed six
Foot. They are certainly a poor miserable People, but very harmless; and I am
apt to believe all former Stories of their monstrous Height and Cruelty to be
Fables.

We got through the Straits once more into the North Sea, and by degrees came
into a warmer Climate. But a terrible Storm overtook us, just as we were in
Sight of Pepy's Island, which drove us within Sight of Port Desire, upon the
Continent; and therefore we thought it the safest way to run into the Bay,
which accordingly we did, and came to an Anchor in seventeen Fathom Water.

At the South Side of the Port, lies Penguin Island, so called from a
multiplicity of those Birds resorting there. Our Men went on shore, and in
three Hours time brought on board five hundred of the Fowls, and several
thousands of their Eggs, which proved delicious Food. They are called Penguin,
not from their Fatness, as some Authors affirm, but from their Whiteness mixed
with black. They are about the bigness of a Goose, weighing between nine and
fourteen Pound; and though their chief Diet is Fish, yet they have no fishy
Taste. Their Skin is very thick, their Bill is like that of a Raven, though not
altogether so crooked; their Neck is short and thick, and the rest of their
Body resembles a Goose, excepting the Wings, which are only two Stumps covered
with Feathers, which they make Use of in Swimming. Their Feet are black, like
those of a Swan. They breed in Holes of the Rocks, which are so numerous, there
is no walking hardly for fear of falling into them. When they walk on Shore
it is upright, with their Wings hanging down, so that they appear in that
Posture like small Pigmies. We staid but two Days here, and then steered our
Course for Rio Janeiro, or the River of January, intending to touch at St.
Sebastian's first, and if we did not succeed there, to sail for St. Salvador.
When we arrived there, the Portugueze would not admit us to enter the Bay, but
fired several Guns from the Forts laden with Shot, to deter us from anchoring;
we could not imagine the meaning of it, but however we left 'em in that Humor,
and steered for St. Salvador, and in one and twenty Days we discovered Praya de
Zumba, a Place very easily known from a Number of white Spots, which appear
like Linen hung out to whiten, or dry.

We past Fort St. Anthony, and saluted it with eleven Guns, which returned us
an equal Number, without the charge of Shot, and came to an Anchor within half
a League of the City; which we also saluted with eleven Guns, and received but
seven in Return.

By Advice of the Officers, we shared among the Sailors a thousand Pieces of
eight a Man, which pleased 'em exceedingly. The next Day, I went to wait on the
Governor, who received me very civilly, and desired I would dine with him. We
were very magnificently served, and a Band of Italian Music played all the
while. After Dinner I made my Presents, which he accepted of very kindly, but
when I came to treat about our Commerce, he flatly denied me, telling me it was
against the King of Portugal's express Orders, to suffer any Trading with
Foreigners. I begged his Pardon, if it was not to be complied with. He would
have returned my Present, but I pressed him to accept it in so obliging a
manner, that he did; and told me in French, that since he saw my Generosity, he
would comply with me. He immediately sent for several Merchants, and took 'em
into his Closet, where they stayed some time. When they came out again, the
Governor told me those Gentlemen would go on Board, and view our Commodities,
and if we could agree, he would be answerable for the Money. One of the Persons
seemed to be of a more free and open Disposition than the Portugueze generally
are. (Though most of the Inhabitants of St. Salvador affect the Manners of the
French.) We soon made an End of our Bargain, and my merry Merchant would oblige
me to go ashore and sup with him that Night. He pressed me so heartily, that I
could not refuse him; and accordingly I went with only my two Indian Servants,
who began to be understood in English.

When we arrived at the Merchant's House, I was surpised to find it so
magnificent. He led us into a handsome Summer House in the Garden, where he
told me we were to sup; and, said he, to convince you that you are welcome,
I Will bring my Wife and Daughter to keep us Company, which is reckoned as a
thing extraordinary among us. But, added he, I have been in England and France,
and I find the Women are not the less Honest, for having their Liberty. I told
him, I thought Constraint did but whet their Inventions to gain their Desires.
Said he, I am of your Mind, therefore give 'em all the Liberty they desire, and
I cannot find I have had any reason to repent it.

In a little time he ushered in the two Ladies, his Wife and Daughter, both
very beautiful, and, notwithstanding the Heat of the Climate, very fair. The
Wife seemed about five and thirty, the Daughter about sixteen, and they both
spoke very good French. Our Conversation was kept up with all the Spirit I was
capable of: I soon discovered a great deal of Wit in them both, and made 'em my
Compliment in finding Ladies so extraordinary in so remote a Part of the World.

When we had supped, the Merchant (whose Name was Don Jaques) told me it was
his Custom to provide Beds for his Guests, as well as Supper: And after we had
walked a Turn or two round the Garden, we all retired to our several Apartments.

The next Morning we drank Chocolate together, and I invited Don Jaques, with
his Wife and Daughter, to dine with me on Board the next Day, which he
consented to. I now begged Leave to be gone; but it being very hot, he had
provided me a Silk Palanquin; which is a Thing like a Hammock, with a Canopy
over it, carried by two Blacks, with each a Rest to hang it on while they take
Breath. This is all the Vehicle in Use at St. Salvador, by reason of the
Unevenness and Steepness of the Situation.

I prepared for them with all the Magnificence I could the next Day. And when
they saw the Variety of Dishes, dressed after the English Manner, they were
mightily pleased; and, to add to their Satisfaction, the Music I had on Board
played several elegant Pieces, accompanied with the Trumpet I had got from on
Board the Spanish Prize, (for notwithstanding his being Trumpeter to the
Garrison of Baldivia, yet he was better pleased to be where he was.) We drank
the King of England, and the King of Portugal's Health several times, with the
Discharge of our Cannon: And when the Time for their going on Shore came, I
fastened a small Present of several sorts of Silk upon the Wife and Daughter.
Don Jaques perceived what I was about, and merrily said, That is not fair; we
did not pay you for your Company Yesterday, and yet I believe it was as
valuable as that you received today, at least in my Opinion; I sha'n't answer
for the Ladies, said he, they are both capable of speaking for themselves. I
received many Compliments on all Hands; but not dealing much in them, I am very
willing to forget 'em.

In a Day or two after Don Jaques came on Board, and told me the Money for the
Goods was ready, but I should not have it, unless I came my self to receive it.
I accordingly went with him, and he made me continue there all Night, where we
had the Conversation of the Ladies as before.

When I was going away the next Day, he told me he should soon find if any
thing else besides Money had the Power to bring me to see him. I told him, to
convince him of that, I would come and dine with him the next Day; which
accordingly I did. After Dinner I expressed a Desire of seeing the most
remarkable Places in the City, which he complied with, and ordered two
Palanquins to carry us.

The City of St. Salvador, the Capital of Brasil, is situated in the Bay of
All Saints, in 12 Degrees 45 Minutes Southern Latitude. It is divided into two
Towns, the upper and the lower. The Streets are strait, and pretty broad, but
most of them very steep; and all the Goods are hoisted in and out of the
Vessels by Machines for that purpose. It was formerly under the Dominion of the
Spaniards, but taken from them by the Dutch in 1624, and pretty well fortified
by them; yet notwithstanding that, the Spaniards retook it the next Year. I
could not learn how long the Portugueze have possessed it, but they all agree
upwards of fifty Years. They have made it a regular fortified Place, and very
strong; having five Forts besides the Castle, well stored with Cannon, and
other Ammunition, and small Arms for ten thousand Men. This is the usual Seat
of the Viceroy of Brasil* but when I was there it was without one, though he was
expected every Day,

The Cathedral is a magnificent Pile of Building, finely adorned, and painted
after the modern Manner. The Jesuits Church is a noble Structure, all of
European Marble; with a fine Organ, the Pipes gilt. There are many more fine
Churches, twenty in all, besides several Convents and Monasteries.

This Place is also the Residence of a Bishop, who has a handsome Palace; and
for the Reverend the Clergy, I never saw such a Number for the bigness of the
Place any where, as Benedictines, Franciscans, Carmelites, Augustins,
Capuchins, Dominicans, and Barefoot Friars; (though I think most of the People I
saw there wore no Stockings.) There are three Nunneries, well stored with Nuns,
but not to be seen; nor hardly any Women in the Town, but common Whores, or
black Slaves; for the Portugueze lock up their Wives and Daughters as carefully
as they do their Money, and would have none look upon them but themselves;
except my Friend Don Jaques; which is something the more extraordinary.

It is a Place of great Trade to Guinea, and other Parts, and is accounted one
of the richest Cities in the King of Portugal's Dominions. By moderate Account
there may be about 20000 Whites, (or I should say Portugueze, for they are none
of the whitest,) and about treble that Number of Slaves.

Don Jaques would make me take five Days up in viewing the several Parts of the
City, and obliged me to be at his House without going on Board during that
Time. Some Part of the Day we played at Ombre, a Game mightily in Vogue among
the Spaniards and Portugueze, and a very entertaining Game for three, invented
by the jealous Spaniards for that Number, to prevent any clandestine Doings
between two. But alas! I believe there are more Opportunities gained than lost
by it.

We had provided every thing we wanted now, and began to prepare for our
Departure.

Don Jaques was very sorry to lose me, he told me; and indeed it was with some
Regret I left him; for his Civility had drawn from me a Friendship insensibly.
I went to take Leave of the Governor, who made me a Present of American
Sweetmeats, and begged I would dine with him, which I could not in good Manners
deny. When Dinner was over, Don Jaques was so obligingly pressing for me to sup
with him the last Time, that I could not refuse; but I begged he would excuse
my staying all Night, and he gave me his Word he would not press me. I sent one
of my Indians to order the Boat to fetch me at Ten that Evening.

When the time of my Stay was expired, I took my Leave of Don Jaques and the
Family, after having forced him to accept of a Gold Watch, and the Ladies a
Present of each a Diamond Ring, that I received from the Governor of Luconia,
for my Civility in returning him his Plate and Jewels, when we took the
Acapulco Ship in the South Sea.

Well, said Don Jaques, I see you will pay for your Board in spite of my
Teeth. I had taken Leave of the Wife and Daughter before, who had left us in
Tears. I must own I thought my self very much obliged for their Tenderness; and
it drew such a deep Melancholy upon my Face, with Thoughts of my dear Wife,
that Don Jaques imagined it was Grief for parting with him and his Family. I
did not take any Pains to undeceive him. Well, said he, I see a Friendship may
be contracted in a few Days, as well as Love, especially where there is a
Harmony of Souls.

We had agreed to correspond together, and I had undertaken to send him some
European Goods, if it pleased God to guard me safe to Europe. I had continued
longer with Don Jaques than I had intended to do, therefore, whatever Violence
I did my self, I took my Leave. Don Jaques tenderly embraced me, and was so
much overwhelmed with Grief, that I could not forbear sympathizing with him:
But I ordered his Servants, (whom I had liberally rewarded for the Trouble I
gave) to shut the Door, to prevent their Master's going any farther.

I walked toward the Port very melancholy, though with some Precipitation; but
was roused out of it by one of my Indians crying, Master, take a Care, take a
Care! I turned about, and saw four Portugueze pursuing us. I made a Stand, and
drew my Sword, took my Cloak from my Indian, and put it across my Arm to defend
my self the better. They all four attacked me at once; but my Indians, whom I
had ordered to wear Swords on Shore, fell upon 'em furiously, and dispatched
two of 'em immediately; and I had made a shift to drop a third, though not
without receiving several Wounds. The fourth ran for it; but my Indians being
as nimble-footed as Does, soon overtook him, and dragged him down the Hill by
the Hair of his Head; while he cried out all the while, Misericordia!
Misericordia! The Noise we made had brought up my Boat's Crew, who were all
armed with Pistols and Cutlasses; and the Guard coming in the mean time, and
seeing my Indians dragging the Fugitive, fell upon us: But my Crew and Indians
charged 'em so furiously, that they soon put 'em to Flight, though treble our
Number: Though this availed us but little, for the whole Garrison was coming
down upon us. I then ordered my Crew to resist no more, but submit to 'em; for
as we were innocent, I did not much fear to come off clear.

The Bustle had roused Don Jaques, and his Servants, who were soon informed of
the Condition I was in, and he came in good time to interpose his Authority;
for the Portugueze began to be outrageous. But the Governor had sent a
Gentleman to bring us before him: And accordingly I went, accompanied by Don
Jaques. But the Wounds I had received bled so much, that they were obliged to
carry me to Don Jaques's, and send for a Surgeon. My Hurts were not dangerous,
but I was very faint with Loss of Blood.

Don Jaques waited on the Governor, and informed him of the Condition I was
in: But the Governor not understanding who was the Aggressor, ordered a Guard
of Soldiers at the Door of the House where I was. My Boat's Crew soon got on
Board, and alarmed both the Ships, who immediately weighed and came close to
Shore, where they had prepared to fire upon the Town, if I was not released
instantly. I understanding the Matter, sent one to inform them, that the Guard
was set upon me to secure me from the Insults of the Portugueze, till the Truth
of the Matter was discovered. This would not serve their Turn, but a hundred of
'em, with the Officers and Don Pedro, landed, all well armed, and vowed to wait
the Event on Shore. The Governor did me the Honor of a Visit, and inquired
into the Cause; and I informed him, as well as my Weakness would permit me.
When they had examined the dead Portugueze, they found one of them was Nephew
to the deceased Viceroy. Upon the Discovery of which, the Portugueze began to
be very much exasperated, and were hardly restrained from rushing into the
House, and tearing me to Pieces; for though they did not regard the Nephew, yet
they had a great Veneration for his deceased Uncle, who behaved himself with a
great deal of Candor in his Post, and the Inhabitants mightily regretted his
Loss. The Governor appeased their Fury, by telling 'em I should have no Favor
shown me if I were guilty, let the Consequence be what it would. And
immediately a Court was summoned to try me, though it was Midnight, and I was
carried there in a Palanquin, weak as I was. But I was obliged to send for my
Lieutenant, and tell him that there was no Danger; and also ordered him to send
the Crew on Board again. When we came to the Place of Justice, the Governor
ordered me a Seat: But the Business was soon ended; for the Portugueze we had
secured, owned that his Master had designed to murder me, because he was
informed I was his Rival in the beautiful Donna Bianca, (which was the Daughter
of Don Jaques.) I was very much surprised (as well as Don Jaques) at this
Report, and we both declared it was only a jealous Suggestion of the Gentleman;
which every one came into: And the Grounds he had for it, was my often
frequenting Don Jaques's House, upon the score of Friendship only, and lodging
there.

The Governor handsomely dismissed me, and told me he was very sorry I had been
detained from my Affairs. I returned, that I was as sorry to be the Cause of so
unhappy an Accident, in a Country where I had received so much Civility.

Don Jaques begged I would go back to his House, and stay till my Wounds were
well; but the Governor took us aside, and said to us in French, I know, Don
Jaques, it is your Friendship for the Captain that makes you desire his Company;
but, if I might advise you, I would have him go on Board upon the Instant; for
though he is very innocent as to the Matter, yet I doubt some of the Deceased's
Friends or Relations, which are numerous, not having Regard to Justice, will
contrive some Method to dispatch him out of the Way: for most of the Portugueze
are jealous, malicious, and revengeful, and very seldom look into the Merits of
the Cause.

I thanked the Governor for his kind Caution; and Don Jaques, notwithstanding
his Friendship, could not but come into what he had said. I therefore ordered
my self to be carried on Board that Moment. It being broad Day, the Governor
and his Guard would accompany me to the Waterside, but Don Jaques would go on
Board with me. In the Boat he told me he had some Thoughts of coming to reside
in England, for, said he, I have enough, and therefore I will, in two or three
Years more, leave off Traffic and live quiet in the World. But he begged I
would write to him as soon as I arrived in Europe, and let him know the Place I
had chose to live in; for, added he, let it be where it will, if it is ever my
Fortune to arrive safe in Europe, I Will take another Voyage only for the Hopes
of seeing you. I returned him the Acknowledgment due to so much Friendship, and
we parted with Tears on both sides.

As Soon as I had got on Board, the Wind being fair, we weighed and stood out of
the Bay. When we were out at Sea, a Letter was brought me written in French,
the Translation of which is as follows.

SIR,
I Was resolved to make Trial of you before I suffered my Heart to choose you
for a Friend* and I am so well convinced of the Sincerity of your Soul, that I
will confide in you a Secret dear to my Repose. I had an Amor with a beautiful
Lady before I was married, that produced the Bearer of this Letter. I have kept
him concealed from my Family hitherto; but the Person I trusted with his
Education and this Secret, being dead, I feared I should find some Difficulty
to conceal him any longer here: Therefore, depending upon your good Nature and
Friendship, I have ventured to send him to you, with Sufficient to bear his
Expenses in his Education, which I would have suitable to the Estate I have in
my Power to give him. I shall ever own this Obligation, and always think it my
greatest Happiness to subscribe my self

Your sincere Friend and Servant, Jaques de Ramires.


I must own I was very much surpised at this Epistle, and could not imagine
his Reasons for concealing it from me. I ordered the Person that brought the
Letter to be conducted in, and immediately entered my Cabin one of the
beautifullest Boys I had ever set my Eyes on. He seemed about Fifteen, his Hair
fair and long, curling down his Shoulders: In short, every Feature so exact and
uniform, and so innocent withal, that I was amazed. At last I took him by the
Hand and embraced him, and told him for his Father's sake he should be as dear
to me as my own Son. But finding he did not answer me, for I spoke to him in
English, I repeated the same in French. He returned me Thanks, and said he did
not doubt but he should find it so.

After some time, he delivered me a Casket, in which were Jewels to the Value
of five thousand Pistoles, and a little Box which contained a thousand
Moidores. I told him I would take as much Care of them as if they were my own.

These, Sir, said the Youth, are designed to bear my Charges. Then ordering
another Box in, had it opened, and told me what it contained was a Present from
his Father to me. When I examined it, I found six Silver Dishes, and three
dozen of Plates of the same Metal; a dozen of Knives, Forks, and Spoons in
Gold, and half a dozen of Gold Sweet-meat Plates In a larger Box was variety of
all manner of Conserves and Cordials; and I was informed he had made small
Presents to every Officer in the Ship, and to the common Sailors a Week's fresh
Provision, with Liquor in proportion. I was amazed at his Bounty, for his
Present to me was what a Prince might have received. I thought it was my Duty
to show all the Kindness I was capable of to the Son of so generous a Father;
therefore I ordered him a Field-Bed in my own Cabin; and his Behavior was so
engaging, that I felt as much Tenderness for him as if he had really been my
own Child; and having Skill in Surgery, I trusted him with the Management of my
Wounds; though I had a very good Ship-Surgeon, who supplied him with what he
wanted. My Hurts, which were not dangerous, soon healed, and I recovered my
Strength again. I could not prevail upon young Don Ferdinand, (Don Jaques's
Son) to go often upon Deck. He said he would rather choose to stay in the Cabin,
where he had French Books of his own, and some of mine to entertain him; for I
had taken my Opportunity to procure several at St. Salvador, and among the rest
a French and English Grammar and Dictionary, which mightily pleased Don
Ferdinand, for he had a great Desire to learn English: I gave him all the Helps
I could; and he in return, instructed me in the Portugueze Language; so that in
a short time we could discourse in either.

We had resolved to steer our Course for the Island of Tercera, the Capital of
the Azores; and after fifty Days Sail, we discovered the Peak of one of the
Islands of Azores, which is called Pico, from the Mountain. It is in the
Resemblance of a Pyramid, and may be discovered as many Leagues off as the Pike
of Teneriff; for we were then by Observation thirty Leagues off from it, and
yet could see it distinctly.

In two Days more we discovered the Island of St. Michael. We were all pleased
that we had entered that Part of the World we call Europe, the Birthplace of
most of us; and what pleased us more was, that we had made all our Fortunes.

August the 19th, 1696, we anchored in the Bay of Angra, the Capital of the
Azores, in the Island Tercera. I cannot give any great Commendation to the Port,
being I think it a very indifferent one. We did not design to stay long, only
to get some Water, and some fresh Provisions; for we were informed there was no
riding out a Storm there. We got in what we wanted with all Expedition we
could, while the Weather was favorable.

The City is seated at the Bottom of the Bay, under the Brow of a Hill called
Monto de Brasil, or the Brasil Mountain; but for what reason so called, I could
not be informed. It is very well fortified, having two strong Castles, and
eight Batteries besides, with Guns of thirty Pounds Shot. But it is very
indifferently garrisoned, having no more than two hundred Men in Pay, and most
wretchedly supplied, having no clothing for three Years.

The Town is very agreeable, having a Stream of Water running quite through it,
which drives several Miles for the Use of the Public; and almost in every
Quarter are public Fountains of excellent tasted Water. From this Place are
brought the finest Canary-Birds, though less than those of the Canaries, yet they
exceed 'em far in the Excellency of their Pipes.

Money is very scarce here, and consequently every thing cheap. I bought two
Months Biscuit for the Ships, much cheaper than in any Port of Europe. Corn is
their chief Commodity, which they send to Portugal; but for any other Trade, I
believe the King of Portugal gets but little Advantage.

I was grown such a Proficient in the Portugueze Tongue, that I could make a
shift to be understood; and by understanding that Language, soon found a Gate
to the Spanish Tongue, by the help of Don Pedro, who had learnt to speak
English very fluently. We got acquainted with one of the Fathers of the
Cordeliers, who showed us the Churches, and other things of Note in the City.
The Cathedral is a very handsome Building, and well painted, which goes by the
Name of St. Salvador; and there is no danger of missing that Title, and St.
Anthony, every where among the Portugueze. There Is no less than twenty, besides
the Cathedral; with four Monasteries, and four Convents, that have each their
Chapel beautifully adorned. When we had got what Refreshments were wanting, we
set sail for the Straits, intending to touch no where, before we were got into
the Mediterranean; and because we met with nothing extraordinary in our Voyage
to Gibralter; I will, to divert the Reader, give him, (instead of Bearing of
Coasts, Changes of Wind, and unexpected Storms,) the Life of my Companion Don
Pedro Aquilio; which he related to us during the Voyage, in the following
Manner.

THE LIFE OF Don PEDRO AQUILIO.
MY Father residing in France, when the Commotions were ingendring between the
King and the Parliament, was made fast to the Interest of Cardinal De Retz, by
marrying one of his Neices of a very great Fortune: He had a Hand in most of
the secret Transactions of those Times; and wading too deep in those Seas of
Trouble, was obliged to retire to his native Country. He foreseeing what would
happen, took care of his Affairs accordingly; sold his Estate in France, and
sent my Mother to Sevil, the Place of his Birth, whither he soon followed. The
King of Spain, having a very great Regard for him, gave him several Offices of
Honor and Prosit; and when I was born, I was Son to the first Man in the City.
My Father, by living so long in France, had contracted the Manners of the
French; and the Formality of the Spaniard seemed as strange to him, as if he
had been born in another Climate. He had several Children, though none survived
but my self. When I had Years enough over my Head to fear the Prejudice of
Education, he took a Resolution of sending me to the College of the four
Nations in Paris, to complete my Studies. And the first thing I learnt, was to
shake off all the Customs of Spain, which was soon done; for they had taken but
small Impression in my Mind, because I found my Father was averse to 'em. I
contracted a Friendship with several young French Noblemen of my own Age; for
Parity of Years is the first Step to Friendship.

When I had reached my fifteenth Year, I began to think of a Mistress, to
complete my Studies. And as I found it was a Method among my Companions, to
supplant each other in their Females without any Animosity, I set my self so
willingly about it, that out of half a dozen Madonas, I made my self Master of
six of 'em. This occasioned many Plots and Contrivances to regain the flying
Fair Ones: Though I perceived most Money laid out in Presents had a prevailing
Force with 'em. We had our Allowance paid quarterly, and getting all my
Companions into gaming, I had the good Fortune to strip 'em all. They seemed to
be a little uneasy, in losing their Mistresses and Money too; and my telling
'em, as I had got the Females, I should have the most occasion for the Money,
signified nothing, but they all begged it as a great Favor, that I would lend
'em half what I had won, to be repaid the next Quarter; which to oblige 'em, I
complied with, and to play we fell again; but Fortune changed her amiable Looks
from me, and I soon lost all I had won, with my own Share too. The fickle Dame
favored one of the Company, that would not lend any of us a Penny. This
chagrin'd the rest very much. But to prevent any more Importunity, he went away
to his own Chamber, leaving room in all our Pockets for the Devil to dance a
Saraband, for we had not one Cross to keep him out; and what was our greatest
Mortification, the Holydays were approaching, that used to give us the
Opportunity of rambling into the Country. The Person that won our Money,
happened to be the last that was added to our Society; and though he had not been
long among us, we began to be tired of him, as much from his odd Humors, as
his Effeminacy. I at last thought of a Project to be revenged on him, and it
was very much approved by the rest of my Companions. The Holydays being come,
we designed for our Country Rendezvous; but he that bore the Purse would not go
with us, without we could produce every one so much Money. This put us to our
Shifts again: But my Man, who was an arch Wag, begged that I would accept of
what he had; for I had been so lucky as to have paid him his Wages, before my
Loss. I accepted of his Offer, and took from him ten Lewis d'Ors: We contrived
it so well, that they were shown to old Sir Snip, from every Person of our
Society. Well, said he, sixty Lewis d'Ors will do our Business; but who should
be Purse-bearer was what he cavil'd at; and not caring to trust any of us, (and
we resolved not to trust him) he pitched upon my Man to be Cash-keeper for us
all. And accordingly he put down in his Pocketbook, so much Money in Bank,
received of such and such Persons, when in reality he had but twenty Lewis
d'Ors.

When we had contrived every thing, we took Horse, and rode six Leagues that
Evening, to the Place where we designed to put in Execution our Project. We had
agreed to pay every Night the Expenses of the Day, and have it set down in my
Man's Book. But when he was called for (as we had concerted) no Man was to be
found. There was strange Enquiry made to no purpose; and we all agreed he had
taken the Opportunity to rob us, and run away with our Money. All that we had
to do, was to beg of Snip to discharge the House. But he declared he had not
half a Pistole in his Pocket: which we knew very well, for he had sewed all the
rest into his Wastecoat. Since it falls out so unluckily, said I, don't let us
make known our Wants to the House, but go to rest, and consult tomorrow. I lay
with Snip, for fear he should take it into his Head to sneak off. In the Night,
when I found he was fast a-sleep, I bundled up all his Clothes, and threw them
out of the Window to my Man that waited for them.

When Morning came, I desired him to rise, that we might get all together to
consult; but no Clothes were to be found. He began to storm, and swear, but all
to no purpose; for not one of his Oaths would bring back a Rag of his Clothes.
He told us in his Ravings, that he had lost so much Money, sewed up in his
Wastecoat. We upbraided him for his Covetousness, in not letting us share with
him; but it did not signify any thing. He threatened to go to the Provost, and
have the Landlord secured; and would have don't, if he had not been naked.

After raving to no Purpose, he was obliged to go to Bed again to avoid
catching cold. He asked us what he should do in his Condition, but all the
Advice we gave him brought him no Consolation.

He was very tall, and large made, and we used to call him in Ridicule the
Infant. He proposed to sell his Horse to cloth him; but being so much out of
Size, there was not any thing to be had ready made that would fit him: This was
still worse and worse; and though the Horse was sold for twenty Pistoles, we
contrived it so, that my Landlord seized the Money for his Reckoning. This put
him almost beside himself, and he was ready to expire with Vexation.

I pretended to be much concerned at this Usage, while the rest of our Company
laughed at his Misfortune. I seemed to be very angry with them; and told 'em I
would do my Endeavor to remedy every thing. I made 'em acquainted, that I had
just called to mind a Person, a Friend of mine, that lived in the Town, much of
the Infant's Size, and I would go to borrow a Suit of Clothes for him. He
seemed very much rejoiced at this; for he resolved, as soon as ever he was
dressed, to take up the Landlord, and swear the Robbery against him.

I went as he supposed about his Clothes; and after staying some time below, I
went up with a Bundle, and seemed very much concerned that I could not succeed.
I told the Infant, the Gentleman was gone to Lions about Business of Concern,
and had carried all his Clothes with him. But I had brought him a Masquerade
Habit that he had left behind him.

He expressed some Satisfaction at the Sight of it, that he should not be
confined to lie in Bed. But, said he, if it were not only for the Name of
Clothes, a Man might as well go naked, for there is no stirring abroad in this
Dress.

It was the Habit of a Satyr, that we had made on purpose for the Occasion,
before we left Paris. When we had equipped him, it was as much as I could do to
keep my Countenance at the Figure he made; and he seemed very much dissatisfied
with it, but however he wore it for the Convenience of not lying in Bed.

When we were at Dinner, we had many Contrivances to get away, but none
feazable.

I told 'em at last, I had thought of a Design would certainly do our Business,
and make up our Losses, if the Infant would consent to it. He readily replied,
he would stick at nothing to do that. Why then, said I, if you will suffer your
self to be shown in that Habit, as a Monster newly arrived, I Will answer for the
Success of it.

After much talk, he agreed to do it, on this Proviso, that his Face should be
disguised. I told him, I would step to my Friend's House, for the Mask that was
made to the Habit. I returned and gave it to him, and he was soon satisfied
with the Project.

Notwithstanding the Bustle we made, none of the House (but the Landlord) knew
any thing of the Matter, and the next Day it was given out about the Town, that
a Monster was to be shown in the Afternoon. We had procured a Chain, and other
Materials, to carry on the Joke; and when the time came to show away, we had
such a Concourse of People to see our Monster (it being in the Holydays) that
our Profit gave us some Satisfaction. For when the time of showing was over,
our Money amounted to three and twenty Pistoles; and the Monster behaved
himself so well with our Instructions, that he gave a general Content.

We had taken care he should appear so fierce, that none should approach near
enough to discover the Deceit. We had a great deal of Diversion at the ignorant
People's Suggestions. One Country Fellow asked how old he was? I told him four
Years, three Months, and five Days. Lord bless me! (cried he out) why, by that
time he comes to be twenty, no House will be able to hold him.

In fine, we showed him so long, that our Money mounted to upwards of one
hundred Pounds, which pleased our Infant so well, that he desired to continue a
Monster all the time of the Holydays. But we resolved to carry the Joke no
further, though we did not tell him so.

We left the Infant chained to the Post of the Window, as usual, went down to
my Landlord, and gave him Instructions how to behave himself. We took care to
satisfy him very well for the Trouble he had been at.

We all rid away to the next Village, and putting up our Horses, returned on
Foot, one by one, back again to the Inn; and stole up Stairs unperceived by any
one but the Landlord. The Infant, finding we staid longer than ordinary, began
to make a great Noise: which my Landlord hearing, sent up one of his Servants,
that knew nothing of the Secret; when the Infant saw him come in, he made
several Signs to him; but as the Fellow knew nothing of the Jest, he did not
much like the Action of the Infant, but ran down to his Master frighted out of
his Wits.

We had made Peep-holes in the bordering Room, where we could perceive every
Action of the Infant's; but he was so very much enraged, that he sat down
biting his Nails for Vexation; for he began to perceive the Trick we had put
upon him. After sitting Melancholy some time, he rose up, and endeavored to
undo the Chains; but as they were tied close behind, and made fast to a Staple
in the Wall, all his Efforts proved vain. All our care was to contain from
laughing, which was a very hard Task. When he found he could not free himself,
Rage entirely possessed him; and the Noise he made with stamping, and rattling
his Chains, brought up several of the Servants armed, who opened the Door
cautiously; but notwithstanding their Valor, ran away as soon as they perceived
his menacing Action; and tumbling over one another, took the shortest way down
Stairs.

When we thought he had Mortification enough, we sent my Landlord into him with
a good Horsewhip, and a Letter in his Hand. As Soon as he had got within the
Door, he spoke after this manner, in a Landlord-like Tone. I was pretty well
assured at the beginning that thou were a rank Cheat; but now I am convinced of
it, I will chastise thee first, and reason with thee afterward, like other
criminal Judges, punish first, and enquire into the Demerits of the Cause
afterward, that Justice may not wait for any body.

These Words were followed with some smart Strokes, and the Dialogue soon began
to be in much Confusion; for between the roaring of the Infant, the bawling of
my Landlord, and the smacking of the Whip, it was a continual jargon of Noise:
And we were obliged all of us to own, our Host executed his Commission to a
Hair.

When he had a little recovered himself, he began to reason with his Patient;
who, that he might the better hear him, laid himself down on his Palate to
condole his afflicted Body. But their Questions being very long, and the
Answers but short, consisting of two Monosyllables, Ay, or No, I will not
trouble you with the Relation.

After their Dialogue was over, he gave him the Letter, which discovered our
Design upon him. He was thunderstruck at our Combination; and uttered such
Imprecations of Revenge, that my Landlord was obliged to answer him with his
Whip, which soon reduced him to Reason.

We began to be tired with our Infant, and so put an end to our Diversion, and
his Torture, by sending him his Clothes; though some of our Company would have
had him gone to Paris in that Trim.

In a few Days after the Frolic was over, he commenced a Suit of Law against
us all, for a Robbery; but the Judges finding it only a Trick of Mirth, fined
every one of the Defendants six Livres a-piece, and every one to pay his own
Costs. This but enraged the Infant the more, and he began to meditate a more
pernicious Revenge; for now he appeared the Ridicule of the whole City, and he
could never stir without a Train of Boys at his Heels.

The first Instance of it was as follows: My Servant having some Intrigue on
his Hands, had made bold with my Clothes to carry it on; and coming home pretty
late, was shot through the Back with a Pistol Ball, just as he was entering the
College Gates. Though it was well meant, the poor Fellow escaped with Life, yet
he lay dangerously ill for several Days. He could give no Account of the Affair
at all, not having seen the Person that wounded him. But the Accident made me
very uneasy, for I was convinced the Favor was meant to me. This made me
cautious how I ventured out of the College; for it was easy to imagine it was
a Proof of the Infant's Resentment, who had left the College upon the loss of
his Trial.

I began now to repent our Confederacy against him, and wrote him a Note to
assure him of my Contrition, with my Share of the Money we had taken from him.
He received the Cash, and sent me Word he heartily forgave me. Imagining him
sincere, I ventured into the City, and soon frequented my old Rendezvous; but I
had so much Regard for my self as to get to College betimes.

One Night as I was going home, four Men in Vizor Masks rushed out from behind
a Wall of a House that was building; They all fired upon me, and ran away
as soon as they had discharged their Pieces. I must confess, at first Fear made
me imagine my self no Man of this World: But by degrees getting over my
Apprehension, I found I had not got any Hurt. This Accident to me seemed
prodigious; for they were all four so near me, that several Grains of the
Powder stuck in my Face. But I was brought out of my Labyrinth of Thought, when
I received the following Letter the next Morning.

SIR,
I Must own my self one of those unfortunate Men, that, for want of better
Employment, receive Money as the Price of Blood. Though this I can say with a
clear Conscience, I never have yet put my Trade in Practice. Yesterday Morning
I was sent for to the House of Monsieur Gomberville, commonly called the
Infant, who employed me to take away your Life; and, that he would be sure of
the Execution, made one of the four that fired upon you last Night; but as I
had the ordering of our Arms, I took care nothing should be put in 'em that was
hurtful. The Acquaintance I had with your noble Father, made me the more
cautious concerning his Son. I beg in Justice to me you would keep your
Chamber, and cause it to be reported that you are dangerously wounded. I need
not caution you to be careful of your self, for the Infant's Malice seems to me
implacable. We never have any Words made of these Things, because we know how
to revenge our selves; therefore let no one else know the Contents of this, and
be thankful for your Life from

Jaques Marriot.


When I had read the Letter, I ordered my Servant to bring the Bearer before
me; where I soon found, by his manner of Talking, that a little Money would be
very acceptable to the Sender; and therefore I sent him ten Pistoles, with my
humble Service, giving him to know that I would exactly comply with the
Contents.

I began now seriously to think on the Danger I had inconsiderately drawn upon
my self, for an innocent Frolic; and that it would be but ill trusting to the
Infant's Resentment. I gave out that I was dangerously wounded; and the better
to carry it on, I got a Surgeon (a Friend of mine) to visit me frequently.

When I had kept my Chamber long enough for the time of my Cure, I ventured
abroad, but never without four or five of my Friends for a Guard, and came home
in very good Time.

During my Confinement, I received Letters of Condolement from several of my
Mistresses; and when they heard of my Recovery, as many of Reproach for not
coming to visit them as usual. One in particular, and my favorite Fair, was
very pressing for a Meeting; and her chief Reason was to pay her with my
Presence for the Affronts she had sustained from the Infant upon my Account. I
sent her Word I would not fail waiting on her the Sunday following, after Dusk.
Accordingly when the time came, I stole out without any of the College Marks
on, and arrived safe at my Madona's.

After Supper, and two or three Bottles of Hermitage, we went to Bed; and when
we had made our selves as merry as we could in the dark, I addressed my self to
Sleep: But notwithstanding my willingness to receive the gentle God, he still
flew from me, and several Hours passed without closing my Eyes.

About Midnight, I thought I heard Whispers in the next Room, which very much
alarmed me: But my Fears were trebly increased, when, looking through a Chink
of the Door, I discovered the Infant, and four other Fellows with Masks in
their Hands, spreading Saw-dust on the Floor, and on the Table lay several
Sacks.

I soon imagined what their Preparations meant, therefore consulted my Safety
as well as I could in the Confusion of my Thoughts.

I went always well armed since the last Rencounter, having two Brace of
Pistols in my Pockets, a good cutting Sword, and a Stilletto. But I was
confounded, when searching for my Clothes where I had laid them, none could be
found. I now began to think of Death seriously, and beg Pardon sincerely of God
for all my Sins; for I knew it would be Madness to think of escaping, naked as
I was, without any Thing for my Defnce. In the Chaos of my Thoughts I remembered
a Closet which had a Window that looked into the Seine; and though it was three
Stories from the River, yet, as I could swim, I thought it better to trust
Providence by leaping into the Water, than those Cutthroats. I stole softly to
the Window, but to my great Consternation found it too fast for me to open; but
by good Fortune in groping about, I found my Clothes. I put 'em on with a great
deal of Precipitation, and having prepared my Arms, resolved not to die alone.

I waited some Time before the Chamber Door opened. When it was open, I could
perceive 'em coming in with Masks on, and the foremost with a Dark-lanthorn. I
did not think fit to wait till they should discover I was not in the Bed, but
rushed on the first, and shot him dead on the Spot; and in two seconds of a
Minute, dispatched two more, one* with my Sword, and the other with one of my
Pistols; and had made as quick work with the other two, but they fell on their
Knees, and begged for Mercy; which I granted, on Condition that one should tie
the other, which was readily complied with; when that was done, I bound the
other my self, and coming to secure my false Mistress, found her expiring in
the Bed. She had Breath enough left to tell me, she had been caught in her own
Trap; for designing to poison me in the Wine I drank, the Servant had mistaken
the Bottle, and given it to her.

I asked her the Reason of her Hatred to me, being, as I remembered, guilty of
no Fault. She told me, the Infant had informed her that I was false to her,
which converted her Love to the most implacable Hatred. I must own, this Woman
was Mistress of my Heart, and I had several Proofs of her Sincerity; but she
was of a Temper composed of Fire and Fury. She further told me, that I had
raised her Rage to that height, that she was resolved to put an end to my Life
her self; not caring to trust her Revenge to any Hands but her own.

She begged I would forgive her, and immediately expired. I examined my two
intended Murderers, and found they were Servants to the Infant, and compelled
to what they did; therefore I resolved to pardon 'em.

I thought once of going to the Provost, and give him a particular Account of
the Action; but one of the Fellows informed me, he was a near Relation of the
Infant's, and had a very great Love for him, which made me apprehend his
Passion would overcome his Justice. Therefore I resolved the next Morning to
set out for Spain, which I put in practice before Day, and gave my Man Orders
to follow me.

I left Paris with this Reflection, that from the meanest triffling Accident,
often dreadful Effects followed; and a Woman once provoked was the most
dangerous Enemy a Man could have.

I met with nothing extraordinary in my Voyage to Cales; but when I arrived at
Sevil, I was informed, my Father, who was Governor of that City, was at his
Country House about six Leagues off.

Though I was very much fatigued with my Journey, I resolved to wait on him that
Night. I hired a Mule (for I had my Servant's Clothes on) and set out. But my
Beast being none of the best, tired with me about a League before I came to the
Villa where my Father resided.

I left him in the adjacent Village, and pursued my Journey on Foot. As I was
willing to get to my Father's House, I made all the Speed I could. And though it
was very dark, I knew the Way perfectly.

I overtook two Men in a narrow Lane, that called to me, asking why I had
stayed so long, and where was Don Lewis.

I fancied there was something of Villainy going forward by the Name of Don
Lewis, being he was an inveterate Enemy of my Father's. I did not answer 'em
immediately, which brought 'em upon me; they soon found their Mistake. They
asked me where I was going at that time of Night; I told 'em I was going to
Saragoza, to my Friends, for I had served a Gentleman in Cadiz, that had
discharged me, for getting his Maid with Child; and I was obliged to walk all
Night, being I had not any Money to pay for a Lodging. I answered a great many
other Questions, with the same Truth and Simplicity. And after talking some
time, two more came up to us, and asked the others who they had got with 'em.
They went all together, and after a little talk, one that seemed to be the
Superior, came up to me, and told me, if I would make one of their Enterprise
that Night, he would not only reward me well, but take me into his Service; but
if I refused after he had disclosed it to me, they would murder me upon the
Instant.

I told him I would stick at nothing to get Bread. Why then, said Sir Gravity,
my Name is Don Lewis: I have a mortal hatred to Ferdinand Aquilio, Governor of
Sevil. I have waited many Years for my Revenge, but never could get an
Opportunity to execute it till now. He has received one of my Servants into his
House as a Domestic, who this Night will open the Door to us, where I shall
quench my Hatred of him with his Blood; and further, to dispatch all fear of
Resistance, I can assure you there are but two more Servants in the House, whom
my Fellow has made drunk, which shall be ordered so, as if they had murdered
their Master.

It was well for me that Darkness covered the Hemisphere, or the old Devil
could have discovered the Confusion in my Countenance. But notwithstanding my
Consternation, I told him I should be proud to serve him in this, or any other
Adventure. Gramercy, said the old One, and here is something to encourage thee,
(clapping a handful of Dollars into my Hand.)

I Will leave you to guess the Confusion of my Thoughts at this Declaration, and
I was casting about in my Mind, how I should prevent this intended Villainy.

When we arrived at my Father's, we found the Treacherous Villain wating for
his Master. As Soon as ever he saw us, he cried softly to Don Lewis, I am glad
your Honor is come; but Don Ferdinand is in his Closet, and does not intend to
go to Bed tonight, because he is to be at Sevil early in the Morning, and he
has shut his Closetdoor. Why then, said Don Lewis, we'll break it open. But,
returned the Servant, he has Arms always ready in his Closet, and I fear the
Enterprise will be a little Difficult, for he is a tough old Blade.

Upon this Account a small Pause ensued, which gave me Leisure to think, and to
the Old one I uttered my Thoughts.

Sir, said I, submit this Business to me, and I Will inform you how I design to
execute it. Your Servant shall accompany me to the Door of his Closet; and
knock, and as soon as ever he opens it, I Will give a good Account of the old
Gentleman.

Thou counsellest well, replied the old Don, and I Will reward thee accordingly
when the Work is done. And I shall deserve it, thought I to my self, if my
Intention succeeds.

Upon this Resolve, we went into the House, and the Fellow conducted me up
Stairs very softly. The Closet was at the end of a large Room, the Door of
which I bolted on the Inside with one Hand, and plunged my Poniard to the Heart
of the Fellow with the other, who dropped dead at my Feet. At the Noise he made
in falling, my Father cried out Who Is there! and rushed out of his Closet, with
a Pistol in his Hand. I replied, It Is I, your Son.

You may imagine the Surprise my Father was in at this sudden Appearance, and
to see one of his Servants weltring in Blood, and dead before me. Sir, said I,
banish your Surprise, and go with me into your Closet, where I will inform you
of this sudden, and unlook'd-for Appearance; and must farther add, that the
Hand of Providence, by me, has saved you from Death.

My Father followed me into his Study, without speaking: Where I declared, in
as few Words as the Time would permit. all that had befallen me that Night; and
we soon came to a Resolution what to do.

We took each of us a Blunderbuss with a brace of Pistols, went down the back
Stairs, and came in upon 'em, a way they little expected. I came first into the
Hall, as we had concerted.

As Soon as the old Wretch saw me, he cried, Well my Lad, have thou dispatched
the Villain! Yes Sir, said I, and have dragged him down that you may behold what
I have done. When he heard that, he gave a Leap for Joy, and came running
forward to view the pleasing Sight. But Words cannot express his Looks, when he
saw my Father confronting him with a Bluderbuss in his Hand. He stood
motionless, as if he had been turned to Stone.

The other three endeavored to make their Escape, but I discharged my
Blunderbuss, and stopped two of them with my hasty Messengers. The Report of my
Piece made Don Lewis fall down, as imagining himself slain; the third Person
finding it impossible to escape, became desperate, and like a Stag at Bay
defied us. He pulled out a Stilletto, and ran upon me like an angry Lion, and
notwithstanding I shot him in the Breast with a Brace of Balls, wounded me in
three several Places; I grappling with him, we came down together upon the Body
of Don Lewis, who with our Weight began to cry out; and that Moment had been
the last of my Life, if my Father had not ran to my Assistance, and with his
Sword nailed my Antagonist to the Pavement.

The Report of our Firearms had wakened the two drunken Servants of my Father,
who came half frightened out of their Senses. By this time Don Lewis had
recovered himself, and seeing Death before him, fell down upon his Knees, and
implored my Father's Mercy.

Thou base Man! replied my Father, how can thou expect to live after thy
barbarous Attempt upon his Life that never wronged thee? He told him he did not
expect to be forgiven, only to be allowed a Priest, and Confession, and he
would die with a hearty Penitence for his Sins.

Wretch! cried my Father, thou may see how Heaven abhors thy Fact, by
blasting thy Design. This Man thou see before thee, whom thou did employ in
thy black Design, is my own Son, whose coming hither was like an Angel sent
from Heaven to my Assistance. I see, returned the Don, the Seal of Providence
is upon you, and I heartily repent the Crime I intended to commit: And if you
will forgive me, and forget what is past, I Will esteem you as the Saver of my
Life; and, to unite our Friendship, I Will match my Daughter with a noble Dowry
to this your Son, and may they ever live happy.

My Father was too much a Gentleman to murder in cold Blood, though he had
sufficient Excuse on his side if he had done it. On the other hand, his
Daughter was a very great Fortune, even beyond his Hopes.

After some small Pause, he made him this Reply. Sir, you know within your
self, that you have forfeited your Life by the Law, in so basely attempting
mine; but as I can forgive any Injury designed me, if you perform your first
Promise, I am resolved to forgive all that is past. Sir, replied the other
(transported with Joy) I am so much obliged to you for my Life, that I will not
stir out of your House till I have signed Articles of Agreement; and I must
farther add, that nothing sets my Shame more before my Eyes than this your
Goodness.

My Father begged he would take a particular Care how he gave way to Hatred;
which, by the way, only commenced in my Father's getting the better of him in a
Lawsuit, and was heightened by the King's conferring on him the Honor of the
Government of Sevil, which Don Lovis had some Hopes of.

We took care the next Day to let the Country know, that those Fellows that
were killed had attempted to rob our House, but we having timely Notice had
prevented 'em by their Deaths.

The old Gentleman was as good as his Word, for Articles of Agreement were
drawn up between 'em, and I had Leave to visit the Lady when I thought fit. But
I was obliged to go back to Sevil, to put my self in an Equipage suitable to
the Occasion, and Don Lewis followed after with his Daughter.

I must confess I was charmed with her Person at the first Interview; and the
Day was fixed for our Nuptials, which rejoiced the whole City of Sevil, that
two of the noblest Houses were going to bury in Oblivion their long Enmity.

I took the Privilege of an intended Husband in my Visits to my designed Bride,
and in her Conversation found she had no Aversion for me, (at least I thought
so,) and I promised my self the utmost Felicity in her Enjoyment.

One Morning, about a Week before the intended Wedding, I came early to wait on
her, but was informed she was not come out of her Chamber: therefore I resolved
to take a Walk in the great Piazza of the City, to give her time to dress her
self; but as I was going out, I observed the Maid to my Mistress conferring
with a Country Fellow; the Sight of me, I observed, gave the Woman some
Confusion. My Heart told me I was concerned in their Interview, therefore I
went to the Corner of the Street, and waited till their Dialogue was over;
which did not keep me long, for the Fellow soon parted with the Woman, and went
out of the Gate that leads to Cordova.

I had my Man with me, whom I acquainted with my Fears, ordering him to dog the
Fellow, and get out of him, by fair Means or foul, his Business at Don Lewis's
House, and I would follow after him on Horseback.

Away ran my Man, and I soon got my Horse, and overtook 'em about a League and
a half from Sevil. When my Man got Sight of me, I observed he took a little
Basket from the Countryman, and ran away over the Fields with it. I fancied by
that he had succeeded in his Commission, so turned my Horse and followed him.

When I had overtaken him, we went behind a Tuft of Trees a little out of the
Road, where he told me he had made the Fellow believe he was sent by Teresa
(the Name of the Maid he was conferring with) to give him Notice that he would
be pursued by a Cavalier, and forced to deliver what he had received from her,
and perhaps be in Danger of losing his Life; and that he had Orders to consult
with him for his Safety.

The Countryman, being none of the wisest, soon discovered the whole Affair to
my Man, and at Sight of me delivered the Basket to him, and ran to a public
House in the next Village, to wait till he could get clear of me, where my Man
was to bring him his Basket again. In the Basket were four Melons, and in one
of them we found a Letter very artificially put up, which I took out, and with
Terror of Mind read the Contents, which were as follows.

LIfe of my Life, and Treasure of my Soul! I received yours, which gave me all
the Consolation my disconsolate Heart was capable of receiving. But the fatal
Moment is approaching, when I must give up this Body to another Person, but
without a Heart, which always dwells with you; and be assured, unless ill Usage
force it thence, shall ever dwell in the Mansion of your Breast. But, my Soul,
grieve not; for maugre my Tyrant Husband, I will find Time to see the Darling
of my Eyes, and in the Pleasure of those dear Arms forget the dull Embraces of
a Husband. Let Ten be the latest this Evening, when you shall find at the usual
Place, with long-expecting Love, your

Isabella.


I was Thunderstruck at the reading of this Letter, yet blessed my providential
Stars that guided me to this black Secret, before the Priest had joined our
Hands. And, though a Spaniard, my Resentment did not rise to Jealousy, but my
Fancy ran upon the Enjoyment of this false Fair-one, without the Marriage
Chain. And what prompted me the more to it, was, a Postscript to her Letter,
wherein she bad him come in his usual Disguise, and in the dark. In order to
the Accomplishment of my Design, I went into a neighboring House, and wrote
the following Letter, which was put in the Melon in the Room of the other.

My Love,
I Have not Time to write my self, I am so guarded by my Father, and my Tyrant
Husband that is to be, so that I am obliged to employ Teresa. Don't come to the
usual Place till you hear from me, which shall certainly be Tomorrow. Adieu,
thou Life and Soul of

Isabella.


Now all the Hopes I had were, that the Fellow knew what Disguise this amorous
Spark wore, and where was the Place of Rendezvous.

I left it all to my Servant, who had Cunning enough to outwit twenty of the
Countryman. After I had delivered him his Commission, I went back to Sevil,
full of Hopes and Fears; and in two Hours my Man arrived: He gave me a
Description of his Converse with the Countryman, (which was diverting enough)
and how happy they were in escaping my Hands.

He informed me, the amorous Gallant came disguised in the Habit of a Peasant,
and was admitted through the back Garden of Don Lewis's House by the Maid, who
always attended the Hour, and conveyed him to her Apartment in the Dark; which
was according to my Wish: and by Description of the Spark's Person, we were not
unlike as to Proportion or Age, and Darkness would conceal the rest.

I soon provided my self of the Habit I was to wear, and impatiently expected
the coming Hour, which came at last, though the intervening ones seemed the
longest of my Life.

I did not wait long before I was admitted by the too-faithful Confident. We
went over the Garden to a small Room at the Entrance of the House, where I soon
discovered my false Fair-one, (though in the dark.) She was undressed, and
disincumber'd of every Let to Enjoyment. I found, by her eager Kisses and
Embraces, there was no Parlying required; so I even fell to and fed very
heartily; my Partner in Pleasure seemed to like what was prepared for her; and,
before we parted, gave me to understand I had done Wonders, and much beyond her
Expectation.

When we had dally'd away about four Hours in our Feasting, the Maid came to
tell me it was time to part, which we did, after snatching another Morsel.

I went immediately home, was soon in Bed, and had no want of any Provocative
to Sleep.

When I arose in the Morning, I began to weigh maturely the last Night's
Adventure; but could come to no Resolution as to the forming my Behavior to my
false Mistress: But I resolved to be determined by hers.

I went to visit her about Noon, and found her more than ordinary civil to me.

In short, I was so charmed with the Sight of her, that I resolved to give her
another Visit in my Disguise the same Night; and all I had to do was to be
first at the Place.

When the Time came, my Conductress was as ready as before; but going softly
in, she clapped to the Door a little too hastily, and fastened my Coat in it; and
to give me the more Uneasiness, she the same Moment dropped the Key out of her
Hand; and though I could see where it lay, yet I could not stoop for it,
because my Coat was secured in the Door.

After groping about some time, she took it up, and opened the Door to release
her Prisoner: But on the very Instant my Rival appeared, and, finding himself
there before he came, rushed in, and fastened upon me.

The Maid, at the Sight of two Sofia's, clapped to the Door in a Fright, and ran
screaming away; so we had the Happiness to be locked in the Garden together.
But however, to make the best of a bad Market, (as the Saying is,) I got my
Rival down, and belabour'd him with my Fists; for, as good Fortune would have
it, we had neither of us any offensive Weapons.

The Noise of the Maid, and our bustling, alarmed an English Mastiff that was
Watchman to the House, who, without saying By your Leave, had the Impudence to
fasten upon my Rival by the Arm, and worried him very handsomely: But,
notwithstanding my Reasons to the contrary, I took Pity of him, and by Force of
Arms destroyed the Dog; that is, I held him so fast about the Throat with my
Hands, that his last Breath flew away in a Huff.

My disguised Spark seeing himself so unexpectedly relieved, gave me Thanks for
his Safety; and, as soon as ever he spoke, (for we had been sullen before,
neither of us having opened our Lips) I knew him by his Tongue to be one of my
particular Acquaintance.

Why how now, Don Juan! said I, how came you thus disguised? Nay, replied the
Don, I ought to ask you the same thing. With several Questions and Answers we
came to a right Understanding. If I had known, said he, your Pretensions here,
I should never have made any Attempts to your Prejudice. Come, come, said I,
it is very well as it is. So we turned that to Mirth and Ridicule, which perhaps
others of our Nation would have turned to Blood. Our next thing was to make our
Escape, for the whole House was alarmed, and coming upon us with their
domestic Weapons, as Pokers, Spits, Fire-shovels, etc. My Companion led me to
a Place of the Garden, where the Wall was something lower than any where else;
and just as we had gained the Ascent, we perceived a Man mounting from the
other Side; but my Friend did him the Favor to tumble him down again; he
quickly got up, and ran upon him most furiously with his Poniard, and gave him
several Stabs; but my Friend closed with him, wrested his Weapon from him, and
stabbed him to the Heart.

As Soon as he was sped, we made off; but did not go far before my Companion
dropped down dead of his Wounds. I was very much grieved at the Accident, but
made the best of my way home, for fear I should come into Trouble about it, if
I was caught near the dead Bodies.

I went to Bed, but very much perplexed in Mind, and had no Rest all Night. But
what was my Grief in the Morning, when my Servant brought me Word, my Father
and Don Juan my Friend were found murdered, in the Habits of Peasants, under
Don Lewis's Garden-Wall! The Relation deprived me of the Use of Speech for some
time, and my Reason forsook me. I was more than once going to put an End to my
Life, and had certainly done it if I had not been prevented by my faithful
Servant. But when my Reason returned again, I began to think of the Adventure
with some Calmness; for though I had all the Grief imaginable for the Loss of
so good a Father, yet I was of a Temper not to grieve long at any thing; and
then the Fortune I thought my self Master of, appeared so lovely to me, that it
soon dried up my Tears.

The City imagined my Father came by his Death through Don Lewis's Means, as
remembering the ancient Enmity of the two Houses; and being found so near his
House, strengthened the Opinion of every Body; and I was the only Person
satisfied to the contrary.

The Servants that brought in my Father's Body, gave me several Papers found in
his Pockets; among which were two Letters that partly let me into the Truth of
this unhappy Adventure. The first was to this Purpose;

SIR,
YOur Generosity has prevailed, and I can no longer withst^nd your Offers, (on
the Condition as you promise in your last, that you will break off the Match
between your Son, and my Lady.) You must provide your self of a Peasant's
Habit, and tomorrow I will send you a Note to instruct you farther.

Yours, etc. Teresa.


The Second was as follows.

BE at the West End of the Garden at one in the Morning, and ascend a Ladder of
Rope you will find there, and bring it over with you; near the Corner you will
perceive an Arbor, go in there, and wait till I come to conduct you to your
Wishes. I Will take care nothing shall be in your way to interrupt your Privacy;
and be sure you be careful of your Tongue, for if you speak, we shall be both
undone.

My Thoughts were in the utmost Confusion about the unravelling of this fatal
Affair; and running over in my Imagination my past Conversations with my
Father, I remembered in our last, he told me, he thought it a little of the
soonest for me to marry; and that it would be more for my Interest, to delay
our Nuptials; and perhaps, said he, I may give you sufficient Reasons for the
contrary. Whatever his Reasons were, I little thought of the true one.

I sent a Letter to the Maid of my false Mistress; but she fearing she should
be found out (as she really was) absconded.

Don Lewis sent to condole with me in my great Loss; but I could perceive it
gave him some Satisfaction, that I was in actual Possession of that Estate,
which I had only Hopes of in the Life of my Father. His Visit was but short,
yet I thought it too long; for as I had no Design of marrying the Daughter, I
was very willing to drop my Acquaintance with the Father. Though I gave him
Hopes, when Decency would permit, I would not fail in my Addresses to his
Daughter.

After the Interment of my Father, I began to examine his Affairs, and was not
very well pleased to find the best Part of his Estate mortgaged for twelve
Years to several Persons; and instead of seeing my self worth twenty thousand
Crowns a Year, soon found I was not worth the sixth Part.

It was agreed, that my Father was very profuse in his way of Living, always
keeping open House; yet it was every body's Opinion he did not expend half his
Income.

I sometimes imagined there was some underhand Dealing in the Affair, but it
was past my finding out: I therefore took an odd Resolution, I determined with
my self to undergo a voluntary Banishment, till the term of Years on the
Mortgage was expired.

I made a Visit to Don Lewis, and told him of my Resolves, and my Reasons for
it, which he could not choose but applaud; for it was easy enough to perceive
Interest was the Jack he aimed at. He did not press me to see his Daughter, nor
I him; but after Assurance of remembrancing on both sides, we parted.

I must own, my Soul longed for another Taste of the delicious Banquet; and I
hope you will excuse me when I own to you, my Passion could not be called Love;
but as I found it impracticable, I made my self as easy as I could.

In a few Weeks I had finished my Affairs, and waited for the sailing of the
West India Fleet; resolving for the City of Mexico, where I had an Uncle very
rich, who had often expressed in his Letters to my Father, the great Desire he
had to see me.

I had raised out of the Ruins of my Father's Fortune six thousand Crowns,
without so much as touching any of his Plate, or Furniture; the care of those
Things, with all my Writings, I trusted to a near Kinsman, Superior of a
Monastery in the City.

One Day, going about two Leagues out of Town, my Horse's Girt broke, which
obliged me to a light at a Sadler's to have it made good. The Man asked me if I
would not take a walk in his Garden while he was doing his Work, which I
accordingly did.

At the end of the Walk was a pretty Arbor, and in it sat a Woman reading; who
at the Sight of me, gave a great Shriek, and was for running out; but I stopped
her, and begging Pardon for disturbing her, told her I would retire, and leave
her alone. But upon finding it was Teresa, Maid to my quondam Mistress, I
resolved to stay with her, that I might know something of my Father's Affair.

She appeared confounded at the Sight of me, is imagining I had come on purpose
to apprehend her; but I soon undeceived her, and with a little soothing
Language, and a couple of Pistoles, she disposed her self to give me all the
information she could.

Sir, (said she) I hope you will pardon me; for what I did, was purely by the
Influence of Gold.

Your Father declared to me, at first Sight of my Mistress his Heart and Reason
forsook him; and often informed me, if he could not enjoy ^er, he should be
obliged to put an end to his Misery by Death. I often laid before him the
^njury he would do to you his Son, but he as often declared he would break off
the Match between you; for he was well assured you had no very violent
Inclination for her, and there were other Women in Sevil, of as great a Fortune
as my Mistress, that would be proud of his Alliance.

The many rich Presents he made me, overcame my Honesty; and that unfortunate
Night that brought him his Death, was to have completed his Happiness. But,
said she, (after some Pause) I am very much at a loss to find out one thing.
What Is that, Madam? said I. Why, Sir, returned Madona, since I know how Matters
stand between you and my Mistress, I shall give you to understand, that you
were not the favored Lover; and that another Gentleman revell'd in those
Delights, you perhaps thought to have the whole Possession of; and that was the
Reason I was so willing to comply with your Father, for I had intended to
introduce him in the Habit of the said Gentleman, unknown to my Mistress, and
had provided a Story accordingly. For as soon as ever the Gentleman was gone,
your Father should have taken his Place in the same Disguise; and I intended to
impose on my Mistress, that her Lover was returned to take another Farewell of
her. And this Cheat was easy to be carried on, being they were obliged to
Silence, old Don Louis lodging in the next Room. But what amazes me, (as I was
saying) opening the Door to let my Mistress's Lover in, another in the same
Disguise rushed in upon me, which I am sure was not your Father. I soon cleared
up this Affair with her, and let her know how I had supplanted my Rival.

She seemed very much surpised at the unravelling of this Secret, but was very
glad she had nothing to apprehend from my Resentments; being that was the chief
Cause of leaving her Mistress, as imagining I should find the Letters she had
sent him. And upon this she resolved to go to her Mistress again, for she heard
every Day from the Family, and knew how Matters stood; and that her Mistress
wanted her, that they might condole together for the loss of Don Juan, her old
Spark. But she declared, she was not very sorry for his Loss, for Money came
very hard from him; and you know Sir, said she, it is our Business to make Hay
while the Sun shines.

Madam, said I, since I know what you love best, if you will pursue my Intrigue,
twenty Pistoles are at your Service. Indeed, Sir, returned Madam, it must be
something very extraordinary that I shall refuse for such a Sum. Why then I Will
let you into my Plot, said I; you shall inform your Mistress Don Juan is not
Dead, as was reported; but after a tedious and dangerous Illness, was recovered
to a Miracle, but concealed his Revival, being under some Apprehension of
answering for the Life of my Father.

Sir, said she, I like your Plot so well that I Will answer for the Success on it,
and I Will go about it instantly, for I long to be fingering the Gold. Why then,
said I, you shall finger it beforehand, and when the Business is done, I Will
double the Sum. She was mightily pleased with the Amendment to the Bargain; and
the third Night after was concluded on for the Time, when I was to attend as
before.

I took leave of Teresa, and pursued my Journey, made merry with my Friends,
and returned.

At length the happy Moment came, that I so long expected. My mercenary
Confident was ready; I entered, and once more took Possession of all my
Treasure; and as I thought it would be the last time, was profuse enough. My
Lady seemed very well pleased with my Night's Work, and in plain Terms told me
so.

I had prepared a Letter, in which I had disclosed every thing. When our loving
Affair was over, she asked me softly how I was engaged in that Adventure. I
told her as softly as I could, that I knew she would be inquisitive, and
talking being dangerous, I had brought the Account in Writing, which I put into
her Hand, and with some regret took my Leave; for the next Day was intended for
our Imbarkation. As I walked over the Garden, I asked Teresa, how long the
Amor had been between Don Juan and her Lady; she told me about two Years, and
this was the Commencement.

Don Juan, whose Country House lay about two Leagues from my Master's, was set
upon by Thieves, and dangerously wounded; and there had lost his Life, if Don
Lewis had not very fortunately for him come that Way attended, and drove off
the Thieves. Don Juan was so very much hurt, that it was not thought safe to
carry him home; therefore my Master ordered him to his House, where his Wounds
kept him a great while. When he had recovered Strength enough to walk, he
usually employed his time in the Garden, where my Lady often seeing him, fell
desperately in Love with him. She made me the Confident of her infant Passion,
and I being a very proper Person to be trusted with such Secrets, advised her
to let the Don see her, which we contrived thus.

She was to go into an Arbor at the farther end of the Garden, (where I had
observed Don Juan sat every Day) and pretend to be asleep. She took all the
care that was necessary in her Dress, and did as I directed her. It succeeded
to her Wish; for the Don, at Sight of her, imagining her an earthly Goddess,
kneeled and kissed her Hand. She seemed to wake in a pretended Fright, but it
was not long before they came to a right Understanding.

That Place was made the Rendezvous of the Lovers, when Opportunity would
permit; but he recovering (though he pretended a Weakness for some time) was
obliged to take leave of our House; though in the Father's Absence, they often
found Opportunity to satisfy their Loves; and when they resided in Town, he
continued his Visits in the Disguise of the Countryman he used to send to my
Lady with Presents of Fruit, and by that means they received Letters from each
other.

When she had finished her short Relation, I gave her the tewnty Pistoles I
promised her, and took my Leave. She seemed to be in some Confusion about
managing it with her Mistress, for she would certainly find her out, she said,
when she would be confirmed of Don Juan's Death; but she comforted her self
with telling me, her Mistress durst not disclose it to any body, for fear of
betraying herself. But poor Teresa little thought her Mistress would find it
out so soon as the next Morning, when she had read my Letter, that I put into
her Hand, when I left her. The next Day, I ordered my Equipage on board our
Ship, which lay at Cadiz, and followed my self; but the Wind chopping about,
hindered our setting Sail. I then repented the leaving my Letter with my
Mistress, for by the help of my Money with Teresa, I might have made another
Meal with her.

I old not think it Prudence to go on Shore, fearing her Resentments might form
some Designs on my Life. I therefore contented my self on Board, till the Wind
should prove fair for sailing. As I was reading in my Cabin one Day alone, my
Servant brought me a Letter: The Contents were these.

Noble Sir,
UNderstanding you are bound for Mexico, the Place of my Birth, I shall think
it the greatest Honor in the World, if you please to take me into your
Protection. My Father was a rich Merchant of that City, who going to another
World, has left me a considerable Estate in this. Those Persons who had the
care of my Education here, seem to have Designs against my Fortune; therefore I
have made my Escape from 'em, but must return to my Betrayers, if you have not
the Goodness to be my Guardian to Mexico, where I shall return the Obligation
you shall please to lay me under, in being my Protector.


I asked my Man who brought the Letter, and he told me a young Negro. I bid him
bring him in. I asked him several Questions, and found him ready with his
Answers. He informed me, that his Father, though a Negro, was a Man of Substance,
and had sent him in his Infancy to be educated at Sevil, and for the rest the
Letter informed me.

I was mightily pleased with the Person of the black Gentleman, and treated him
civilly, with the Assurance of delivering him safe to his Friends at Mexico.

When we were alone, he told me he had a farther Secret to discover to me, if
he was sure of not being interrupted. Upon hearing this, I ordered my Servant
on Shore for some Necessaries, and informed him, we need not fear any
Interruption for some Hours.

After a long Pause, and casting his Eyes on the Ground, he began.

This Veil of Night would not hide my Blushes, if I were not convinced in your
Knowledge of my Frailty. But if you will consider my Youth, Climate, and
Opportunity, you will allow few of my Sex could withstand the Temptation. Be
not surpised to find in this Disguise the Daughter of Don Lewis, who is so far
subject to the caprice of Love, as to disclose to you the inmost Secret of her
Heart.

The Letter you left with me produced a contrary Effect than I believe you
imagined; and instead of Rage and Indignation taking Possession of my Breast, a
softer Passion stole in, and I felt all the Tenderness imaginable for Don Pedro.

I expect nothing but ill Usage from you for my past Conduct; but if you can
believe there is any Sincerity in Woman, after what I have been guilty of, I am
assured you may depend on what I say, that no other Object shall share my Heart
with you. I do not mean the tie of Wedlock, but if you will accept of me as I
am, I Will be as subservient to your Commands, as your meanest Slave.

I was so confounded between Pleasure and Amazement, that I imagined all I
heard and saw was a Dream; but being sweetly convinced of the Reality, I said
all my Passion could suggest in return, not giving my self time to consider of
the Oddness of the Accident: 'Twas sufficient I had in Possession all that was
lovely in Woman, in my Imagination; and I had no other Thought, but how to keep
her from the Knowledge of her Father on Shore, and the Sailors on Board, for we
did not know when we should set Sail.

My Mistress told me, if she had not succeeded with me, she resolved for a
Nunnery, but since we were reconciled, she had laid by all Thoughts of the
Habit. She made her Escape from her Father's, without the Assistance, or
Knowledge of any one but Teresa. But what favored her Escape was, the Absence
of her Father for ten Days in the Country; yet she feared, when he came home
again, he would fright Teresa into Consession, or by Promises get it out of
her; for that she was mercenary enough to sell any thing she had to the best
Bidder. To prevent which, we agreed to dress her in the Habit of a Man, and let
her wear her own Complexion.

Accordingly we both went on Shore at Cadiz, and soon equipt our selves with
what we wanted, and on Board I brought my Spark, as a Relation of mine, that
had a Mind to run his Fortune with me. The next Day the Wind proving
favorable, we set Sail, and left our Apprehensions behind us.

I was obliged to let our Servant into the Secret, that I might have it kept
so; well knowing, if he had discovered it himself, it had not been a Secret
long, though the Fellow was very faithful to any Secret that was trusted to him.

We touched at the Madera Islands, passed the Pike of Teneriff, got over the
Line, duck'd our Men as usual, and met with no extraordinary Accident; but in
fifty three Days, arrived safe at the City of Sancta Domingo, (or St. Dominick)
the capital City of the Island Hispaniola.

I was very well pleased to find so delightful a Place as this was, after the
Fatigue of our Voyage. My Mistress and I took us a Lodging at a goodnatur'd
Spaniard's, that treated us very well -- for our Money.

Here my Lady told me, she felt the Effects of our Familiarity. I endeavored
to persuade her I had no Hand in it; but she insisted upon it, that the Deed was
done by me, and gave me some Proofs to believe it.

I was very much concerned to find Means to hide it from the House; for she
began to have those Qualms which attend that natural Distemper; and by the
Beauty of her Face, I feared her Sex might soon be distinguished.

I kept her from the Sight of our Ship's Crew in the Voyage, she always staying
in the Cabin; and it was very dangerous to discover a fine Woman in this Part
of the World, because there are few that are handsome.

I was upon Thorns till our Departure for Mexico; but the Fleet staying longer
than I expected, I took a Ramble to the most noted Places in the Island; and
since I understand by your Story you never were there, I Will give you a short
Description of it.

Hispaniola is seated from seventeen Degrees, to nineteen Degrees Latitude, in
Length about one hundred and twenty Leagues; and Breadth (about the middle
Part) fifty. The Air much the same for Heat, as at Sevil in Spain; the Fruits
delicious, and some peculiar to the Place.

The capital City, is St. Domingo, which gives a delightful Prospect from the
Fields about it, being mixed with pleasant Gardens and Rivers.

Here the Governor of the Island resides, and here are kept all their Offices,
and Courts of Judicature, and it is likewise the Storehouse to the whole
Island.

There are two Cities more, St. Jago, and Nuestra Sennora de alta Gracia; the
last of which is to the South, and is famous for the best Chocolate in the
World.

The Cathedral of St. Domingo, is a handsome Pile of Building, and the other
Churches are answerable to the Grandeur of the Inhabitants, whose very Artizans
are wealthy.

The Friars live as luxurious here, as in any other Part of the World, and
follow the Steps of their Brethren, in choosing the noblest Situations.

This Island was discovered by Columbus in the Year 1492, and kept in the Hands
of the Spaniards ever since that Time; while most of their other Acquisitions
are fell to the English, French, and Dutch.

Though the French have some Plantations in the Island at present, yet they were
of their own acquiring, and not taken from the Spaniards; and being chiefly
Hunters, and not very rich, the Spaniards make no Attempt upon 'em.

No Island can boast of more convenient Ports than this, and every Port
disembogues fine Rivers (stored with palatable Fish) into the Sea; but then to
qualify that Blessing, they are very much infested with Aligators, and
Crocodiles. I saw one lying on the Shore-side like a Log of Wood, and as a
Buffalo came there to drink, he sprung upon him, dragged him to the Bottom, and
there devoured him; though they are easily to be avoided, from the aromatic Smell
that comes from their Skin.

I was much surpised to find in most Houses, Serpents instead of Cats, that
were greater Enemies to Rats and Mice; but what was more pleasing, they were
not the least Offensive, having no Venom in 'em. But then, they will often play
the Fox with the Poultry, and destroy many of them, unless narrowly watched.

The Scolopendria of the Greeks is found here, and very large Scorpions; but by
the Divine Providence, neither of 'em hurtful.

I shall not trouble you with any farther Account of this Island, because there
is not any thing to be found there, but what is upon the Continent, unless some
particular Herbs; and as I am no Botanist, I shall not take any notice of 'em.

The time came at last for our embarking for Vera Cruz, in order to go to
Mexico, and I left St. Domingo with some Regret; as imagining I should not meet
with any other Place in America so pleasant.

During our Voyage, my Mistress was mightily disordered.

We embarked for Vera Cruz, where we arrived without any Accident; and having
no Business there, we set out by Land for Mexico, and got safe there. But
enquiring for my Uncle, I was informed he was gone to reside at Lima, the
capital City of Peru. My Concern was the more, in that I feared I should not
meet with proper Accommodation at Mexico, for want of him, in the Affair of my
Mistress; for her Condition would not bear the Fatigue of another Removal.

I was entertained in the House of a near Friend of my Uncle's, and one who
kept a Correspondence with him; he was very civil to me, and of a freer
Disposition than generally the Spaniards are; but he had the same Vanity as all
the old Christians have, who Pride themselves very much upon it. I let him into
the Secret of my Lady, and her Condition; and by the help of his Wife, we made
her reassume her proper Dress. But we kept her private.

The time of her Delivery came, and the Product proved a lusty Boy, who staid
among us three Weeks, and then left us. I had no Scruples about being the
Father, for it was plain enough to be seen; it being my Picture in a little. My
Mistress continued very weak longer than the usual Time; and I being alone with
her one Day, she told me she was under some Apprehensions concerning our
Landlord, Don Manuel, who had made her secretly many large Offers, and the
Nurse was his Emissary. I told her I had the same Proposals from his Wife; and
though the Woman was not disagreeable, nay might pass for a Beauty, where Women
were so scarce, yet I could not find any Tenderness for her in my Heart.

After many Arguments between us, a Thought came into my Head, which I hoped
would produce some Mirth among us. I desired my Mistress to give Don Manuel
some small Encouragement, and leave the rest to me.

My Landlord soon found an Opportunity, through my means, to see my Mistress. She
followed my Advice, and transported the Don out of his Senses; his Joy was not
to be contained, he forgot the Gravity of a Spaniard, and caper'd about like a
French Dancing Master. When I learnt all their Discourse from my Mistress, I
begged her to continue her good Humor to him, and promise him a meeting that
Day Seven-night in the Summer House of the Garden. She did as I directed.

In the mean time I took my Opportunity to confabulate with the Wife, and gave
her Directions the Night appointed, to go to the same Summer House, but to
avoid Speech, being it was over the Water, and Men were continually passing to
and fro. The good Woman was as much overjoyed as her Husband; and the better to
carry on my Design, I gave it out, that I was to go with some Gentlemen a
hunting the Buffalo for two or three Days. I desired my Landlord (a Title I had
given him out of Mirth) to take care of my Wife in my Absence. I told my good
Landlady, this was a Contrivance of mine, that we might not be suspected.

My Mistress had made just the same Agreement with the Don. The Time came, and
the good Man and good Woman were left to worry one another, with their
extraordinary Passion.

The next Day at Dinner, (for we generally eat together) Don Manuel cast many a
Sheep's Eye at my Wife, and his good Lady at me.

The same Day, as I was reading in the Garden, Madona came to me, and in bitter
terms of Reproach gave me. much ill Language; and told me I had betrayed her to
her Husband basely, by giving him the Ring she gave me the last Night. I soon
found that she had made a Present to her Husband of a Ring, taking him for me,
and she had observed it upon his Finger. She made so many Speeches about it,
that at last I was compelled to tell her the whole Truth, to get rid of her
tiresome Passion, but I soon repented of my Declaration; for she flew upon me,
and with her Nails played the Cat with my Face, and I had much ado to disengage
my self from her. So furious does a disappointed Passion make a Woman.

Her confounded Temper made me resolve to leave Mexico. The Husband began to
suspect something of the Affair; but his Imagination, that he had the Company
of my Wise in the Summer House, curbed his Resentment.

The Woman's Rage was unsurmountable, and it was not in my Power to bring her
to Temper: Therefore I chose to avoid her as much as possible. As I was at
Supper with my Mistress, some few Days after the Accident happened, she told
me, she had received a Present of Cordial-water from Don Manuel's Wife. Now I
had not told her of Madona's Resentment, because I imagined it might make her
uneasy: But as soon as I heard of the Present, something struck my Mind, there
was something uncommon in it; I therefore desired my Mistress not to drink any
of it. Lord said she, my Dear, I have already, and desire you would taste it
too, for it is the pleasantest Liquor I ever drank in my Life.

I was mightily disturbed at it, and two Hours discovered the fatal Effects.

My Mistress began to be very much out of order; and notwithstanding all the
Aid of Physicians, she expired in my Arms, and every body agreed she had been
poisoned. I had, in my Fury and Ravings, declared to Don Manuel the Author of
this black Deed; and when he went to enquire after her, was informed she went
out before Night, and was supposed to have gone to the Town of St. Jago, on the
Lake, to one of her Relations. Don Manuel sent after her, but she was not to be
found. He grieved at the loss of my Mistress, as much as I did; and I dare
avow, if he had found his Wife, he would have sacrificed her to the Manes of my
dear Mistress.

I was very much grieved for the Loss of my Mistress, for I had reason to be
convinced her Passion for me was unfeigned. You may easily imagine, there was
no staying for me in the House where this dismal Accident happened; but as I
was preparing to be gone, the Corrigidore sent for me to appear before him, to
give him the best Account I could of this Action. I related to him the whole
Truth, as I have told it you; only I declared it was my Wife I had lost. Don
Manuel was seized, and put in Prison, notwithstanding I insisted upon his
Innocence; but he proceeded in that manner, being it was supposed he was
accessory to his Wife's Escape. But a few Days after he was secured, News was
brought, that his Wife was found murdered in the Woods, as it was supposed by
some Indians, as she was endeavoring to make her Escape from the Hands of
Justice.

Thus she met her Reward for her barbarous Murder of a Woman that never wronged
her, though indeed the Favor was designed for me.

A few Days after this fatal Accident, I heard of some Merchants that designed
to cross the Continent to the South Sea with a good Guard. I made Acquaintance
with 'em, paid my Quota to the Charge, and set out along with 'em, leaving
behind me the hateful City of Mexico, where I had lost the only thing I
esteemed on Earth. And I must own to you, notwithstanding my Philosophy, I
never thought of her for some time without the utmost Heartbreaking. I have
endeavored indeed, by forcing my Temper to Mirth, to bury the Remembrance; and
Time, with good Company, has brought me some Assistance; yet nevertheless, I do
firmly believe, no Woman's Charms will ever for the future break my Rest; for I
am satisfied, my late Mistress made a Hole quite through my Heart.

But to pursue my Discourse.

We set out, with a Guard of fifty Spanish Soldiers, for fear of the Indians,
who had made it their daily Practice to set upon every body that went through
the Country, if not too strong for 'em. I need not tell you, that Mexico is one
of the finest Cities in the World, or that it lies upon a Lake, and no other
Passage to it but over three broad Causways from different Cities on the Land.
But what is something extraordinary, one part of the Lake is brackish, and
noisome, with no living Creature in it; and the other is fresh, wholesome, and
stored with palatable Fish. But as there are many exact Accounts of the
Continent of America, and its Conquest, by my noble Countryman Hernando Cortes,
I shall say no more of it; but I will take the Liberty to add that Caesar* and
Alexander were but Pigmy Conquerors to him; and every body will be of that
Opinion, if they will give themselves the Trouble of reading his History.

We met with no Indians to oppose our Passage, and arrived at Segovia, an
inland Town environed with Rocks, and but meanly built. Some of our Company
staid there, and I was willing to stay along with 'em to refresh my self; for
it is but indifferent traveling over rocky Mountains, and crossing Rivers upon
Hurdles, that is Pieces of Timber lashed together with Ropes; and it is
sometimes dangerous, though we got over safe with our whole Company.

I staid fifteen Days at Segovia, with fifteen of my Companions. I was very
much surpised at the Relation of some of the Inhabitants of that Place, who
told me, about two hundred of your Countrymen the Year before (Free-booters) in
spite of all Opposition came from the South Sea, to the North, with a very
great Booty, defeated the Spaniards when ten to one, and posted to all the
Advantage in the World, several times. The People of Segovia talk of 'em as so
many Devils; and that they were aided by the black Gentleman, or it had been an
Impossibility to have gone through what they did. But it must be confessed,
your Countrymen despise Hazards, and laugh at the greatest Dangers.

After we had sufficiently refreshed our selves, we took our Leaves of Segovia,
and pursued our Journey to the South Sea, with a Guard of Indians, subservient
to the Spaniards. And I must own to you, there is not a People in the World
more true to their Trust, than those confederate Indians that own the Dominion
of Spain.

Our Journey to St. Fee was pleasant enough, through a rich, level, pleasant
Country, and we rode upon Mules, a Beast of a sure Foot; and our chief
Diversion was shooting of Monkies, that played us several comical Tricks,
running up the Trees, and frequently did us the Favor to urine in our Faces,
and sometimes something worse.

When we arrived at St. Fee, a small Town and Port in the South Sea, we had the
good Fortune of meeting with a Vessel ready to set Sail for Lima. We went
immediately on Board, and got clear of the Shore that Evening.

We arrived at Lima after a Voyage of twenty five Days; we landed at Calao, the
Port that all the Ships of Spain anchor at, and one of the finest in the
South Sea.

The Town is built upon a Point of Land that runs into the Sea. It is very
strongly fortified, and well garrisoned. I sent my Servant to my Uncle at Lima,
to acquaint him that I was coming to wait on him the next Day; but my Servant
returned in four Hours, with my Uncle's Coach, who informed me, that he was
impatient till he saw me. My Uncle was Judge of the Civil Courts, and a Man in
very great Power. He sent his Major Domo to wait on me, with his Excuse, that
he had come himself, but that he was afflicted with the Gout. I only staid till
I had put on other Clothes, and immediately after went in the Coach with the
Major Domo, and arrived at my Uncle's just within Night. He was very well
pleased to see me, and caressed me in an extraordinary manner. But I was
something surpised to find that he had resolved for Spain within a Month,
there to end his Days.

I told him the Story of my Father's unhappy Fate, only concealing his Love to
Donna Elvira. He was very much shocked at the News, owning to me his chief
Reason of going to Spain, was to have the Happiness of living together. I then
told him, I supposed as that could not be, that he would alter his Resolution,
and think no more of his Voyage: But he answered, most of his Effects were gone
for Spain two Months before, and that he must of necessity follow.

I gave him to understand, that it was not in my Power to wait upon him. He
took a great deal of Pains to persuade me to it, but when he found it was to no
purpose, he told me since I was not to be prevailed upon, he would leave me
Master of a small Fortune in Lima.

During his Stay, he introduced me to most of the best Families in the City,
and the Viceroy was pleased to show me good Countenance, and promised my Uncle
to provide for me.

When the time came of his embarking for Spain, I waited on him on Board, where
we took Leave, though not with dry Eyes; and I have repented many times that I
did not accompany him. But we must submit to Fate; and what is allotted us by
Fortune will come.

He left me Master of a well-furnish'd House, and a Plantation whose Income
would provide every thing Necessity required in the middle Station of Life,
with a Promise that at his Death I should inherit the Remainder of his Estate;
for he was a single Man, and had no nearer Relation than my self.

I took all the Pleasure the Place would afford; and to say Truth there was no
want of any thing at Lima, except the Conversation of the Female Sex; though I
must freely confess I did not always want that.

The Viceroy proved very kind to me, but Death taking him away suddenly, I
mightily grieved his Loss, as indeed I had Reason; for the Person that
succeeded him proved the Reverse. He made a general Remove of all the Officers
the Deceased had put in Posts, and among the rest I was one of the Sufferers;
and farther, upon all Occasions he made it his Business to slight me; and often
affronted me so grossly, that nothing but his Dignity shrouded him from my
Resentment: and many other People in Power, (as the Injudicious generally copy
the Frailties of their Superiors, and neglect their Virtues) treated me in the
same Manner; but I was resolved not to bear it.

One Day as I was coming from my Plantation upon my Mule, attended only with my
old Servant, I met a Nephew of the Viceroy's in his Chaise, in a narrow Road,
and not being willing to give way to him, we were both at a Stand; which so
enraged the choleric Gentleman, that he flew out of his Vehicle, and ran his
Spado into the Belly of my Mule, which dropped down dead.

I did not want so much Provocation to raise my Choler, therefore I drew upon
him, and left him in the same Condition with my Beast, groveling upon the Sand.
He had several People that attended him, who rushed upon me and my Man,
overpowered us, and dragged us immediately to the Viceroy's Palace; who, being
glad of any Pretense to wreak his Ill Nature upon me, condemned me to Baldivia
for Life, in spite of the Intercession of those few Friends I had.

It was in vain to complain of this damned Trick of Fortune; and the more to
plague me, he left Orders that I should be disposed of to Don Sancho Ramires, a
Relation of his; the Wretch that I have sufficiently revenged my self of, and,
in part, of the inhumane Viceroy; for they were Partners in Trade.

Ramires used to put me upon the most slavish Business, but as I had Money I
usually bought it off; for I received yearly my small Estate from Lima, I mean
from my Plantation, for the Viceroy had seized all the rest of my Movables;
and would have done this, but that the honest Indian who had the occupying of
it, insisted on its being my Uncle's.

This old Hunks had a beautiful Daughter, that I found was in Love with a
Colonel of the Garrison of Baldivia. This Colonel, notwithstanding my
Condition, was not ashamed of my Acquaintance, and often told me the Torments
he endured for the young Lady.

I asked him if the Lady knew of his Passion; he informed me that he flattered
himself with the Return, though they had never spoke to each other, but he had
received obliging Glances from her fair Eyes, from the Gallery which overlooked
the Court of Guard.

I agreed that if he would write a Letter, I Would pawn my Life she should have it,
and an Answer into the Bargain; if she had any Inclination to send one. He
embraced me, and thanked me for my kind Proffer, and wrote a passionate Letter
to the Lady; which I accompanied with another, to let her know I was devoted to
her Service upon the Colonel's Account.

In two Days I had an Answer conveyed into a hollow Tree in the Garden, as I
had concerted in my Note to her, that waited upon the Colonel's.

These Paper Messengers brought Matters to bear, and the kind Lady resolved to
venture her self with the Colonel.

We contrived a Ladder of Ropes long enough to reach from her Window to the
Terras on the Court of Guard; and I conveyed a small Bundle of Packthread for
her to throw down, which we fastened to the Ladder of Ropes, and the Lady with
much Difficulty pulled it up, and fastened to an Iron Chest which was in the
Room: But as she came trembling for Fear down the Ladder, it drew the Chest
along the Floor above, which awakened that old Devil her Father. He immediately
alarmed all the Servants, as well as Slaves; but the Captain had got safe off
with his Mistress.

When old Huncks had summoned us all together, he went into the Room to see
what the Matter was; but when he found his Money safe, his Distraction began to
abate. I must own, I wished heartily we could have cleared his Money too, as
well as his Daughter. It was some time ere he missed her, as having no Notion
of her Elopement; but when he found she was gone, his Passion was
unsurmountable; for the good Lady had made bold with Writings of an Estate,
that it seems were left her by an old Aunt; and I was very well pleased she did
not go empty-handed to my Colonel; for I take Money to be the Sinews of Love as
well as War.

The enraged Don ran up and down like a Madman, with about a dozen of us at his
Heels; and as we approached the Ditch of the Castle, which happened to be free
from Water, being the Tide was out, but pretty well provided with Mud, some of
his Servants imagined they saw something lie on the Mud. The old Don being very
peery, was stooping down and gazing to be satisfied; and the Devil prompting me
just at the same time, I clapped my Knee into his Bum, and down fell the poor Don
into the Mud.

I was the first that cried out for Help, yet I did not make extraordinary
Haste to assist him; but at last Ropes were brought, and after he had
flounder'd about a Quarter of an Hour, we lugg'd him up in a sweet Pickle.

By good Luck, he did not mistrust that the Favor was designed him, but purely
accidental. I had an Opportunity the next Day to find out the Lady and the
happy Colonel, who had brought a Commission from the Priest to go to Bed
together. He was so well pleased with my Service, that he promised to ransom me
from Don Sancho, and did not doubt but he should succeed, being the Don made
Money his Summum Bonum. But we were surpised at the Refusal, for he had such a
strict Charge from the Viceroy of Peru to hold me fast, that it was more his
Interest to keep me than part with me. Nay this Proposal opened the old Don's
Eyes, for he saw plainly I was at Bottom of his Daughter's Affair. This so
enraged him that he ordered a great wooden Clog to be locked fast to my Leg,
which I was obliged to lug along with me.

This Proceeding drove me almost to Despair, and I lost all Hopes of ever
procuring my Liberty.

The Colonel and his Lady (who had recovered the Fortune from Don Sancho) were
very much grieved at my ill Usage, and tried all manner of Means for my
Liberty, but to no purpose. I past three Years in this uncomfortable Life, and
had the Pleasure to hear that my implacable Enemy, the Viceroy of Peru, was
summoned to Spain, upon the Account of some Maladministration. At the hearing
of this News my Hope of Freedom began to revive, but it was soon clouded again;
for the old Devil, Don Sancho, was resolved to keep me a Martyr to his own
Revenge; and I weathered out two Years more in my wretched Confinement: Though,
Thanks to Heaven, nothing depressed my Spirits quite.

The Colonel got an Opportunity to tell me that there was a Vessel in the Road
bound for Lima: and the Captain being a very good Friend of his, he had
prevailed with him to take me on Board him, if it was possible for me to get
out of Hunks's Clutches.

I made all the Efforts imaginable, but to no purpose; and I was once more in
my Imagination given up to eternal Slavery.

The same Night, as I was endeavoring to compose my troubled Thoughts, I heard
a great Noise in the Castle-Yard, and was very much surpised a while after,
when I saw an Officer and a File of Soldiers come to seize me, as a Plotter
against the State, and carried me to the Colonel's Lodging. But my Surprise was
turned into Joy, when I found he had used this Stratagem to gain me my Freedom.
I told him he had trebly repaid the Obligation he was pleased to say he lay
under to me, and I was resolved not to accept of my Liberty till I found what
Stir Don Sancho made about it: but the Colonel resolved me that he had the
Means in his own Hands to pacify him.

I went on Board, and set Sail the same Evening. We had but an indifferent
Voyage, being involved in many Storms; yet at last we arrived safe at Calao.

I shall, if you think fit, give you a short Description of Baldivia, because
few Foreigners are permitted to enter their Port.

Baldivia, or Valdivia, takes its Name from the first Founder, a Spaniard. The
old Town stood a little higher than the new one, till it was destroyed by the
Indians. For Peter Baldivia, and the rest of the Spaniards, were such Tyrants
over the poor Natives, that they took Heart, laid an Ambush for 'em, and
destroyed 'em every one. But in the new Town they are sufficiently guarded from
their Insults, or Danger of a foreign Enemy; which have often attempted 'em to
no Purpose. This being reckoned the richest Country for Gold Mines in all
America, Nature has befriended 'em very much in the Strength of the Place; for
there is so large a Sand-Bank in the Mouth of the Bay, that Vessels are obliged
to come within five hundred Yards of the Shore (which is guarded by a strong
Castle) to avoid it. It is a difficult Harbor to enter, but when you are once
at Anchor, no Wind on the whole Compass can hurt you, though it blew a Storm; it
is so well sheltered by the Land on all Sides of it.

The Inhabitants are chiefly made up of banished Persons, who generally work in
the Mines for so many Years; and the Time expired, they have so much Land of
their own to cultivate; and most of them find the Means to be rich; but how
honestly I Will give you leave to judge. The Country about it is very fruitful,
and produces great Quantities of Apple Trees, from which they make very good
Cider. But the Juice of the Grape is very uncomatible there, and those that do
procure it must pay extravagantly for it.

This City, for it is no less, is esteemed the Key to the South Sea.

The Governor and Officers are generally sent from Lima, but the Soldiers are
composed of those Persons that are sent there for a Punishment. And though few
Persons choose to be sent there, yet as few desire to leave it when once they
are settled.

Notwithstanding the People could make shift to live without Religion, yet
there are seven Churches and three Monasteries; but they seem to be in a
ruinated Condition: And I don't doubt but an Age or two hence, those that pass
that Way may find them totally ruined.

As I said, we arrived safe at the Port of Calao. I was resolved to remain
incognito, till I had inquired into the Affairs of the City.

I took an Occasion to send to my Indian Tenant, who came to me, and was very
well pleased to find me at Liberty.

I sent him to several of my Friends, to acquaint them what Circumstance I lay
under, who soon informed the Viceroy of my Misfortune, and he as readily
complied with my Desire, allowing me the Liberty I had enjoyed before I was
sent to Baldivia.

I once more made my Appearance at Lima, renewed my Acquaintance, and began to
divert my self as before. By degrees I crept into the good Graces of the
Viceroy, who gave me a Post in the Government, that brought me a considerable
Income; and with the Esteem of most People I past on a whole Year.

The Viceroy not liking his Situation, found the Means to be recalled to Spain:
Yet recommending me to his Successor, I remained in the same Station he before
had given me; though I cannot brag of any more Favors bestowed on me by my new
Superior; for he was a Man of an uncertain Temper, proud, and revengeful. He
was newly married to a very rich Widow of Lima, who had a very beautiful
Daughter, by Report; for she was not suffered to take the Liberties of the
Place.

I often had a great Desire to see her Face, for I had observed her veiled many
times at Church, which was all the Liberty she had. I was in formed she was
designed a Wife for the Supreme Judge, though much against her Inclination,
being there was a Disparity of Years, which is certainly the greatest Bitter to
the Sweets of Matrimony; but nothing is consulted now more than Wealth.

I received a Letter from my Uncle at Sevil, wherein he desired I would leave
Lima, and come to Spain: And, to induce me to it, he gave me the Promise to
make me his Heir. I must own I began to be pretty well tired of this Climate;
and the Time drawing on for the Expiration of my Mortgage, I set my self to
prepare things accordingly.

I disposed of my Plantation to my faithful Indian, for an under Price, being I
thought I was under many Obligations to him. I resigned up my Office in the
Viceroy's Palace, indeed, because I could not get Leave to dispose of it.

I turned all my Effects into Gold-Dust, and sent it before me to my Uncle; and
now I only waited for Company to go over Land to Vera Cruz, a Port in the North
Sea, where I should have Convenience of imbarking for Spain.

I began now to think of settling in the World; and indeed it was almost time,
for I had past my twenty-eighth Year, and at that Age the Heat of Youth should
be pretty well over; for if a Man cannot see his Follies on this side thirty,
he is in Danger of being incorrigible all the Days of his Life. Beside, I had
very good Encouragement to Stability, my own Fortune, and the Prospect of my
Uncle's; who in all Probability had not many Years to live, being in his
eighty-third Year.

Well then, as my Story is almost off the Stage, I Will throw you into the
Bargain a short Account of one Place more, for my Catastrophe, and then to my
Epilogue for detaining you so long, and that shall be the Description of Lima,
as it is at present.

Lima, the Capital City of Peru, is seated about two Leagues from the Seaport
of Callao, in 12 Degrees 6 Minutes of Southern Latitude, and 79 Degrees 45
Minutes of Western Longitude. It is built in a noble Plain, with Hills at a
Distance.

Francis Pizarro was the Founder, in the Year 1535, though it has changed its
Name since his Time, from La Ciudad de los Reges, or City of Kings, to Lima,
which is only a Corruption of the Indian Word Rimac, which was the Name of an
Indian Idol, formerly worshipped in that Place.

This is the finest City (next to Mexico) in all America. All the Streets are
in a direct Line, exactly measured out, and much of the same Length and
Breadth, being fifty Yards wide.

In the Heart of the City is the noblest Square my Eyes ever beheld, and in the
midst a Fountain of Brass, adorned with eight Lions, continually spouting
Water, supplied by the River of Lima, that runs through the Skirts of the Town,
covered with a handsome Stone Bridge that leads to the Suburbs. Within the
Suburbs is a fine public Walk, beautified with Orange Trees, and in the
Evening is crowded with the best Company of the City. Although this City is so
beautiful, it was mostly destroyed by an Earthquake in the Year 1682. There are
no less than fifty-seven Churches and Chapels (with those that are in the
Monasteries) in this City, and twenty-four Monasteries for Men, and twelve for
Women. The Cathedral is very magnificent, as are most of the other Churches,
though chiefly built with Wood from the first Story, by reason of the Earthquakes.

The Viceroy of Peru has his Residence here, and is so powerful he hardly owns
the King his Master to be his Superior. Here are likewise kept all the Courts
of Justice, and from the High Court there is no Appeal. Among the rest, they
have settled an Inquisition, which, on my Conscience, is worse than that of
Spain. Heaven keep every Body from it; for in this Court the Informant is a
Witness, and the Accuser is ever behind the Curtain, and to mend the Matter,
the Witnesses are never brought Face to Face.

To complete the Grandeur of the Place, there is an Archbishopric, and an
University of three well-fill'd Colleges; though the Students don't always follow
Learning, for I have found some ignorant enough.

There are twelve Hospitals, and one of them for Indians.

This City is garrisoned with two thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot; but
very indifferent Troops for Service against a foreign Foe, being chiefly
composed of Creolians and Indians. These Creolians (who are so named from owing
their Birth to America) are most of 'em proud, lazy, and ignorant, and
generally Tyrants whenever they have Power, though sharp enough as to Trade, and
will overreach you if they can.

They are all inclined to Venery, and will sacrifice every thing to gratify
that Vice. The Women (who are really very handsome) generally sit at home all
Day cross-leg'd, and as mute as Fishes; but at Night it is customary for 'em to
haunt the Streets veiled, and will as hardly be refused a Favor, as the Men
with us on the like Occasion.

As I was sitting one Evening in my Lodging, dispatching some Letters for
Spain, I heard some body knock softly at my Door. My Servant was gone abroad,
and therefore I arose and opened it my self, but was surpised to see a Lady
veiled, who, without making any Words, came in and sat down on a Couch. After
she had reposed her self some time, she unveiled, and discovered to me one of
the sweetest Faces I had ever seen. I was almost turned into Stone at the Sight
of so much Beauty, and was ready to fall down to worship her as a Divinity.
Said she, I come not here to be gazed at; I like you, and if you can do the
same by me, I believe you will not use me ill.

Madam, I returned, I know no other way to convince you that I like you, but
one. With that I took her into an Alcove, where we soon came to a right
Understanding. As Soon as our small Matter of Business was over, she desired to
be dismissed, yet with a Promise to give me another Visit the next Evening;
but, said she, if you should chance by any Accident to see me in any other
Place, take your Eyes from the Object, for fear of Danger; for those Messengers
of the Soul often betray their Trust. I promised to observe her Directions, and
left her, but yet could not help my Curiosity; for when she was got down
Stairs, I put on my Cloak, followed her, and observed she want into the
Viceroy's Palace. I was convinced, by the Dress she wore, that she was none of
the common Sort; and much diverted I was at the Accident.

The next Day she did me the Favor of another Visit, when we passed our time
as pleasantly as we could; and my Incognita seemed very much pleased with my
Company.

After our Toying was over, she told me she was afraid of losing me, for she
had heard I designed for Spain. I informed her, nothing had Power to stop me,
but the Passion I had for her.

She at last discovered herself to me: She was Daughter-in-Law to the Viceroy:
She told me that she had respected me a great while, and had many Disputes with
her Honor and Love; but the former was forced to give way to the latter. She
likewise let me know of her approaching Marriage, and added that the Knowledge
of my Person would make her Aversion to her Husband the stronger. We had many
Meetings, to the Content of us both; and she made me several Presents of
Jewels, which I intend to keep for her sake, having preserved them through all my
Fortunes. Our Meetings now began to be less frequent, being the Wedding Day was
fixed, which gave me a great deal of Uneasiness. To divert my Melancholy, I
usually took a Walk in the Orange-Grove, where, in my musing Fits, I often
stayed longer than usual.

As I was going home one Evening, I heard the Clashing of Swords at a Distance,
and immediately after saw a Person running toward me, who cried, For the
Virgin Mary's sake, if you are a Gentleman, lend me your Sword, to defend my
self against a Villain who has offered me the vilest indignity. I made him no
Answer, but gave him my Sword (for he looked like a Man of Quality) and
followed him.

Just as I turned the Corner I saw him engaged, and his Antagonist drop down
dead.

The Gentleman seeing that, took to his Heels.

The Street being alarmed with the Bustle, as I came near the Body, I was
seized as the Murderer. What strengthened their Opinion, and I must confess had
but an indifferent Look, was my Sword remaining in the Body of the Deceased.
All my Asseverations of Innocence signified nothing: I was carried before the
Corrigidore; but having no Witnesses of my assaulting him, and one Fellow by
good Fortune proving I was not the Person that engaged him first, I was only
once more condemned to Baldivia. I cursed my hard Stars a thousand times, and
the Grief of parting from my Mistress was like to rid me of Life; but Time
began to wear it off.

I was secured in the Castle of the City till the Vessel was ready to sail.

While I was confined, in order to be transported to Baldivia, a Gentleman came
into the Prison, and begged half an Hour's Conversation with me. I had been so
liberal to the Keeper with my Money, and pretty jovial in my Humor, that I
believe if I had asked him to let me go, he would not have deney'd me; so that
I begged the Favor to admit the Gentleman, and his Absence, during our
Confabulation. He obeyed me in both, and the Gentleman entered my Room; which,
though but mean, was the best in the Prison.

As Soon as the Gentleman had reposed himself upon a Chair, (none of the best)
he asked me if I would please to refresh my self with any thing the Place
afforded: But I answering in the negative, he made half a dozen Humms and Haws,
and opened his Mouth to utter Sense.

Sir, said he, you see before you the unhappy Person that is the occasion of
your Confinement. I should not be thus free with you, if I were not assured of
your generous Goodnature. Once more I must tell you, you see before you the
unhappy Man who is guilty of that Fact you are to suffer for. I am a Gentleman
by Birth; and though I had not the good Fortune to owe my first Being to old
Spain, yet I have this for my Consolation, that my Parents were born at Cordova
there; but the Frowns of Fortune driving them to this part of the World, grew
ashamed of her ill Looks, and greeted 'em with Smiles of Favor. In a few
Years, Plutus the God of Wealth made 'em a Visit, and took his Leave of 'em
with a Promise of his frequent Return; and he proved as good as his Word, for
in a little time Fortune became a neuter Gender, that is, believing they did
not want her Assistance, they were no more her Devotees.

Sir, said I, the sooner you will please to come to plain Spanish, the sooner I
shall be in the ready Road to your Business.

Why then, said he, not to keep you in Suspense, I am the Person that was
obliged to you for your Sword on such a Time, which proved the Instrument of my
Revenge on a base Wretch, that deserved an Eternity of Torments after this
Life, for wronging the best of Women. And since I find you love the shortest
way, without the tedious outward Flourishes of Rhetoric, I will inform you of
my Story, with as much Brevity as I am capable of.

My Mother died about seven Years since, and I may very justly say the rest of
my Father's Life was a Delirium; but Death taking Pity of his Griefs, came to
his Aid, and about two Years ago I was left Master of a plentiful Fortune.

As Death is the End of all things, and Age must pay its Tribute to him, I
shook off my Grief for my Father's Loss; and in six Months after his decease,
fell in Love with a young Lady of an incomparable Beauty, at least in my Eye.
My Fortune gave me easy Access to the Father of my Fair, and when I had the
Happiness of conversing with the Object of my Wishes, she did not seem averse
to my Passion. Every thing concurring to my Desires, Hymen joined those Hands
whose Hearts were united before.

For several Days we revell'd in the Sweets of Love; and I may justly say,
Possession had not the Power to pall Desire; each Moment of Enjoyment seemed
new, and my utmost Wish was centered in her Breast: But the dire Fiend,
tormenting Jealousy, at last crept in, and palled my Appetite to ardent Love;
the fatal Bitter to our mutual Sweets.

I had a Person that I called my Friend, who shared the Affluence of Fortune
with me: We had the same Desire to Love and Hate: I therefore thought I was but
poorly blessed till my Friend saw the Idol of my Soul. But oh! what Pangs that
fatal Moment cost me! His Eyes received the Bane to all his Peace, and in one
Moment rendered up his Heart. I gave him Leave (for what could I refuse to such
a Friend?) to visit my Wife, when Business demanded my Absence. He often
declared his Passion to her, by plaintive Sighs and languishing Looks. When my
Wife perceived he importuned her too far with his Love, she threatened to tell
me of it; but in the mean time he had acquainted me with what had passed
between him and my Wife. Said he, My Friend, I imagined your Wife was like
other Women, prone to change, therefore in your Absence I counterfeited a
Passion for her, to see whether she had that Regard she ought to have for you,
and I am pleased to find you have made so worthy a Choice.

I must own to you I was mightily pleased with this Trial of my Friend, as
believing it sprang from his Kindness to me; and I had much to do to reconcile
my Wife to his Visits* She would often say, I wish your Friend be sincere in
his Professions to you; for my part, I greatly doubt it.

In a little time after this Accident, I perceived my Friend began to look very
melancholy; I endeavored to sift the Secret from him, but to no manner of
Purpose for some time.

One Day, as we were riding out to take the Air together, he seemed more deeply
plunged in Sorrow than usual. I told him, I should not take him for my Friend
any longer, if he did not let me into the Cause of his Disorder. At last, with
much Reluctance, he told me that the good Opinion he had before conceived of my
Wife was false, for he was well assured she was not true to my Bed.

You must imagine what a Thunderclap this must be to me, from a Friend who I
was assured in my self would not relate a Falsehood. It was some Moments before
I could open my Mouth; and all the time of my Silence, he seemed so much
grieved that he had declared the Secret to me, that I had no Doubt of the Truth
of it.

When my Grief had given me Liberty of Speech, I begged he would give me the
Foundation of his Suspicion; but he desired to be excused till he had certain
Proof of her Infidelity, which he did not doubt but he should soon have, though
it was what he wished to be deceived in: And farther added, he would not have
me take any Notice of it, but carry it fair to her, as if nothing had happened;
for if you should, said he, you will never come to the truth of the Matter.

I promised to comply with him, and went home; but Heaven knows with what a
Heart.

I followed my Friend's Advice punctually, but yet could not help showing the
Discontent of my Mind in my Countenance. My Wife was mightily concerned for my
Melancholy, and was very pressing to know the Cause; and in a very tender
manner seemed to be disquieted, which I took all for Art, and the Cunning of
her Sex.

I must own to you, that sometimes I imagined my Friend had deceived me; but
whenever we had an Opportunity of conversing, he strengthened my Jealousy to
such a degree, that I began to wish the Cause of it no longer in this World.
And if it had not been for my revenging my self on the supposed Partner of her
Guilt, I had certainly taken Methods to dispatch her hence.

I had some Affairs to transact at Segovia every Year; and the time drawing on
for my Journey, my Friend told me, before my Return I should have Demonstration
of her Infidelity; for, said he, your Absence will give her the Opportunity she
wants, and she will be sure to take hold of it.

It was a great while before I could be prevailed upon by my Friend, to
undertake really this Journey, but only to feign as if I had, that I might be
convinced of her Perfidy, and punish it my self; but my Friend laid me down so
many Reasons for it, that I at last very unwillingly agreed to go. But in the
mean time, said he, you must order that I may have Admittance in your Absence,
that I may take my Opportunity to observe all Passages. Why, said I, I never
knew you debarred the Liberty of my House. But you know, said he, since my
false Declaration of Love, to try your Wife's Virtue, she has looked upon me
more like an Enemy than Friend, as knowing I was not sincere in my Passion; for
Women, be they ever so vicious, yet they abhor the Man that doubts their
Virtue. Well then, said I, if you will, we'll sup together tonight; and then
I Will take an Opportunity to leave Directions with my faithless Wife, to allow
you the same Privileges in my Absence, as you now have. Why then, returned my
Friend, don't you be surpised at what I shall say to her.

We parted, and went to prepare every thing for my intended Journey. When I was
at Dinner with my Wife, I gave her some Hints concerning my Friend, and that I
desired he should have Admittance in my Absence; I observed she changed Color
at my Discourse, and seemed to be in the utmost Confusion, although I did not
seem to see it.

After some Talk about indifferent Matters, she told me, if I thought fit, she
intended to live private in my Absence, and admit of no Visitors. For Sir, said
she, the World will be censorious, and receiving Visits from a Man, when you
are from Home, is not consisting with our Spanish Customs. She found by my
Discourse that I was determined it should be so, wherefore she left off arguing
upon that Subject: but I could perceive all the time we were together, my
Resolves sat very uneasy upon her; and it was with much Difficulty she
restrained her Tears. Her Sorrow struck me to the Heart, and it was the
greatest struggle I ever went through to keep my Temper: For I imagined all her
Grief was to have this Spy upon her Actions.

When Night approached, my Friend came according to Appointment, and during our
Supper, I told my Wife, she was to look upon him as my only Friend, and give
him the same Admittance, as if it was my self, in every thing he should desire;
well knowing (I told her) he would ask nothing contrary to our strict Amity.

Sir, said my Friend, I am very sorry I cannot comply with your Desires; for I
have received Letters from a near Relation at Panama, and I am obliged to
attend his Nuptials, being he cannot make proper Marriage Settlements without I
am upon the Spot, and I fear I shall hardly return this six Weeks. I was at
first very much surpised at this his sudden Resolution, and was going to say
something upon it, till I observed he winked at me. I then began to remember
what he said to me in the Morning, that I should not take Notice of what he
said. But I observed, the Cloud upon my Wife's Face began to disappear by
degrees, which seemed to me the greatest Proof of her Infidelity. I was so
provoked with the imaginary Wrong, that I could not help showing it in Words
and Actions; but yet I had so much Reason in my Madness (for Passion is no
less) that I concealed the real Clause.

My Wife seemed confounded at my incoherent Anger, having never seen my Fury
before; and when my Friend was gone, begged I would tell her the real cause of
my Uneasiness, for she was well assured some secret Cause had ruffled my
Temper; but I persisted in the Obstinacy of not discovering it to her, and the
next Day pursued my Journey with a dismal Idea of what was to come.

Thought had so much impaired my Strength, with its violent Workings, that I
found it a difficult thing to sit my Horse; and when I came to my Inn at Night,
I was carried to Bed in a violent Fever, and all Night was in a Delirium. My
Servants sent for a Physician, who gave me something to resist my Malady; and
while he was with me, I uttered some Words in my Ravings, that gave him to
understand my Disease proceeded from the Mind. When I came to my self, I was
something surpised to hear him speak to me after this Manner.

Sir, I have so long dealt with Diseases of most kinds, that I have Knowledge
enough to perceive when they proceed from an ill habit of Body, or those
Maladies of the Mind that slight all Physic; and be not amazed when I tell you,
I have often cured the Latter by wholesome Advice. You are a young Man, and
perhaps may have taken a wrong Conception of Things; if you will be pleased to
tell me your Case, I Will give you my Advice without a Fee; and don't think me
impertinent to desire it, I have seen more Years than you. You may conceal your
Name in your Relation, and if my Advice does not please you, you are but just
where you were: I shall be as faithful in keeping your Secret, as your
Confessor.

You may be assured I was very much surpised at his Proceeding, and I easily
perceived a Sincerity in his Discourse, that gained him my Esteem; and I was
resolved to let him into my Story; which I did, as much as I have to you.

After a Pause, he said I had just come up to his Imagination of my Case; and
now Sir, (said he) I will proceed to my Advice. Consider well what you are
about; you have confessed, your Friend owned to you he made pretended Love to
your Wife to try her Virtue, and yet I don't find he advised with you about it
before he had put his Device in Practice. To give you my Sentiments of this
Matter, I believe your Friend to be false to you, and that he really is in Love
with your Wife. The Distress of your Spouse, proceeded from her Indignation to
him, and Love to you. His telling you, after his Attempt upon her, was no more
than to be the first in the Declaration, as imagining she would of course
inform you with it! her keeping it a Secret from you, was, not to make you
uneasy; and his declaring his Suspicion of her Virtue afterward, was either to
be revenged on her for slighting his Passion, or to give him an Opportunity in
your Absence to wrong your Wife.

This, in short, I fancy will prove the whole Truth. Neither is this Judgment
hard to make, for I am apt to believe any disinterested Person would make the
same Judgment; your Passion has blinded yours; yet nevertheless, if you can
give your self time to think calmly, I don't in the least doubt but you will be
of my Opinion. This I am assured of, Jealousy is a certain sign of Love; and if
you should in the heat of Passion do a rash Deed, every Moment of your Life
will prove a Torment to you. Lovers Eyes are often false, and too quick in
false Creations. Call Reason to your Assistance; that will prove your best
Friend. Take some time to think of my Advice and Counsel; Friends may as soon
prove false as Wives, and you had better lose the former than the latter.

All the while he was speaking, methought I was listening to an Oracle; and at
the end of his Discourse, I could not help blaming my self for my rash Belief.
I called over in my Memory every Moment of my Wife's Behavior, and could not
find any one Action start up, to give me that hard Opinion I had rashly
conceived against her.

I returned the Physician of my Mind, as well as Body, many Thanks for his
cordial Advice; and would have paid him in another Coin, but I could not
prevail upon him to take a single Dollar. No, said he, in accepting of your
Money, I shall make it appear, that, like Lawyers, I pleaded for my Fee. No
Sir, all the Recompense I shall ask of you, is only to let me know the Truth of
every thing, when the Catastrophe is over, which I hope will not affect your
Wife; And if I might throw in one Word of Advice more, if you prove the Friend
you have so much confided in to be false, show your Resentment by slighting
him, and leave Revenge to Heaven. I promised to follow his judicious Advice in
every Thing, and so we parted with a very good Regard for each other.

I was resolved to proceed no farther on my Journey, but make the best of my
Way back again; and as I went along, consider of my Behavior, and let Time
alone for Proof. The Reason I gave my Servants for returning, was, that I had
not Strength to pursue my Journey; which in Reality was no Falsehood, for I was
weak enough; and I am convinced, that Disorders of the Mind weaken the Body
more than habitual Distempers. In part of my Journey back, I could not come to
any Resolution how to behave; and therefore resolved to lie one more Night upon
the Road, to see if my Pillow would advise me. When I arrived at my Inn, one of
my Servants told me Don Roderigo was just alighted. Hearing him named, my Blood
ran a wild Course about my Body, and immediately it struck to my Mind something
was not right.

I asked my Servant, if Roderigo had seen him; he told me no, and that he
seemed disguised, as if he did not desire to be known. This strengthened my
Suspicion of some Ill intended, or done already, and that he was making his
Escape. I ordered my Servants not to appear: But when Supper was ready, I sent
for my Host to bear me Company; where, after some trivial Discourse, I asked
him what Guests he had in the House. He made no Scruple in telling me; but when
he came to Don Roderigo, he declared he did not much like him; for he seemed
very willing to be private with two of his Servants, and he had observed 'em
often whispering. They design, said he, to be going very early in the Morning,
but I don't know which Road they travel. I concealed my Disturbance of Mind
from my Host, but resolved to be going as early as Don Roderigo; and to be sure
of being early enough, I determined not to go to Bed, notwithstanding the
Weakness of my Body required Repose.

In the middle of the Night, I heard People whispering in the next Room, and I
could easily distinguish Roderigo's Voice: though I could gather little of their
Discourse, yet I could hear mine and my Wife's Name often mentioned.

At break of Day, I found they were preparing to be gone; and though I was pretty
expeditious, yet they were got out of the Inn, before I could get on Horseback
with my Servants. I was much vexed at it, yet pursued my Journey homeward. But
I was very much amazed, when about two Leagues from Lima, I met my Wife in a
Coach with her Maid, and two Indian Servants. The Servants, as soon as they saw
me, were overjoyed, and my Wife could not open her Mouth for some time. I then
began to relapse into my former Jealousy, and imagined she was following Don
Roderigo.

At last she opened her Mouth with a great deal of Joy. Lord, my Dear (said
she) is it you in Reality, or are my Senses deceived? I asked her the Reason of
her Journey, and her mighty Surprise. Sir, answered she, that Question
confounds me; have I not a Letter from you, to come with all Speed imaginable?
Here it is, continued she. I took the Letter from her, and read the Contents.

My Dear,
PUrsuing my Journey, I had the Misfortune to fall from my Horse, and break my
Arm, which prevents my writing to you. The Accident is attended with a violent
Fever, which I am told is very dangerous. I have refrained writing to you till
now, as expecting some Amendment; but finding my self worse, I beg you will
come to me with all the Expedition imaginable, for fear you should never see me
more alive.

Your Affectionate Husband.


There needed no Sphynx to unriddle this Enigma; and I observed, by my Wife's
Countenance, we both knew the Author of the Letter. While we were confused, the
Coachman that drove the Coach was stealing away; but my Wife cried out to stop
him, for that was the Messenger that brought the Letter to her; and farther
told her, he was to conduct her to me, for the Coachman we had before was
drowned; and that Circumstance 'deceiv'd her more than any thing else: The
Fellow also told her that I had prevailed with a Gentleman in the Neighborhood
where I lay hurt, to send him to drive the Coach. I rid after the Fellow and
brought him back, ordered him into the Coachbox, and forced him to drive out of
the Road to a neighboring Village, where lived a Gentleman of my Acquaintance.
He very unwillingly complied with my Commands; and we kept very close to him,
to prevent his making away. When we arrived at my Friend's House, we secured
the Fellow in a strong Room, and I left two of my Indian Servants to guard him.
I made my Friend acquainted with the Accident, and that this Visit was not
intended, but by mere Chance. He gave me to know I was welcome, let what would
bring me there.

When my Wife and I with my Friend were alone, I tenderly embraced her, and
begged her Pardon for my unjust Suspicions of her Virtue, and related the whole
Progress of my Jealousy, without omitting the least Circumstance. She gave
thanks to Heaven, for the Danger she was saved from, and related to me the
manner of her being deceived by the Fellow that brought the Letter, as follows.

The fifth Day after you had left me, as I was musing in the Garden, my Maid
told me a Person had a Letter to deliver me from you. I began to tremble with
timorous Apprehension, and my whole Frame felt violent Disorders. I ordered the
Bearer to be brought to me; and when I had read the Letter, Grief locked up my
Tongue, and I had not power to speak for some time. When I had recovered
Speech, I asked the Fellow where you were. Madam, said he, he is at Don
Florio's Country House, (naming a Friend of mine, that my Wife had heard me
often mention) and knowing you had never a Coachman, my Master sent me to
conduct you to your Husband. I would not spend time in dressing my self, but
just as I was, with my Maid, and the two Indians, pursued our Journey. I never
once dreamed of any Treachery, though I always doubted your false Friend; but as
he had never been to visit me in your Absence, it wiped away all Suspicions of
him. I observed the Coachman, by his Looks, did not like the Company of my
Servants, but I was too much concerned for you to think of it much.

We congratulated one another again at our happy Deliverance, and admired the
workings of Divine Providence, and the second Cause, my friendly Physician.

My Wife expressed a great Desire to see him, to return him Acknowledgments for
his inspired Advice, and in the Morning I promised her to go to him, if we
could get any convenient Carriage: For we were not very fond of making Use of
the Coachman that brought her out.

I deferred his Examination till the next Day, being too much fatigued to do it
then, though I ordered he should want nothing but his Liberty; for I considered
him only as an Instrument to work his Master's Ends. When I was up in the
Morning, I ordered him to be brought before me; but after some time, they
brought me Word he had made his Escape, by creeping through the Cieling of the
Room, and throwing down the Shingles; for it was a single Apartment near the
Garden. I was a little uneasy at his getting away, as well as my Wife, for fear
his Master should make some Attempt upon us in the House where we were; it
being a quarter of a Mile from the Village, and the Gentleman, my Friend, had
but few Servants. Therefore it was thought the safest Course for us to go
immediately to Lima. And as soon as we could procure Mules, we set out, and
reached that City without Molestation.

I heard nothing of the faithless Roderigo for several Days, neither did I
think it strange; for I imagined, if he had any Shame left, he would not dare
to appear publicly at Lima; but if he did, I had resolved to take my friendly*
Physician's Advice, (which had proved so successful to me) to show my
Resentment in slighting him.

One Night, as soft Repose had locked up our Senses, we were alarmed from our
downy Sleep, by a fearful cry of Fire! Fire! I rose, and ran into my Wife's
Apartment, where she remained frighted almost to death; and as People generally
in the alarm of Fire know not what they do, she ran to the Chamber where the
Maids lay, and dressed herself in her Servant's Clothes; the Maid being equally
frighted, when she found she had no Clothes to put on, clapped on her Mistress's
which I had brought after her, and was running down Stairs to free herself from
the Danger. As she was going through the Hall, I observed four Men in Masks
seized her, and carried her off. I followed with my Sword in my Hand, till one
of the villainous Company came behind me, and run me through the Back. My
Servants, who came after me, bore me in faint with loss of Blood; but by good
Fortune the Wound did not prove dangerous, though well meant.

We could never come by the Truth how the House was set on Fire, though it was
soon extinguished; but we were assured it must be by some one of the Domestics.
It was easy to judge Don Roderigo was the Cause on it, by running away with the
Maid, as mistaking her for my Wife, because she had in the Hurry put on her
Mistress's Clothes and Vail.

I was advised, by my best Friends, to summon him before the supreme Judge, for
it was dangerous to let him go on with Impunity. But he would not obey the
Summons, therefore he was designed to be out-lawed by due course of Law. But as
that takes up several Months, I was obliged to keep a Guard in my House; for I
received several menacing Letters frequently from him, either thrown over the
Wall, or left so, that we could never secure any Person that brought 'em. While
our Suit was going on, our new Viceroy arrived, who proving a Friend to Don
Roderigo, a nolle prosequi was issued out, and I was obliged to stand at the
whole Charge of the Lawsuit. This violent and unjust Proceeding of the
Viceroy's raised my Gaul to that degree, that I said many warm things against
his Administration, which came to his Knowledge: for there are generally
poor-spirited Wretches in all Governments, that have no other Merit than to
improve Tales, and feed the Ears of their Superiors with nauseous Flattery and
Lies.

I was sent for to the Viceroy, and examined concerning these Reports; and I
so far incensed him with my Replies to his Questions, that if I had not met
with some Friends that palliated the Matter, I don't know how far his
Resentment would have carried him. I was dismissed with my Liberty, but a
multitude of Menaces, if for the future I ever gave my Tongue another loose;
and I soon found the Effects of his Resentment, by losing a small Place in the
Government; but as Providence had put me above wanting it, I was not much
grieved at the Loss.

My Wife begged me to remove from Lima, a Place where I had received so many
Insults; and it was not improbable but I might receive more; which proved but
too true.

In a few Days after I had appeared before the Viceroy, the Maid that was
forced away (by mistaking her for my Wife) came home, miserably ill used, and
brought me a Letter from the ungrateful Don Roderigo, which you may read if you
please: upon that he took the Letter out of his Pocket, and I found it as
follows.

I Declare my self your inveterate Enemy, though I have no just Reason to be so;
you may be sure my Enmity is rooted for ever in my Heart, and I shall have no
Rest in this World, till thou art out of it. I should not perhaps be so free in
declaring my Mind by Writing, if I was not very well assured, thy publishing it
would do thee no good. I have so much Honor in me still, as to assure thee, I
would venture my Life to hazard thine, and if I have ever the Opportunity, I
shall put it to the Hazard; therefore be well guarded whenever thou appearest
abroad. Minds like mine are never appeased. I always was a Villain, but had so
much Cunning to hide it from the World till now this Affair has published it.
And be assured, I shall study every way to compass my Revenge, whilst I am

Roderigo.


The Insolence of this Letter was not to be born, and I was as impatient to
meet him, as he could be to meet with me; and I must own to you, I thirsted for
his Blood, for his Usage was beyond the nature of Man to bear. I examined the
poor Girl of what she knew of the Wretch, who informed me that they put her
into a Coach, and carried her a League out of Town; but when they found their
Mistake, the Usage she bore from 'em was insupportable, and the Brute Roderigo
told his Servants, if they pleased to make use of her in the vilest Manner,
they were welcome. The Wretches that served such a Villain, must have very near
the same Sentiments of Honor and Honesty, or they would seek another Master;
they were too forward to neglect such a Cruelty, and four of 'em by turns
ravished her. Strangers to the nature of the Wretches, who are Superiors in
this Part of the World, would imagine such Deeds should find Punishment by Law:
But alas! Justice is fled the Place, and we may expect more Mercy from the
worst of Cannibals, than is to be found here.

The poor Creature in a little Time felt the farther Effects of their Cruelty;
for they gave her a Distemper that ended her Life.

Before her Death she gave me Knowledge of the Place where they led her; for
they had not any Caution in their villainous Proceeding, but as soon as they had
gratified their Lust and Cruelty, turned her out of Doors.

I had no farther need of any thing to whet my Revenge; but I must own, the
Death of this unfortunate poor Creature added Fuel to the Fire. My Wife was
almost distracted at the unhappy Accident, and had no other Consolation, but
that she had escaped their cruel Hands.

I did not acquaint her with my Intention of seeking this Villain, but I made
it my only Business; I went to the Place the poor Maid had directed me, where I
had Information that he had left the Place, and now resided in Lima. I was very
sorry he had changed his Habitation, because I should find it a more difficult
thing to execute my Resentment with Safety in Lima. But however, I sent him the
following Letter.

THY Usage to me is not to be born; therefore, if thou have that Spirit, (which
I much question from thy Villainy, for Villains are always Cowards) meet me in
St. Justin's Field tomorrow at six in the Morning; as I imagine there is no
Second in thy Villainy, I shall expect thee alone, and I hope thou will not fail
to meet the injured

Alonzo de Castro.


I chose St. Justin's Field, for the Convenience of a small Publick-house which
overlooked it, where I went before Day, that I might discover if he came
alone; for I had but little reason to expect fair Play from such a Villain.
When the time came, I saw him go by the House alone; I let him pass by me, to
see if he was not followed by any of his cursed Crew; but finding none, I
hasted after him, into the middle of the Field, and called to him; he turned
about, and with the Image of Hell in his Face, he cried, I thought your
Resentment would have brought you first into the Field: But as I am here before
you, it speaks me no Coward, though your vile Scrawl would intimate as much.
Come, said I, no Words, thy Breath is Poison to me, it will insect the Air;
Only this Sir, said he, as you had not named any particular Weapon, I have made
bold to bring a pair of Pistols with me, and to let you see I have some Honor,
you shall take your Choice. I gave him no Answer, but took one, and we agreed
to stand at such a Distance. As I was going to Fire, he cried out Hold! I will
tell you one Secret more before we engage, and that is this; Your Pistol is only
charged with Powder, but mine with Ball, which I put in since you made the
Choice; and now prepare for Death, be assured this is the last Moment of thy
Life. I did not give my self time to answer, but fired my Pistol, and then
hurled it at him, and had the good Fortune to cut him in the Face with it; and
in the Confusion and Surprise his Pistol went off without hurting me. Now, said
I, thou Wretch! we are once more on equal Terms, and Heaven I hope will favor
the justest Cause. We drew, and in a few Passes I laid him for dead on the
Ground; though in the Encounter I had received a dangerous Wound in the Breast. I
went home, notwithstanding my Hurt, and sent secretly for a Surgeon of my
Acquaintance, who dressed me, and told me I was in no Danger.

My Wife was very much grieved at the Accident, though she could not but be
pleased at Roderigo's Death; yet her Fears increased, as imagining I should
suffer for it, by the violent Temper of the Viceroy: But her Grief began to
blow over, when in several Days after, no Enquiry was made, nor even any Notice
taken of his Death.

I was very much surpised at it, imagining I had really killed him.

As Soon as my Wound was well, I went to the little House to enquire if they
knew any thing of the Body; (for the Owner of the House was formerly my
Servant, and a Man of much Probity, who knew all my Story;) he informed me,
that a little while after I past by his House home again, five Persons ran that
way, and coming to the Body, seemed to mourn over it, and went the Road that
leads to St. Dominick; a Village about half a Mile from the Place where we
fought.

I imagined they had buried him privately in that Village, and went home to
acquaint my Wife, who shared my Contentment.

I now went abroad as I was wont, and all the Discourse was of Don Roderigo's
sudden disappearing. Servants and all had left his House, but no one suspected
any thing of his Death. Some of my Acquaintance told me, they imagined this to
be some Trick of his, and that he only lay dormant to meditate some Mischief to
me.

I seemed to come into their Fears, but in my Mind slighted their Advice, as
imagining I had nothing to fear. I past on a whole Month without any Danger at
all; but as I was going one Day across the Bridge to a Warehouse I had in the
Suburbs, a Fellow came up to me, and privately asked me if I would be his
Chapman for some East India Goods. He told me a long Story, that he was obliged
to make up a Cargo and leave this Part of the World, for his Credit began to
fail, and if he did not get away speedily, his Creditors would lay him up. We
went to a neighboring Tavern, where he read me his Bill of Parcels. He told me
he had been encouraged to offer his Goods to me, from the fairness of my
Character; and was coming to wait on me when he had the good Fortune to meet
me. The next Day was agreed on for me to go and view the Goods, for I was not
to pay for 'em till they were entered my Warehouse. Accordingly, as appointed,
I went to the House of the Person, in the Benedictine Street. I was shown into
a Room till the Goods were brought; but as I was looking on some Paintings,
five Men rushed out of a Closet in the Room, and seized me. They disarmed me,
took out every thing that was in my Pockets, went out, and locked me in. You
may imagine the Surprise I was in, which was very much increased when I saw my
Enemy Don Roderigo enter the Room. I in my Confusion thought I had seen a
Ghost, for he looked very pale; but he soon convinced me of the contrary. And
have I got you at last? said he: I now will revenge my self at leisure; but to
complete my Revenge, I have sent a Token for your Wife, that I may ravish her
before thy Face; and then I Will devise Tortures to rack every Joint about thee.
He gave me to know that he had sent my Watch for a Token, and that she would
bring such a Sum of Money to pay for the Goods. The Torment of my Soul no
Tongue can express; and I am assured, if they had not taken my Sword from me, I
had put an End to my wretched Life.

The inhumane Villain insulted me so much, that I rushed upon him, unarmed as I
was, and had certainly choked him, if his wicked Assistants had not dragged me
from him.

It is well, said he, I have no other Passion but Lust reigning in my Breast at
this Instant; but when I have sated my Desires on thy Wife, I Will then add
another Pang for this Usage; but in the mean time I Will leave you to think of
this Matter alone, for I fancy you don't much care for my Company.

As Soon as he had made an End of this Speech, he and his Gang went out, and
fastened the Door on the other side. I Will give you Leave to imagine the
Confusion of my Thoughts. I remained some time without moving; but accidentally
casting my Eyes on the Door, I observed there was a Bar to shut it on the
inside. I immediately barred it, and began to look about to see if I could find
any thing for my Defense; but to my Grief could perceive nothing. I entered the
Closet, and searched there, but to no purpose. Looking upon the Floor of the
Closet, I perceived one of the Boards seemed to be loose: I essayed to pull it
up, but wanted some Engine to effect it. I at last thought of the Bar of the
Door, ran to it, and by main Force wrench'd it from the Staple; for I thought
if it would not serve me to make my Escape, it would serve me to defend my
self: but I easily forced up the Board, and with my Bar beat down the Ceiling
under me. I was resolved to explore the hidden Place, whatever was the
Consequence; for it could not be worse than to remain where I was. I therefore
ventured down, though something of a difficult Descent; for the Joyces were so
close together, I had much ado to force my Body through; but at last, with much
Difficulty, I pressed through, and had a desperate Fall to the Ground.

I soon found I had got into a Cooper's Collar, for there were several
Pipe-staves, and Tools to work with. I seized upon some of them, and by Force
wrench'd open the Cellar-Door, which led me once more into the Street before
Don Roderigo's House. I did not give my self Time to consider, but ran toward
the Bridge to get to my own House; and just as I entered the Cordeliers Street,
I met my Wife with her Maid, and the Wretch that had decoyed me to the House. I
ran upon him, seized him by the Throat, and flung him over the Bridge, where he
met with the Reward of his Villainy. I had not Power of Speech to inform my Wife
of the Accident, but made Signs for her to go home. By this time it was dark;
and the profligate Villain Don Roderigo, fancying his cursed Emissary staid too
long, came out of his Door which faced the Bridge. As Soon as I discovered him,
I ran toward him, and seized him: Now Villain, said I, I will not part with
thee till thou have rendered up thy Soul to Hell. We both struggled, and I kept
him down; but the rest of his Company coming up to his Assistance, I quitted
him; and runring to see if I could meet with some one armed, I had the good
Fortune to light on you. As Soon as I received your Sword, I ran back, and just
met the Villain as he was entering his Door. I ran the Weapon into his very
Heart; and I believe you were a better Witness of his Death than my self, being
you were found near the Body.

As Soon as I saw him fall I made the best of my way home, not imagining you
would meet with any farther Damage than the Loss of your Sword.

The Darkness of the Night, I fancy, concealed me from the Servants that came
to the Assistance of their Master, for I never once was suspected; or perhaps
if they did know me, Fear kept 'em from discovering me.

When I heard of your Trial, I came my self into Court, and if you had been
condemned, resolved to have discovered the Truth; but finding you were to be
banished to Baldivia, I concealed the Fact, imagining I had it in my Power to
gain your Freedom, by paying your Ransom; which was the Reason I came now to
wait upon you, to offer you my Service in that, or any thing else that lies in
my Power. I returned him Thanks for his Offer; and considering his Story, I
told him I was glad I was in some sort an Instrument of his Revenge. He would
force upon me a Ring, and two hundred Pieces of Gold, and begged he might be
ranked in the Number of my Friends. He made me many Visits, and once brought
his Wife with him. She was a very handsome Woman, and seemed to have a great
deal of Wit. She made me several very handsome Compliments in behalf of her
Husband, and begged I would accept of their Pictures set round with fine
oriental Pearls.

He accompanied me on Board when our Vessel was to set Sail, putting in the
Captain's Hands fresh Provision, and several sorts of good Liquor to comfort me
in my Voyage.

I had the Happiness to have Pirates for my Fellow-Suflerers; and the Viceroy
had given out, to take off all Censure from him, that I encouraged 'em in their
Piracy.

We took our Leaves, with Protestations of a lasting Friendship; and I lived as
merrily as I could, till the Day we had the good Fortune to meet with you,
which has not given me any Reason to change my Humor.



WE were mightily diverted with the Relation of Don Pedro, and I found I was
not deceived when I took him for a Man that understood the World.

We had now gained the Streights of Gibraltar, and had entered the
Mediterranean Sea: But I must confess I could not see the African Shore,
without Numbers of Sighs for Misfortunes past; and I found my Griefs renewed
with the Remembrance: And all the Mitigation I had was the affectionate Concern
from Don Ferdinand, to whom I had told my whole Story. We had not made a Day's
Sail in the Mediterranean, ere we perceived two Sail making toward us. I must
own I had no Desire to engage, being so richly laden; and therefore, by the
Advice of both the Ships Company, made all the Sail I could to avoid 'em. But
our Vessels being foul with so long a Voyage, and never once cleaned during our
whole Course, they gained upon us, do what we could. When we found there was no
getting from 'em without Fighting, we were as much determined on the other Hand
to fight our Ships to the Bottom of the Sea rather than surrender. Having fixed
this Resolution, we prepared for the Engagement; and when we had got all Things
in Readiness, we lessened our Sails that they might come up to us. I ordered
every Sailor to load as many small Arms as they could, and not to fire a Gun
till I gave 'em Orders; but as soon as ever they had fired the great Guns, to
discharge their small Arms upon 'em. I could not prevail upon Don Ferdinand to
keep below, though I saw Fear livelily painted in his Face. When they came
within Pistol-shot of our Ship they hailed us, and commanded us to strike
immediately. We made no other Answer than with our Guns and small Arms, which
surpised 'em, and did 'em a great deel of Damage in their Rigging; for cutting
the Topsail Halliards with our Shot, the Topsail fell down upon the Cap, and
hindered their Ship's Way very much; and I believe we might have made our
Escape. But I perceived the Villars was hard put to it, (our Spanish Man of
War, whom I had named the Villars in Remembrance of that dear One.) By this
time we were prepared again, and I ordered every Man, as soon as they had
discharged, to lie flat upon their Bellies till we had received the Fire of the
Enemy; which accordingly we did. They fired in upon us* but killed (...) not
one Man. Then our Ha^^^ ^ose up all together, and fired in our small Shot. We
had so damaged their Rigging with this Broadside, that we fell astern till we
were charged again; and then I gave our Men Orders to fire into the Body of the
Ship, and point their Guns low on purpose; which we soon found had the desired
Effect: For they had several Shots between Wind and Water, so that they were
obliged to heel the Ship on the Starboard Side, to prevent the Water running in
on the Larboard. I seeing there was not much to be feared from her, bore down
to assist the Villars, because she was over-match'd. But when her Antagonist
found my Design, and understood the Condition of the other Ship, she made all
the Sail she could, and fled for it. We did not think fit to follow her, but
sent a Boat on Board, to enquire how it stood with 'em in the Villars. They
sent me Word they had lost eight Men, had three wounded, and were very much
mawl'd in their Rigging, as well as their Hull, and had received a Shot between
Wind and Water, and the Ship leak'd very much. I bad 'em search for it; but
there was no coming at it; therefore I ordered them to get out as many of the
Goods as they could, and bring them on Board me. The Weather proving very
favorable, they went to Work as fast as they could.

Our Men brought me Word that the Ship we had engaged was sinking. They fired
several Guns for Assistance, and their Consort being almost out of Sight, I
bore down to help them all I could; but before we could come to 'em she sunk to
the Bottom. The Men had put out their Longboat and Barge, and were got in
them, and made toward us. As Soon as they came within hearing, they called out
for Quarter, which I promised 'em they sh uld have. There were 123 of 'em; and
as their Number exceeded ours, we were obliged to confine 'em, for fear they
should take it in their Heads to set upon us.

The Captain was killed in the Engagement, but the Lieutenant informed me they
were two Men of War, of forty Guns each, set out from Barcelona to cruise upon
the Coast; and manned each with two hundred Men: But the rest of their Crew
were either killed, or being wounded sunk with the Ship. I did not think it
proper to carry 'em to Italy, for fear it should prove prejudicial to Don
Antonio; and understanding that in removing the Goods on Board the Villars,
they had found out the Leak and stopped it, I intended to put 'em on board her,
and give 'em the Ship with their Liberty; but first I ordered out the Guns and
Ammunition, and her Goods, leaving 'em nothing but Provision and Water, which
they returned me many Thanks for, and so we parted.

The next Day there arose such a Storm as we had never felt before, and
continued in the utmost Violence for fourteen Days, so that now we were in
Danger of drowning; and I believe most would have parted with their Wealth to
have been safe on Shore. At last we discovered Land, but were very much
surpised to find it Candia, for now we began to be in fear of the Turkish
Pirates. So we resolved to steer for Zant as fast as we could, and there make
Dividend of our Prize-Money and Goods. And accordingly we arrived there safely,
Sept. 3. 1696.

This Island of Zant belongs to the Venetians, therefore we were out of Danger
from the Turks. The Town, which bears the same Name with the Island, is above a
Mile in Length, seated upon a Beach of the Bay. It is built mostly of Stone,
and has a noble Look from the Sea. To the West of the Town stands the Castle,
built on a high and very steep Hill, where most of the Merchants dwell, and is
very near as big as the City below. It is a Bishop's See, and the Governor is
of the Nobility of Venice. The chief Commodities they deal in are Wine, Oil,
and Currants, which are esteemed of the best Growth. They grow on Vines like
other Grapes, and are gathered in July, and then packed in Hogsheads ready for
the Merchants.

Our Men being well pleased they were out of Danger, and in a Place where Wine
was to be bought cheap, traffick'd so much for that Commodity, that most of
them fell into dangerous Diseases; therefore I resolved to leave Zant, and make
for Sapienza, an Island with a good Harbor, not inhabited, where they would
not be under the like Temptation; so we came to an Anchor there, Sept. 8. I
ordered twelve Guns on Shore, and raised a Platform capable of defending us
from the insults of an Enemy. In a pleasant Green we put up a large Tent, and
others smaller by it for the Officers and Sailors: But I having but one Bed put
up on Shore, Don Ferdinand was forced to lie with me, though as I thought very
unwillingly. Our sharing the ready Money took us up four Days. I reserved a
fourth Part to my Owners, which amounted to upwards of sixty thousand Pound;
and a twelfth Part for my self, which, with what Presents and other Things that
I had, amounted to the value of fifty thousand Pound. Every Sailor from first
to last shared above twelve hundred Pound apiece; but when we came to divide
the Goods, we knew not which way to go about it; so with one common Consent of
the Sailors, I was obliged to accept of them, without paying one Penny for them.

We set Sail for Ostia the next Day, after we had finished our Dividend, and
arrived there Nov. 1. after a Voyage of two Years and seven Months, and the
richest Prize that ever came into any Port of Italy. I sent a Letter to Don
Antonio, to give him Notice of my Arrival, and Advice to come and take Care of
his Cargo. In two Days, he, Donna Isabella, and their little Son came on Board
in a Pleasure-Boat. I found they were in Mourning, and I told 'em I was afraid
to ask 'em who it was for; they informed me that Isabella's Father had been
dead above two Years, but they had resolved never to wear any other Color,
till they had seen me. Never was a more tender Meeting between Friends, than
between us; and I must confess, for some time all my Cares lay hushed.

When I came to inform Don Antonio of the Wealth I had brought him home, he
stood amazed: For besides the Money which I told him of, the Goods I had on
Board exceeded in value the Freight I went out with. I could hardly prevail
upon him to accept of such a Sum of Money, till I informed him it was but
barely his Due, and that I had very near as much to my own Share.

I presented Don Ferdinand to Antonio and his Lady, who seemed very much
pleased with him; and Don Pedro, out of his free merry Humor, told me he hoped
I would not forget him, because he was older, for he thought he had more Right
to my Friendship than Don Ferdinand, being he was an older Acquaintance. I let
'em into some of his Life and Humor: they received him yery friendly; and we
all went to Don Antonio's Villa together.

After staying a Week, I began to be tired with so much Pleasure, and therefore
begged Leave of Don Antonio to visit Rome, only to show Don Ferdinand that
celebrated Place. Don Antonio sent before to his Palace to prepare for our
Reception, and the next Day we followed. We visited all the Rarities, ancient
and modern, where we might see the Grandeur of the ancient Romans by those
stupendous Ruins still left. As Rome was formerly a Nursery of War and
Greatness, it is now a Nursery of Arts, but chiefly Painting, Architecture, and
Music. There have flourished in one Century, Lanfranio, Dominichino, Pietro du
Cortona, the Possine's, Camassei, Guercin da Cento, Chivoli, Andrea Sacchi, the
immortal Raphael, Hannibal Carac^e, Guide Rene, Mutiano, and many more
excellent in the Art of Painting. Then Palladio, Vitruvius, Scamozzi, Pozza,
and many more, famous for Architecture. Then the divine Corelli for Music,
whose sweet Compositions will be always new; and we may say by him as a great
English Poet said of our Countryman Shakespeare, that the former had pulled up
the Roots of Music, as the latter of Poetry, and transplanted 'em into their
own Gardens, where all those that follow must borrow a Branch from them.

I shall not say any thing more of Rome, nor of Naples, where we went once
more, upon Don Ferdinand's Account. I would have persuaded him to have begun
his Studies at Rome, (for I supposed him a Roman Catholic) but he would not
hear of it, and begged he might go with me into England, which I promised him
he should.

Donna Isabella had an Orphan Cousin, that lived with her, of a vast Fortune,
beautiful to a Miracle; who having seen Don Ferdinand, fell desperately in Love
with him. But he did not seem to have the least Regard for her. Don Antonio,
discovered to me the Secret, and pitying by Experience his Kinswoman, desired I
would foward the Match. But when Don Ferdinand understood my Desires, he fell
upon his Knees, and begged I would never mention it more; for he had made a
solemn Resolution never to marry any Woman breathing. I pressed him all I
could, and laid the Folly of such a rash Resolve before him; but it was
preaching to a Tempest; and all my Arguments had no Power upon him. On the
other hand, the merry Don Pedro was as deep in Love with Donna Felicia, which
was the Name of the Orphan Lady. But his manner of Courtship was so odd, and
out of the way, that he caused more Diversion than we could have imagined. If
she went to Bed, he would lay himself down at her Chamber Door, and sing Songs
all Night; that if she had any Inclination to have rested, he was resolved she
should not; and he would often say, he intended to plague her into a
Compliance. If she went into the Garden, he was sure to follow her close; or
even at Church, he would often tell her, it was in vain to pray for a Blessing
from Heaven, when she was committing Murder with every Look. In short, he would
often force a Smile from the afflicted Lady her self.

I was still endeavoring with Don Ferdinand, to forget his rash Vow: But he
desired me, in such moving T^^ms, not to entreat him further, that I resolved
never to trouble him any more on that Theme. Notwithstanding which, I begged of
Donna Isabella to try what she could do with him, for I imagined Complaisance
might work more upon him than Friendship. She sent for him into her Closet, and
they remained together several Hours; and I was very much pleased the next Day
to see him walking in the Garden, only with Donna Felicia. I did not think it
proper to interrupt them; but when I had an Opportunity, I declared my
Satisfaction, and told him I easily forgave his not complying with me, and
yielding to the Persuasion of Donna Isabella. He seemed in some Confusion at
what I said to him, which I attributed to his denying me, and his Condescension
to Donna Isabella. But in a few Days after that, I was something more surpised
to see Don Pedro eagerly addressing Donna Felicia, and she regarding him more
favorably than usual. And my Surprise was increased, when Donna Isabella told
me the nuptial Day was fixed between Don Pedro, and Donna Felicia. I told her I
was very well pleased, the Lady had so soon forgot her violent Passion; but I
added, that the stronger the Flame, the shorter the Duration. If so, returned
Donna Isabella, we may hope your Passion is buried long since. I told her, I
did not Love like others, for I was resolved to carry mine with me to the
Grave. By what I have formerly heard (returned Donna Isabella) from you, as
well as my Husband, you have not the least glimpse of Hopes. Madam, said I,
that is the Reason I must despair; for no other Fire shall ever warm my Breast,
but what was kindled there by my first Flame. We had much Discourse upon the
same Subject, and Donna Isabella told me at last, I was a Pattern for all
faithful Lovers.

When we were at Naples, I had provided Goods and Convenience of sending to St.
Salvador, according to my Promise given to Don Jaques; and the Vessel being to
touch at Ostia, was to send to me for my Letters to Don Jaques. I desired Don
Ferdinand to write to his Father; but he begged to be excused, for fear it
should fall into the Hands of his Lady; and for the same Reason he begged I
would be cautious how I mentioned him. I told him he should see what I had
wrote before I sent it; which was as follows.

SIR,
I Know not how to make you Acknowledgments sufficient for those Favors so
generously conferred upon me; and the Manner of doing it stamps a double Value
on the Obligation. If there is no way to repay the mighty Debt, yet I shall
with the utmost Gratitude remember Don Jaques, and his kind Benefits. I have
done my self the Honor to send you those Things you were desirous of, the last
Time I had the Happiness of conversing with you; which I beg you will accept,
only for this Reason, that you may see you shall ever live in the Remembrance
of one, who shall think it the best good. Fortune can fall upon him, to
subscribe himself

Your sincere Friend and Servant, Robert Boil.
P. S. I also beg you to give my humble Duty to your good Lady and virtuous
Daughter; and be assured, whatever you have given me in Charge shall have the
same Regard, as if an immortal Spirit had descended from above, and written in
my Heart your Commission. Whatever Letters you are pleased to honor me with,
direct for me at the Palace of Antonio de Alvares in Rome, who will take Care
to send 'em to me wherever I am; for as yet I am undetermined where to settle
my self, but I have England in View.




I wrote this Letter in the Portugueze Language, and showed it to Don
Ferdinand, who approved of what I had written.

I had disposed of the rest of my Goods on Board, and the Money amounted to
upwards of fifteen thousand Pound; but I could not prevail upon Don Antonio to
accept of one Penny.

No, my dear Friend, said he, you have already brought me the Fortune of a
Nobleman; though it is not worldly Wealth I covet. I have all the Earth contains
in the Possession of my adorable Wife: and even that, my greatest Happiness, is
owing to you; and all the Allay of Joy I have, is, that I cannot see you as
blessed as I am. But, continued he, Time that wears out all things, will, I hope,
cure this amorous Sickness of your Soul. I let him know my Grief was as fixed
as Destiny, and I had nothing else to do but to wing to the Place where the Joy
of my Life did once reside; with this only Hope, that the lively Imagination of
my Loss would put an end to all my Sorrows, by sinking me into the Arms of
Death.

He was so very much concerned for me that he could not avoid shedding Tears;
and used all the Arguments he could to persuade me to reside in Italy. I told
him I had more Reasons to go for my native Country than what I had given him,
and that was the Education of young Don Ferdinand, who begged to cultivate his
Studies in England.

I turned all my Money into Bills of Exchange, well knowing the Casualties that
attend Travelers; and I intended to go by Land to Flanders, with Don
Ferdinand, my two faithful Indians, and one Servant more.

All my Spanish Sailors that I had picked up by the Way, had by my Consent
their Discharge, and were gone to their several Homes, in Circumstances beyond
their Expectations; though they all declared, if I intended another Voyage,
they would never forsake me. Some of my English Sailors had married Italian
Women, and so designed to settle in Italy.

When I desired Don Antonio to take Charge of the Ship, he told me he had
nothing to do with it, declaring it was mine, and therefore desired I would
make no more Words about it; for, said he, you don't know but you may meet with
something to change your Mind, and we may have the Satisfaction of seeing you
once more.

In a few Days after this, the Nuptials were celebrated between Don Pedro and
Donna Felicia, who designed for Spain (as soon as I left Italy) where he
intended to take up the Mortgage of his Estate, the Time being almost expired.
I must own, the Uncertainty of Women's Tempers gave me much Cogitation; and I
thought this Marriage was a very odd Thing.

I now began to think of my Journey; but first I ordered a Goldsmith to make me
every way the same Parcel of Plate as I received as a Present from Don Jaques
de Ramires, which I presented to Donna Isabella, that she might remember me.
She gave me many Thanks for it, but seemed very unwilling to accept of it a
great while. I told her, as merrily as I could, if she made any more Words
about it, I would return her the Ship that bore her Name, and would be no
longer under her Command. Well, said she, I Will accept 'em; but as you allow me
to be your Owner, I Will give you Orders in Writing, that you must not break open
till you come in such a Latitude, that is, a Fortnight after you are settled in
England. I promised to obey her punctually. The next Day she gave me a sealed
Paper, which she told me were the Orders she mentioned.

I had given my Lieutenant Charge of the Ship, with Directions to make for
Bristol with all the Expedition practicable.

The next Day, being Feb. 6. 1696, I took my Leave of all my Acquaintance; and
notwithstanding I am not used to weep, could not forbear shedding some Tears at
parting with such true Friends as Don Antonio and his Lady had proved. I rode
the first Day overwhelmed with Melancholy, and not one Thought of being
possessed of such a Fortune, from nothing, in so short a Time, ever entered my
Breast. But seeing Don Ferdinand by his Countenance partake of my Sorrow, I was
forced to appear less melancholy, to oblige him to be so too.

I would have shown him the Rarities of Italy in our Travels, but he seemed
very little inclined to Curiosity: And we arrived at Antwerp without any
Adventure. We staid some time there to recover the Fatigue of our Journey, but
more upon Don Ferdinand's Account, being he was something indisposed, having
never traveled on Horseback so far before.

As we approached the Town, he and my Indians were surpised to see the Manner
of Begging. The Boys and Girls would run before you, and of a sudden stop
short, stand upon their Heads, and clap their Hands, saying their Prayers all
the while.

The City of Antwerp is finely seated upon the River Scheld; it is very well
fortified, and upon the Walls are planted Trees that give an agreeable Shade,
and make it pleasant Walking. The Castle, both strong and beautiful, was
founded by the Duke of Alva. The City in Bigness may compare with Bristol;
their Streets spacious, and Houses very magnificent. The Church of Sancta
Maria, their Cathedral, is a superb Building; and of that Neatness, that the
Emperor Charles the fifth, of Germany, would often say it was only fit to be
kept in a Case. The Inside is as glorious and neat as the Out. The Paintings
were performed by Sir Peter Paul Rubens, an Inhabitant of Antwerp, and are
equal to any thing that ever he did. The Jesuits Church is also very beautiful,
adorned with abundance of curious Marble Pillars, and all the Pannels painted
by the same Hand as the other. There are several more beautiful Churches and
Chapels; but as these mentioned are the chief, we shall take no farther Notice
of 'em.

The third of April, (having pretty well recovered our Fatigue by a Rest of ten
Days) we set out for Calais, being the shortest Cut to Dover, and arrived there
April 6; making short Stages.

From this Place we might behold the white Cliffs of Dover. I must own I had
some secret Satisfaction in viewing my native Country: and the next Day, early
in the Morning, we embarked, and reached the Town by Noon, having a very
favorable Passage. Here landing, I had like to have lost one of my Indians.
Slinging his Horses into the Boat, he would get upon the Back of one of them,
thinking he would go out quietly. But just upon the Instant, a Vessel riding by
the Peer fired a Gun, and frighted the Horse to such a degree, that he plunged
into the Sea, and swam from the Shore; and the Indian being thrown off with the
Start, had his Foot so entangled in the Stirrup, that (notwithstanding his
Skill in Swimming) he must have inevitably perished, if the other Indian,
seeing the Misfortune, had not plunged in, and with a Knife cut the String. He
then took the Horse by the Bridle with one Hand, and swimming with the other,
brought him safe to Shore.

Don Ferdinand not being over-pleas'd with riding on Horseback, we took the
Flying-Coach the next Day, and safely arrived at London. I ordered my English
Servant and the two Indians, with our Baggage, to make two Days of it; and gave
'em Directions to wait at the Place where the Coach inn'd, till I sent for 'em.

When we arrived at London, I did not care to go to any of my Acquaintance, but
rather chose to lie at a Bagnio for a Day or two; but I sent privately for my
Uncle's Clerk, that had endeavored to prevent my being kidnapp'd by putting a
Letter in my Pocket, mentioned in the Beginning of this Relation. He came to me
according to my Desire, but was overjoyed and surpised to see me, though he
hardly knew me at first, for I had not sent him my Name.

He informed me that my Uncle had been dead above a Year, and had left his
Estate to his eldest Son* and his Business to his youngest and him: But they
would often talk of me, not believing I was in the Land of the Living; yet they
had increased my small Estate with their utmost Care, intending, if ever I came
back again, to restore it to me. I let him into my whole History, and he was
very much pleased to hear that I had gained such a plentiful Fortune. I got him
to provide us convenient Lodgings, and private, for I did not intend to go
abroad much; and also to go to the Inn to fetch my Servants.

My two Indians spoke English very well, and I had learnt 'em to write and
read; and being in modern Habits, they were not much gazed at.

The Time being expired that I was to look into my Commission, (as Donna
Isabella called it) I resolved to break it open, having some Curiosity. But it
was gone, and notwithstanding all my Search, I could not gain any Tidings of
it. I could not imagine how I should lose that, and nothing else. I must own I
was very uneasy, fearing it might be something of Importance I was to do for
Donna Isabella; therefore I dispatched a Letter to Italy, to tell 'em of my
safe Arrival, and my Loss of the Packet, (and to send me a fresh one) with
Directions where to write to me.

While I staid in Town, I purchased an Estate of 2000 l. a Year in
Somersetshire, and yet had 25000 l. left, which I employed in the public
Funds. And now I had settled my Estate, as well as that I had for Don
Ferdinand, I was willing to forward him in his Studies, and proposed to send
him to Oxford with a Tutor. But he still begged to stay a little longer with me.

I therefore took a Resolution of going to Bristol, only with Don Ferdinand,
and one Servant, with no other Business than to see the Place where my lost
Treasure once lived.

When we were arrived, I inquired which was the House that Mr. Villars, late
Merchant, formerly dwelt in. We soon found it out, but were informed one Capt.
Kendrick dwelt there. I was inquisitive to know if there was any Tidings of one
Susan, who was formerly Maid to Mrs. Villars, Daughter to the deceased
Merchant; and at last got Information that she lived at a Country House near
the Seaside.

I went immediately away for the Place, though near thirty Mile off, and late in
the Evening* Before we had rid far, the Skies became gloomy, and a violent
Storm threatened us, which soon overtook us with such Fury, that we were forced
to put into a little House out of the Road for Shelter. When we came within, we
could not see any Body in it but a little Child, playing with some Toys it had
before it; and all we could get out of it was, that Mamma would come by and by.
It was as lovely a Child as ever I saw, and we were still admiring it, when a
Man and Woman came in. They were much amazed to find us there; but I begged
their Pardon, and told 'em the Storm drove us in to take Shelter.

The Man told us we were very welcome to such as his House afforded, but he
feared we should find but poor Accommodation. In short, the Storm kept up in
its full Force, and now it grew dark, and we were two Mile from any Inn; and to
add to our Distress, we were Strangers to the Road. The Man seeing us so put to
it, told us he had but two Beds, but we should be welcome to 'em, such as they
were.

I told him I would gratify him for his Trouble, and thereupon gave him a
Guinea. He was very well pleased with my Present, and began to show it in his
Looks, as well as the Woman. I gave him another, to provide us something to
eat, and to take care of the Horses. He said he had but bad Stable-room, but if
I pleased he would take my Servant, and all the Horses, (with one of his own to
bring him back again) and leave 'em at an Inn in the neighboring Village. I
agreed to it; and while he was gone I asked the good Woman many Questions about
the Child which we saw there, and soon sound it was none of their own, but a
Gentlewoman's, a Stranger to them, and one they had never seen but once. Why,
said I, how are you paid for the keeping of it? She seemed amazed at my
Question, and was some time before she answered me; but at last she said she
was always very well paid.

I finding she did not much care for talking upon that Subject, changed the
Discourse. Soon after the Man came in, and we went to Supper. I would have had
Don Ferdinand to have lain with me; but the Man understanding we usually lay
asunder, would give us both the Beds, and they would sit up. I asked them where
the Child lay; and they told us in a Cradle. I began to be concerned for the
Infant, though without giving any Reason. When we had supped, we went to Bed,
and had but little Rest; and when we rose in the Morning, (it proving fair and
pleasant) we resolved to walk to the Inn where our Horses were, with our Host
for our Guide. When we arrived, I dismissed him with another Guinea; and would
have got immediately on Horseback, but Don Ferdinand was so very much
disordered that he was not able to mount. I was very much concerned for his
Indisposition, and begged he would repose himself there, while I pursued my
Journey; with a Promise to return the next Day, or send my Servant for him. He
consented that it should be so, and I set forward.

Coming to a Place where several Roads met, I was confounded to know the right,
and therefore was some time at a Stand, not knowing which to take: But hearing
several Voices in an adjacent Barn, I made up to it on Foot, giving my Horse to
my Man. The nearer I approached, the more Noise they made; but I could not
understand 'em. This awakened my Curiosity, and I stole softly to the Barn,
where I could observe through a Crevice (unseen) upwards wards of twenty
Gypsies, sitting in a Huddle, with a Child in the midst stark naked, which they
were rubbing over with Walnut-Shells; and every time it cried they set up that
confused Noise. But I was very much surpised to find in that Child the
Features of that I had seen the Night before at my Country Landlord's. I
beckoned my Servant to come near with my Horses; being armed, I made to the
Barn Door, and forced it open. I asked 'em, in an imperious Manner, what they
were doing with that Child; and further affirmed they had stole it from such a
Place, giving them to understand I had People coming to apprehend 'em. Upon
hearing this, they all took to their Heels; and some (I found) that had come
there with Crutches, ran very nimbly away without 'em; but the Child was left
behind. I now began to consider with my self what I had done; and that I had
gotten a Child, but did not know what to do with it. They had rubbed the poor
thing all over with the green Walnut-Shells, that made it look like one of
their Fraternity. By good Fortune they had left his Clothes behind 'em, as also
some Rags, which I suppose were to be put on instead of the others.

My man and I dressed it as well as we could, and aukwardly enough; but when we
had finished (notwithstanding my Haste) I resolved to go back again, and
enquire into this Affair. When we came to the Inn, I gave the Infant to the
Care of the Woman of the House till my Return; and understanding Don Ferdinand
was gone to Rest, I proceeded to my Host's House without disturbing him. When
we arrived there, I met the Woman at the Door. Pray, (said I to her) good
Woman, where is the Child that I saw here last Night? Where Is the Child?
(returned the Woman snappingly) why the Child's in his Cradle asleep. Let me
see it; said I. No, said she, I will not disturb it for you, nor no one else. I
told her peremptorily I would see it that Instant, in spite of her, for I
feared some foul Play. She seeing me resolute, and lighting from my Horse; Well
Sir, seeing you are so desirous (said she) I Will go and bring it to you. When
she was gone, I began to imagine my self mistaken, and that Children might be
very like, without being the same; but I knew a Guinea would soon reconcile her
to my Rudeness. I staid waiting a considerable time, taken up with several
Thoughts; and not observing how long I had waited, till my Man told me the old
Woman was long a coming. I began to call, and no body answering, I ordered him
to go in, and see for her. He came out again, and told me she was not in the
House, nor any one else; but that he believed she had slipped out of the back
Door, and got away through the Garden. I began to think there was something
very extraordinary in the Adventure of the Child, and resolved to be strict in
the Examination. I entered the House my self, and searched, but to no Purpose.
I sent my Man in the mean time in pursuit of the Woman. But he returned without
her. There was never a Neighbouring-house to enquire, no nearer than the
Village where I had left the Child. So I had just got on Horseback in order to
go back, when I perceived the Man coming toward his own House. I spurred on to
meet him, and he seemed much concerned; I seized him by the Collar, and told
him, I came to secure him, for the Murder of the Child I saw at his House last
Night. The Man was in such a terrible Fright at what I said, that he was more
dead than alive* Sure Sir, said he, it cannot be, it is not murdered. I bid him
produce it, or he should be tried for it. In short, I frighted the poor Fellow
so much, that he told me, if I would have a little Patience, he would tell me
all that he knew concerning it (still crying, I hope it is not murdered.) I
told him the Child was safe. We went back to his House, where after the Fellow
had a little composed himself, he made me the following Relation.

About three Years ago, a Gentlewoman came to my Wife, and made a Bargain with
her to keep this Infant, and by paying us handsomely, we imagined it belonged
to some Person of Distinction; for we received ten Pounds every Quarter, and
that before it was due. The Lady would often take the Child for a Day or two,
and return it again. My Wife, being a worldly Woman, laid several Plots how to
know the truth of the Child, but to no Purpose; but by all Circumstances we
believed the Parents did not care for owning it. One Day my Wife told me she
had a Design in her Head, but she would not disclose it, till she could be sure
of succeeding; and when the Lady came the next time to take the Child away for
a Day as usual, my Wife was in Conference with her for some time. And when she
was gone, she told me that she had prevailed upon the Lady to pay her one
hundred Pounds before hand, and that she brought her to it, by telling her we
should make a Purchase of the House we live in. In short, my Wife (who wears
the Breeches) made me consent to carry on the Deceit; and the next Day the Lady
brought the Child, and the hundred Pound and gave it my Wife, without any thing
under my Hand, and left us in a small time after. When she was gone, my Wife
discoursed me after this manner.

Husband, we have now one hundred and fifty Pounds (for we had been very
saving) besides our Goods, and Cattle, which will fetch us one hundred more.
With this Money we may go into my Country (which was the Isle of Man) and live
contentedly all our Lives, without any fears of bad Crops, and ill Markets.
Well, but said I, what will become of the Child. I quickly found by her
Expressions that she resolved to murder it. I was struck with Horror at her
Proposition, and notwithstanding her violent Temper, opposed her in it; and told
her, upon no Conditions would I consent to do so barbarous a Deed. I found her
so fixed upon the design of Murder, that I was at last, as the lightest Evil,
obliged to consent to her selling it to a Company of Gypsies; but with the
greatest Reluctance in the World; which was executed this Morning. But we had
disposed of every thing before hand, with Intention to have gone for Bristol
two Days hence; for we were assured the Lady would not come again for some time.

When he had done, I informed him how I came to meet with the Child. I then
began to examine if he did not know where the Lady lived; and at last he
confessed he dogged her to her House one Day, set on by his Wife, but would
never discover it to her, for fear of her playing some Trick. I prevailed with
him to go with me, and show me the House, with the promise of a Reward, and
letting him go afterward. We set out (after he had got a Horse) and in two
Hours arrived at a pleasant House, surrounded by a small River, and almost
covered with Trees. I stopped some time to view it, and through a little Avenue
saw two Women gathering Flowers; one had her Face turned toward us, which the
Man said was the Woman that used to come to see the Child, and that was the
Place she carried it to. I ordered my Man to take the Horses to the next Town,
about half a Mile off, and come to me again. But I needed not have bid mine
Host to have gone about his Business; for he being fearful of the Event, got
away without our perceiving it.

When my Man was gone, I walked about to view the House, but I had lost sight
of the Women, and it began to rain again. I stood up for Shelter from the
Weather under a large Oak; and had but just got there, when a Woman came out of
the Gate, with her Mistress's Service, to invite me in. I was very well pleased
with the Invitation, and went into the House, where I was met by the
Gentlewoman, a very handsome Lady. She told me, as I looked like a Gentleman,
she desired I would take Shelter there till the Storm was over. I returned her
the Thanks her Civility deserved, and we sat down, but were immediately
interrupted with ringing at the Gate; and I perceived, through a small Window,
a Gentleman in a Scarlet-cloak a-light from his Horse, and go in quite through
the House. The Lady begged my Pardon, and told me, she was obliged to go keep
another Lady Company while that Person was there, but would wait on me as soon
as possible again. As my Curiosity had brought me there, I had no Thoughts of
going away till I had satisfied it in some measure. I could hear the Man's
Voice very plain, who seemed to threaten a Lady with a great many Hardships as
to her Fortune, if she would not consent to his Love. The Lady answered in so
low a Voice, that I could not hear what she said, but I found her Answers did
but inrage him the more. They talked a great while, and at last they seemed to
be silent. I hearing the Door open, stepped back into the Room where the Lady
left me. She came to me again, and sat down. I hope, Sir, (said she) you will
pardon my Rudeness, but I could not wait on you before. Madam, (returned I) I
ought to beg your Pardon for taking Possession of your House here, who am an
utter Stranger to you. We were interrupted in our Compliments, by the Voice of
a Person that scream'd out Murder! Murder! -- We both ran out, and she coming
to the Door where the Noise was, we found it shut, and the Voice still calling
out for Help. I burst it open with my Foot, and, with my Sword in my Hand, ran
into the Room, where I found the Gentleman that came in the Cloak, endeavoring
to force a Lady. I gave him a Stroke upon the Head, and bid him turn about and
defend himself; which he did, with many bitter Exclamations. But after several
Passes, I had the good Fortune to disarm him; and he having received several
Wounds, dropped down with loss of Blood. The Lady he had attempted, was still in
a Swoon; and the Bustle had brought several Women Servants into the Room. I
retired into the Chamber I came from, but desired the Lady to take some care of
the Wretch, who deserved Death; but I wished might survive, to prevent farther
Trouble. She took my Advice, and sent to the next Town for a Surgeon, who soon
came, and my Man along with him by Accident. Perceiving his Wounds were not
dangerous, (for I stood by while the Surgeon dressed him) and finding the House
in too much Confusion to be better informed concerning the Child, I was about
to take my Leave. But the Lady I had so timely rescued, having recovered her
Fright, desired she might thank me for so great a Providence. I was easily
persuaded to stay, and immediately a Lady came into the Room. But, good God!
what Transports did I feel, when in that Lady, I beheld every Feature of my
dear Mrs. Villars. Our Eyes were fixed upon each other, and the Sight of me
raised such a tumult of Joy in her Breast, that combating with her unsettled
Heart, she fell down in a Swoon again. The other Lady at first knew not the
Meaning of our Disorder: But when I called her my dear Wife, and other
extravagant Expressions of my Love, she soon guessed the Truth, and seemed as
much transported as we were. Words would but wrong the Sentiments we felt for
each other. Therefore, let the Reader (if possible) guess the Joy of two Lovers
meeting, after imagining each other no longer in this World. We thought it was
all a Dream; but at last being convinced of the Reality, we sent privately for
the Parson, and were tied by the outward Ceremony of the Church, whose Hearts
had been divinely united long before; and that Night I took once more
Possession of what I valued above all the World could give.

The next Day, I sent for Don Ferdinand to partake in our Joy, but was informed
his Indisposition had increased upon him so much, that it was dangerous to
remove him. This was some allay to my Joy, for I had a real Friendship for him.
I told my dear Wife, the Obligation I had to his Father. I now desired to know
the Particulars of her wonderful Escape, which she related to me after the
following manner.

You know, said she, when we parted at Mequinez, our Hearts foreboded something
would follow prejudicial to our Loves. I was not acquainted with Mustapha's
Escape; if I had, it is very probable I might have avoided the Misfortune that
befell me: But he got a Vessel to carry him to Sallee, (as he informed me, when
I was their Prisoner again) and by the Way, met with his Master Hamet; who
wrote a Letter to the Governor of Mammora, and sent Mustapha with it, while he
intended to wait near the Coast to guard us back. When they had seized me, they
hurried me away immediately on board a Vessel, and sailed upon the Instant; and
before Night met with Hamet, where I was carried on Board. He upbraided me in
Terms, that gave me to expect worse Treatment from him; but I told him, rather
than submit to his nauseous Love, I would starve my self to Death, if I could
find no other means to rid me of Life. The next Day a Storm arising of a
sudden, blew down one of their Masts, and drove 'em back again, within Sight of
the Port of Mammora; but to avoid it, they ran beyond it, and the Storm
continued. In the Evening it began to abate, and he steered his Course back
again; but before it was dark a Ship appeared in View. And notwithstanding he
had lost several Men in a former Engagement, he resolved to set upon this
Vessel; and it growing Calm he got up to her with rowing. The other Vessel
knowing what she was, began with us first, and fired very briskly.

The Fight continued about an Hour, as near as I could guess; for all my
Employment was to pray, that some lucky Shot would end that Life, which was so
burdensome to me. When the Noise of the Ordnance ceased, I had not Curiosity
enough to go to see how Affairs stood. But judge my Surprise and Pleasure, when
I tell you the first Man that entered the Cabin, was the Mate that I had made
Captain, as I mentioned to you in the Relation of my first Misfortune.

How Madam! cried he, is it you! thank Heaven my Voyage is at End. Come Madam,
(continued he) I Will carry you to one that thinks her Life a Burden till you are
safe, being your Danger is owing to her. I had not Power to return him an
Answer, or ask him who it was he meant, I was so confounded with Thought. He
carried me on board of his own Ship, where he brought Mrs. Susan to me. My
Heart was so full of Content, that for a Moment you had slipped out of my Memory.

The Ship of Hamet's was just sinking, for they had shot her between Wind and
Water, and could not come to stop it. They had taken out as many of their Goods
as the time would permit, and all the Men that were wounded (before she Sunk).
I let 'em into your Story, and the mutual Affection we had; and in Return the
Captain gave me the following Account of their getting away from Sallee.

You know, Madam, (said he) the Moors were not very strict in searching us; and
I had at the first Sight of 'em (judging what they were) secured all the
Merchants Money designed for Trade, as well as what I had of my own about my
Clothes, and in a great Fur Cap, which I wore upon my Head.

Hamet being satisfied with you, and what he found besides, would not sell us
for Slaves, but gave us the Liberty of walking about the Town, with a small
Allowance of Provision, till we could send a Person to England for a thousand
Pounds, which was the Ransom of both Ship and Men. In a little time, I became
acquainted with one of the Jews of Sallee, whom I prevailed upon by the force
of Money to buy the Ship, and pay for our Ransom; which he did, without any
one's concerning themselves about it. We did all we could to find you out, but
to no purpose; so we were obliged to set Sail for England.

In our Voyage home, Mrs. Susan informed we with your Story, not concealing
even her own Part in it; and I found her so sincere in her Repentance, that I
could not help pitying her, which soon rose a softer Passion; and as soon as we
arrived in England, the Ceremony of the Church completed my Happiness. We
acquainted Mr. Kendrick, your Ladyship's Guardian and Steward, with your
Misfortune; who, with the Advice of us, fitted the Ship out in your Name, with
a sufficient Quantity of Money for your Ransom, if it were possible for us to
hear of you; and by meeting with you now, we have compassed what we intended. I
returned 'em many Thanks, (especially Mrs. Susan, who would accompany her
Husband, in hopes to meet with me.) I desired Captain Morris, (which is the
Name of Mrs. Susan's Husband) to steer toward Mammora, but he told me it was
not safe: For as there was a War proclaimed between France and England, the
Ambassador could not answer it if he did not make us Prize; and we were further
informed by one of the Renegado Prisoners, that he was very well assured they
were sailed for France.

Upon this Notice we directed our Course, with this Hope, that you would soon
arrive in England, and find me out; for I remembered in the Story of my
Misfortunes, I gave you Marks enough to let you know where I was to be found.
Before we made the English Coast, I found my self with Child, and the very
Imagination had like to have cost me my Life, for fear the Father of the unborn
Infant would not come time enough to save my Credit; for though I was well
assured of your Honor, yet I knew the censuring World would be apt to blame my
Conduct. I could hide nothing from the faithful Susan, who joined her Fears
with mine.

When we came into Bristol Channel, I consulted with Susan about my Management,
and I at last resolved to live Private, till I could hear some News of you. But
I was obliged to let Mr. Kenderick my Steward into the Knowledge of my Arrival,
though he was a Stranger to my Condition.

I sent to London, in hopes of hearing some News of you; but having kept the
Name of your Uncle a Secret in your Relation, our Endeavors proved fruitless.

My Melancholy increased with my Condition; and for fear of a Discovery, I went
into Wales, with a Relation of Mrs. Susan's, and was delivered of a Boy, that
proved the greatest Comfort to my sinking Heart; for in his Face was every
Feature of his dear Father. I brought him back again here, and had him put to
Nurse, as a Child to a Relation of Mrs. Susan's, and had resolved but this very
Day to have sent for him home, that I might always have the Satisfaction of
having him in my Sight.

My Steward, finding I was under a Necessity of living Private, began to talk
to me of Love; and often proceeded so far (after finding I disdained his
Passion) to tell me, if I would not consent to make him my Husband, he would
take care my Estate should come into his Hands. Though I could have soon broke
his Designs as to my Fortune, yet my solitary Dwelling pleased me so well, that
I gave him good Words, which did but more encourage his Insolence, till it
arrived to that Pitch you so happily delivered me from.

I soon found, by my Wife's Relation, that the Infant I had so marvellously
saved, was our own Child. When I related the Accident of meeting with the
Child, my Wife expressed so much Feat* Terror, Tenderness and Joy, that I
thought the different Passions would have taken away her Understanding. By this
we may learn, there is a ruling Providence that regulates every Action of our
Lives, when they tend to Virtue.

Mr. Kendrick, (the Person that made the Attempt upon my Wife) was soon
informed of our happy Meeting; and his Wounds mending every Day, he begged we
would favor him with a Visit, (which we complied with) where he asked Pardon
for all past Offenses in such a sincere Manner, that we were easily prevailed
upon to forgive him.

He sent for all the Books of Accounts and Writings, that belonged to my Wife's
Estate, and delivered 'em up to us.

The same Day Captain Morris arrived from France; where he went by the Desire
of my Wife, as her last Hope, to know if he could gain any Intelligence of me.
He was so very diligent in his Commission, that he got to the Speech of
Monsieur de St. Olon, who informed him of my pursuing the Vessel, and
returning, and of my Voyage to Italy. I rewarded him by several handsome
Presents for his Trouble, and found in all his Actions, a downright blunt
sincere Honesty, which drew me into a Friendship for him. I now began to think
of Don Ferdinand's Illness, and resolved to go with my Wife to make him a
Visit; and my dear Wife was so impatient to embrace the Child, she would not
let me stay to finish my Affairs with Mr. Kendrick.

As we were upon our Journey, we were met by a Relation of mine, Son to that
barbarous Uncle that had Kidnap'd me. He was in the Country when I arrived at
London. Notwithstanding the Injury I had suffered from his Father, I could not
help receiving him with the utmost Affection; for we were both of an Age, and
very like as to our Persons, being brought up together till the Death of my
Father, which created a Friendship for each other.

He brought me a Packet from Italy, and in it one enclosed from Don Jaques,
sent from St. Salvaldor. I broke open that first, which was as follows.

I Hope the Distance of Climates has had no Force upon your Friendship; mine
here has rather received an Addition, though I am overwhelmed with a very great
Misfortune. My Daughter (in whom all my Hopes centered) is (I fear) entirely
lost; for the very Day you left us, was the last time my Eyes beheld her. We
have some reason to fear the Relations of the Person, who died by your Sword,
have used some clandestine Means, and perhaps have privately murdered her, to
be revenged on us for that Accident, though of their own seeking. In short, I am
weary of the hateful Place, and shall do my Endeavor to seek Repose in some
other Part of the World; and relying upon your good-natured Friendship, I hope
to have the Honor very shortly after your receiving this, to *embrace you in
England, for I am preparing to leave St. Salvador with the soonest. I received
your obliging Letter, and the Bales of Goods, all in good Condition. But there
is something Dark in it, or at least my Understanding cannot reach this
Paragraph; and be assured, whatever you gave me in Charge, etc. I sent you
nothing but what I hope you will accept as your own; and I took the manner of
leaving 'em with you, knowing your generous Temper would not have been easily
persuaded to have accepted 'em, from one that shall ever subscribe himself,

Your sincere Friend and Servant, Jaques de Ramires.
P. S. My Wife (who is inconsolable) throws in her Love and Service; and all
the Hopes she has left, is the Expectation of telling you Face to Face, the
Grief she lies under at her fatal Loss; and to bring us farther in your Debt,
we beg you will leave us sufficient Direction among our Countrymen at your
Exchange, where we may find you.




I was very much concerned at my Friend's Misfortune, especially in believing I
was in some sort the mistaken Cause of it. I had informed my Wife of the
Adventure before, and she condol'd with me; and the Thoughts of being so near
the same Distress in her own Child, redoubled her Grief. When we had given up
some time to those Melancholy Reflections, I broke open the following Letter
from Don Antonio.

My Dear Friend,
WE received yours with the utmost Transports; but as I am an Italian, I ought
to be jealous at the Joy my Wife expressed when she read it; and much more,
when she now declares that she will come to England, to reproach you for the
little Care you took of her Commission. She will (farther to increase my
Jealousy) write you her Sentiments her self; but let her say what she will
there, I am resolved to esteem you as the only Friend that is dear to

Antonio de Alvares.


The other Letter from Isabella contained these Words.

SIR,
I WILL suspend my Reproaches till I see you, (which I hope will be soon.) I had
no Commission to be executed in those Papers you lost, but that of having
cleared the Aspersion you cast on our Sex of Inconstancy, which you had some
Grounds for, in the sudden Marriage of Don Pedro and Donna Felicia, after her
violent Passion for Don Ferdinand. When I found the Cause of her Distemper, I
(as having felt the keenest Dart of Love) pitied her Pain, and therefore taxed
Don Ferdinand often with his wearing an obdurate Heart in his Bosom. I pressed
him so often, that he desired to meet Donna Felicia and my self in my Closet.
We came according to Appointment, where he spoke to this Effect: Madam, tax me
no more with Hardness of Heart, for if I had not a very tender one, I had never
arrived here; and to discover my Frailty at once, know, I am a Woman: And upon
that undiscovering her Bosom, gave us Evident Tokens. We were both so very much
surpised that she went on with her Discourse; I beg, Ladies, you will never
open your Mouth to my Captain concerning this; for the Moment I am sensible he
knows my Weakness, shall be the last of my Life. But notwithstanding this
Injunction, I cannot help informing you, in Pity to her; and I am well assured,
(as your Passion is hopeless) you have Humanity enough not to destroy one who
dies for you; and nothing in this World can equal my Joy, if I find, when I
arrive, Don Ferdinand the Wife to one who shall ever have the Friendship of

Isabella de Alvares.


What Words can express the Amazement I felt, at the reading this last Letter!
My Thoughts were confounded in Thought, and a Chaos of Ideas possessed my
Brain. I was in so much Confusion, that I thought of returning home again, to
consider of this strange Turn. Recollected Circumstances convinced me, how
blind I was in not discovering it sooner. My Soul was immediately filled with
the most tender Pity; and I had not the use of Words to declare my Sentiments
to my Wife and Cousin. Sometimes I would imagine it was all a fictitious Dream;
yet at last I was not displeased, that I had it in my Power to restore to Don
Jaques his long lost Daughter. My Wife was as much concerned as I was, and my
Cousin could hardly believe it. I soon found that she had taken care the Packet
should not fall into my Hands; and that convinced me she would not have her
Disguise discovered. The next Day we resolved to visit her, and form my
Resolution from my Observation.

When we arrived at the Inn, we found her dressed at a Table, with Paper, Pens
and Ink before her, but very weak. I presented my Wife and Cousin to her. She
saluted 'em, and seemed mightily pleased with my good Fortune, and was very
much concerned her Indisposition would not admit her waiting on me, to partake
in my Contentment. Her Weakness was so prevalent, that she could hardly utter
her Words. She knew nothing of receiving the Packet from my Cousin, but after
we had sat some time, I gave her the Letter from her Father; which, as soon as
she had read, she fell backward upon the Bed in a Swoon.

The Noise we made at this Accident brought several People into the Room; and
among the rest my Landlady, who it seems had fell desperately in Love with her,
as imagining her to be a Man. She made such awkward Complainings, that, if our
Minds had been at ease, would have produced much Mirth; but among her Actions,
she unbutton'd her Clothes, to give her Breath, and soon discovered her Mistake
in the Object of her Wishes. When she found by her Breasts that she was a
Woman, she ran down Stairs with the utmost Precipitation, and left us alone to
recover her. When we had brought her to her Senses again, she soon found that
we had discovered her Sex; and the Grief and Shame at the Accident had like to
have thrown her again into her Swooning. It was some time before we could bring
her to her self: But, she found by my Discourse, that I understood the whole
Secret.

After a long Pause, said she, I did not intend to let my Frailty be known to
you till after my Death; but since it is discovered, I beg you will have some
Regard to my Memory, and I shall die contented. I begged her not to talk of
Death, but live to comfort her grieved Parents. It is too late, said she, to
talk of any Comfort, for I have called my greatest Friend Death to my Aid, who
is just now arrived. Upon uttering these Words, a deadly Paleness possessed her
Face, and Trembling seized her Limbs: She had just Strength enough to declare
to us that she had taken a Dose of Poison, provided for the Occasion, bought of
an Apothecary of the Town; and that she was just going to write a Letter to me,
but was prevented by our sudden Appearance, whose Contents were only to see her
secretly buried, and if possible to have concealed her Sex and Story from the
World. She had hardly made an End, before her Speech forsook her, and Life in
all Appearance fled the beauteous Dwelling. My Wife was not present at this
Accident, being her eager Desire had carried her to her Child; but she came in
before it was over. My Cousin seemed more oppressed with Grief than any of us,
for Love had taken full Possesson of his Heart.

While Sorrow had locked up all our Tongues, the Apothecary came in, in a
strange Confusion; for the Report had soon dispersed it self all over that
little Village. Sir, said he to me, don't be concerned at the Condition you see
the Gentleman in, for he is not dead, he has only took a sleeping Potion. I
partly guessed his Design, when he applied to me for Poison; and the
extraordinary Price he paid for it, convinced me it was for some sinister
Design; and therefore I happily imposed upon him.

This News revived us all again, especially my Cousin, who I thought would have
gone distracted for Joy; and to see his impatient watching for her Life's
return, (if we may call it so) only gave me further Proof, that one Look is
sufficient to fix Love for ever in the Soul. The Apothecary, during this
interval of Life and Death, poured Cordials into her Mouth to help the
Operation; and at last she opened her unwilling Eyes, and gazed around her, as
if she had been in another World: But we soon convinced her of the Apothecary's
Deceit, at which she seemed in the utmost Confusion, and gave us to understand
that Life was forced upon her against her Inclination, and she would shake it
off.

We gave her all the Comfort we were capable of; and my Wife told her if she
talked any longer of Death, it was only that she could not bear to see us
happy. This as it were roused her from her Lethargy. Well then, said she, I
will live, if it be only to convince you, that I am pleased to see my Captain
blessed (for she would always call me so.) After we had a little composed her,
we left her with my Cousin, to look after our Child, who was in the same Place;
which had proved the secret Instinct of Nature; for at the first Sight in the
House of his unnatural Nurse, I could not help feeling a tender Regard for him.
When we had satisfied our Inn, we prevailed upon Donna Bianca (now no longer
Ferdinand) to come into the Coach with us, and we arrived that Evening at
Bristol; where we took Possession of the House (which Captain Kendrick had
lived in) that belonged to my Wife. We staid some time there to settle my
Wife's Affairs, and as much to recover Donna Bianca's Indisposition.

My Cousin by his Assiduity gained very much of her Esteem, but she freely
declared she had no Room in her Heart for Love: But notwithstanding, with much
Importunity, we prevailed upon her to accept him for a Husband; and her Esteem
soon came up to a more tender Passion. As Soon as the Ceremony was over, we took
a Journey to London to settle our Affairs there, and provide for my expected
Guests.

One Morning as we were pursuing our Journey, coming near the Skirts of a Wood,
we heard several Groans, which alarmed us; but as we had too many People about
us armed, to sear any thing, we came out of the Coach to know the Reason: Where
we found a Woman weltring in Blood, being stabbed in several Places with a
Sword. When I came to take a nearer View, I found it was my former Master (the
Watch-maker's) Wife. I could not help having Compassion for any Person in that
Condition, therefore ordered her to be taken up and put in the Coach. Donna
Bianca opened her Breast, and stopped her Wounds as well as she could, till we
could get a Surgeon that I had ordered to be sent for. She soon knew me, and
cried out, Sure Heaven has sent you that know my Guilt to be Witness of my
Repentance: The Wrongs I have done my Husband have pursued me to my Grave. When
I had robbed him of all I could lay my Hands on, I made my Escape to Ireland,
changed my Name, and set up for a greater Fortune than I really was. I had many
Suitors, but Heaven, to punish me, made me place my Affections on a Person that
courted me for my Money: And though I soon understood he had but very little
Estate, yet Love prevailed with me to make him my Husband. He soon spent both
his own and my Fortune, and by contracting many Debts was forced to fly for
England; and finding no Relief, took to the Highway, where he has committed
many Robberies. He lodged me in a neighboring Village; but our Place of
Meeting was generally in this Wood, for fear of a Discovery. This Morning he
came, according to Appointment, where he began his Discourse after this Manner.
I had no Inclination for you when I first married you, but now I utterly abhor
you, therefore am resolved to part with you: But I have another Reason besides
my Hatred to you, which is this; I have it in my Power to marry an old Woman,
very rich; and therefore it is necessary to send you out of the World, for fear
our Marriage should come to her Ears, and spoil my Fortune. He followed his
Discourse with these Wounds, which he gave me, and rode into the Wood, without
my once offering to open my Mouth; for Astonishment had tied up my Tongue. I
told her, I hoped Heaven had given her all its Punishment in this World. That Is
all the Hope I have, said she, and in my unfeigned Repentance; for I feel Death
approaching. We observed she was just expiring; and before the Surgeon came,
she gave up her last Breath, calling upon Heaven for Mercy. I gave Orders for
her Funeral, and sent after her Murderer, but to no Purpose. But I heard he was
taken for the Highway, some time after, and executed at Worcester; where he
confessed the Murder of his Wife. Thus we see the Hand of Heaven, though slow
in Punishments, yet always overtakes the Guilty. When I had given Directions
for her Funeral, we pursued our Journey, and arrived safe at London.

Don Antonio and his Lady arrived first, in a private Capacity; not caring to
make a Show according to their Birth, to be taken Notice of. And in a few Days
after came Don Jaques and his Lady, in a Ship of their own, in Company with the
Isabella which my Lieutenant commanded, that had sprung a Leak which obliged
her to put into Lisbon to refit, where Don Jaques joyfully met with her.

I had desired Donna Bianca once more to put on her Boy's Clothes; for I
intended agreeably to surprise her Parents.

I was obliged to take Lodgings for Don Jaques's Family, being they intended to
take a convenient House in the City. As Soon as mutual Caresses were over, Grief
again took Possession of their Souls for the Loss of their Child. After
condoling with 'em some time, I begged 'em to hope for the best, and that it
was possible to hear of her again. They shook their Heads, and told me that
Thought was long given over, and they had no Hope but in Time to wear away
their unhappy Loss.

I told 'em I had a Kinsman, as much as I could remember the Features of their
beautiful Daughter, as like her as a Man could be like a Woman. They expressed
a great Desire to see him. I told 'em I had invited him with another Relation
to sup with us on purpose. We had taken care before, that Donna Bianca should
Ombre her Face, and speak nothing but English, on purpose to carry on the
Deceit. 'Till the time of their coming, we spent in relating our Accidents in
the Voyage. I told 'em how much I was surpised at the Likeness of my Cousin to
their Daughter: for I had given 'em to understand it was a Relation I had never
seen before I left England: which was Truth.

When the Time I had appointed came, Donna Bianca and my Cousin entered. I
presented 'em to Don Jaques and his Wife, as my Relations, and they saluted 'em
as utter Strangers. But when they saw and heard Donna Bianca, they burst into
Tears at the great Resemblance in both Voice and Features, as they said, to
their Daughter. She carried it on as long as she could, speaking English all
the while; but at last their Tears prevailed so much upon her Tenderness, that
she begged leave to retire, but would return immediately. I made an Apology for
my Kinsman to Don Jaques and his Wife, and told 'em he would return in a very
little time. The Space of their Absence was filled with Sighs and Tears; and as
I knew their Grief would soon be over, I never attempted to comfort 'em.

When they were ready, they sent a Servant to tell me a Gentleman wanted to
speak with me. I retired, and came in again immediately, and told 'em our
Company would be increased, for another Relation and his Wife were just coming
in to sup with us; and upon the Instant my Cousin entered, leading by the Hand
Donna Bianca. They both ran and kneeled down before Don Jaques and his Wife. At
the Sight of their Daughter, the Mother fell backward in the Chair in a Swoon;
and Don Jaques was in such a Surprise that he could not open his Mouth, but
expressed his Joy by Tears, Kisses, and Embraces; and his Lady coming to her
self, had like to have stifled her with her Transports.

They did not ask any reasonable Questions till the Torrent of their Joy was
poured out. After the first Transports were over, Donna Bianca told her own
Story. She said, the first time I dined at their House in St. Salvador, Love
flew into her Heart; and knowing the Modesty due to her Sex, she was resolved
never to discover it till she found the State of mine: Yet finding her Passion
daily increase, and understanding the Day of my Departure, she procured
secretly the Habit of a Man, with all other Necessaries, and conveyed herself
on Board in the Boat that carried the Presents her Father had sent me; and
counterfeited the Letter she gave me as from her Father. Every thing answered
my Wish, said she; but I soon found my Captain had no Heart to bestow. It is
needless to tell how many bitter Sighs and Tears that Knowledge cost me: But it
is now buried in Oblivion. Then she proceeded to beg their Pardon for her rash
Folly, as she called it; and they were too much overjoyed not to forgive her
every thing; and they expressed a great deal of Satisfaction in that they could
now call me their Relation. We lived in all the Contentment imaginable,
returning Heaven our grateful Thanks for its bounteous Mercy. And now I am
settled, I Will take Leave of my Reader with this Couplet of the Poet: O never
let a virtuous Mind despair,
For constant Hearts are Love's peculiar Care.


THE VOYAGE, SHIPWRECK, AND Miraculous ESCAPE OF Richard Castelman, Gent. With
a Description of Pensylvania, and the City Philadelphia, etc.

Printed in the Year MDCCXXVI.

THE VOYAGE, etc. OF Richard Castelman, Gent.
THE Dangers at Sea are certainly more imminent than those on Shore; even in
the fairest Weather, the Space is very small between this World and the next.

A Grecian Philosopher was, in my Opinion, much in the right, when asked by a
Friend if he would go to a neighboring Island in the Hellespont to hunt,
answered, if he should be guilty of so much Folly, he should have no other Hope
but of returning safe back, for those that trusted their Lives to the Sea
ventured with a changing Mistress.

I embarked on Board Captain Cox, bound for Charlestown in Carolina, with Mr.
Jones and his Family, and arrived safe there without any great Hazard, just
when Captain Moor had made a Descent upon the Spaniards of St. Augustine, a
Plantation to the Southward of Carolina, and returned with considerable Booty.
By some of the Colony his Proceedings were censured with Injustice, being the
Spaniards had not any Notice of the Rupture between England and Spain; but all
Stratagems are lawful in War.

Some time after, the Spaniards, resenting the Usage of the English, fitted out
five Sail of Men of War, and several Transports, to repay them in their own
Coin.

They landed eight hundred Men in the Bay, and sent two Trumpeters to Sir
Nathaniel Johnson, at that time Governor of Charlestown, to surrender; but he
sent 'em word back, as the Place was entrusted to him by the Queen his
Mistress, he was resolved to hold it out to the last. The Messengers informed
their Admiral of Sir Nathaniel's Resolution, and likewise added, that the Town
was too well Manned to be easily taken. He thought better on it, recalled his
Men, and sailed away.

This Attempt very much alarmed the Country, and put 'em upon fortifying
Charlestown, which at present may laugh at all Attempts from a Foreign Foe, or
the native Indians, who used before to infest 'em daily.

Charlestown, or Charles City, the Capital of Carolina, is situated upon a
Neck of Land formed by a River on each side, (named Ashley and Cooper Rivers,
from the first Plantations) well stored with Fish. There was when I was there
but an indifferent wooden Church; but before I left the Place, Subscriptions
were taken in to build a regular Stone Building. There are upwards of a
thousand Houses, very neatly built, with Gardens almost to every House. There
is Plenty of every Thing for the Life of Man to be found at Charlestown. It
lies in 32 degrees. 40 min. Northern Latitude. The Trade of this Place is more
considerable for its Bigness than any other Plantation in America; it being the
Southermost Settlement belonging to the Crown of England upon the Continent;
and I have been informed they have Dealings three hundred Leagues up the
Country, which is very much facilitated by the numerous navigable Rivers that
come from the Mountains. The Climate is very wholesome. Though most Europeans
have at their first Arrival the Distemper of the Country, which proceeds from
Change of Air and Diet; yet I had the good Fortune to escape with a swelled
Arm, which had like to have ended in the Mortification of a Finger; but I was
happily cured by the Care and Advice of Madam Rhett, the only good Surgeon on
the Place: Though were I to enumerate her other good Qualities, my small Tract
would exceed in Bulk my Intentions: I shall only say, another Dacter may be
found in America.

I staid at Charlestown upwards of eight Months, and was well entertained by
the courteous Inhabitants; for I must own Pleasure as well as Profit induced me
to travel, though I have no Inclination that way now.

Mr. Jones, the Person concerned with me in Trade, was obliged to go to
Bermuda, being Secretary and Provost-Marshal of the Summer-Islands; and in a
short time after I followed with his Family. We met with no other Accident than
a large Shark that followed our Vessel several Days together, and the Master
told me he was well assured some One on Board would die. I laughed at his
Superstition, and endeavored to rally him out of it, but he still persisted in
his Opinion. When the Shark appeared first, every Body was in good Health, but
in three Days time a Woman Passenger expired of a Fever; whom we committed to
the Waves, and was probably entombed in the Bowels of the Shark, for he took
his leave of us the same Day. The Master told me he had made it his Observation
for several Years, and was never once out. It Is not impossible but the Shark at
Sea has the same Instinct as the Vulture at Land.

When I arrived at St. George's, the Capital of Bermudas, I was as well pleased
with the Climate and Inhabitants as I was at Carolina.

St. George's Town is seated in the Bottom of a Bay of the same Name, and is
very well fortified. It contains about two hundred Houses, with a Church
something handsomer than that of Charlestown. The Incumbent was the Reverend
Mr. Holland, a Person of a good Understanding. I had a Present, an Antelope's
Foot set in Gold, for a Tobacco-Stopper, which I was to deliver to the Bishop
of Bangor, his Patron; but it was lost among my other Things in my Shipwreck.

There is a perpetual Spring to be observed in these Islands, and the old
Leaves never drop before they are thrust out by new ones. Their Fruit is in
Blossoms, Buds, and Ripe at the same time. The Air is generally temperate and
innubilous, but now and then troubled with violent Thunder and Lightning; and I
have been shown several Rocks that they say were split by Lightning.

I was informed by a Gentleman that had coasted along these Islands, that their
Number amounts to 378, but above 300 of them deserve no other Name than Rocks;
and most of the others that are inhabited have not above half a dozen Houses
upon them.

The Soil of all the cultivated Islands is alike, being very fruitful; and some
People imagine they were once joined, making one entire Island, but were
divided as they are now by the Innovation of the Sea: And what gives them
ground for this Opinion is, that the Waves daily lessen the small ones. But
this is only Conjecture.

I am sorry to say that the former Inhabitants gained much by Pirates; and even
some that had large Plantations when I was there, were little better at first
than Sea-Robbers.

The late Queen being informed of it, ordered Mr. Larkins with a Commission to
try Pirates, wherever they resorted in her Dominions in America. I happened
to be at Bermuda when he arrived there. He acquainted the People in Power with
his Commission, but met with a very cold Reception from 'em: But however, he
proceeded in his Design, and issued out Warrants to seize the suspected
Persons. Mr. Jones, as Provost-Marshal, was obliged to execute the Warrants;
but he met with Resistance every where, and was very ill used by some of them,
even to the Hazard of his Life.

The Governor, whose Name was Bennet, as he represented the Monarch of
England, should have assisted Mr. Jones and Mr. Larkins; but whether he was
afraid of offending the Inhabitants, or not enquiring truly into the Matter,
Mr. Jones and Mr. Larkins were seized and committed to Prison. Mr. Jones first
made his Escape, and arrived safe in England; where he set forth his Case, and
had all the Redress he desired: He was ordered back, and re-instated in his
former Post.

Those that opposed him, I am informed, had reprimanding Letters from England,
upon his Account; but when Hate is fixed in the Minds of some Men, it is never
to be rooted out: Their Animosities rose as high as ever, and he was once more
obliged to abandon the Island. There is now depending a Suit in Law between the
Governor and Mr. Jones, who are both in England; and there is no doubt but
Justice will take Place.

Mr. Larkins was put into the Dungeon of the Prison, and it was the common
Report, he was denied even Food to sustain Life; and would have certainly
expired for Want, if he had not made his Escape in the Habit of a Woman, with
the Assistance of a true Friend; which is hard to find any where, but more
especially among the Men of Power in America: But his Confinement had so worn
him, and he had contracted so many Distempers by his Ill-Usage, that he expired
in his Voyage home.

As I said before, this Island was in former Times the common Receptacle for
Pirates, and indeed their chiefest Gain proceeded from trading with them. Here
they came to spend what Money they got, and recreate themselves; it lying very
convenient for 'em, between 32 and 33 Degrees of N. Latitude, and 300 Leagues
from the Continent or any other Island.

Among their Trees, the Cedar is the most plentiful, which they use even for
Firing. I have seen Vessels of a hundred Ton built with Cedar; and most of the
Houses are composed of the same.

The Laws should be the same as those in England; but Power is generally Chief
Judge in America: Yet if a Person never comes under the Lash of the Superior,
there is very comfortable Living at Bermuda.

Mr. Jones, Capt. Bayley, and my self, had jointly bought a Vessel of about 140
Ton, and we had got in all our Freight but Tobacco, which we were to take in at
Virginia, and then make up with the Fleet for England. While we were fitting
out our Vessel, Mr. Jones was employed in his own Affairs, therefore the Care
of his Share was committed to me.

We set Sail from Bermuda, April 5, 1710, with a fair Gale, which continued
till we lost Sight of the Islands; but in the Night a contrary Wind sprang up,
and blowing very fresh at N. N. E. carried us to the Southward of the Bermudas;
and it was the greatest Providence in the World we were not stav'd upon the
Rocks; but with great Difficulty we got clear of them, being obliged to ply it
to Windward three Days.

We had the Misfortune to find our Ship none of the best Sailors; yet in four
Days we got in our proper Latitude; and the Wind continuing pretty fair, we
made very good Way. We had no other Diversion than taking Dolphins with our
Fizgig; but in my Opinion it is but indifferent Food.

We were forty one, including Passengers; and many of those being sick with the
Rocking of the Ship, made it uncomfortable living among them; and I wished my
self once more on Shore.

April 12 we were alarmed at Sight of a Vessel we discovered, which we imagined
to be a Spanish Privateer. We crowded all the Sail we could to avoid her, which
would have been very hard to do, if immediately after the Wind had not changed
to S. S. E. a very strong Gale. We bore away before it, and ere Night lost
Sight of her.

As we were at Supper in the Cabin, a Son of Capt. Bayley's came and told his
Father that the Color of the Water was changed; but his Father reprimanded
him, and told him he had lost his Senses, for it was impossible to be near any
Shore. When the Sea changes its Color, it is an evident Token Land is not far
off. We continued the same Course under a Foresail; but our Terror and Surprise
was not to be expressed, when in the Morning Watch, the Captain, who being upon
Deck discovered Land right ahead, came down into my Cabin, and with Tears in
his Eyes desired I would rise. I knew by his Looks something extraordinary was
the Matter, and got upon Deck to be resolved, for Capt. Bayley had not Power to
utter a Word. I soon found the Danger, for I perceived we were in View of
Virginia, near Ronoke Sand-Banks. We did all that was in our Power to weather
'em, but our Ship having a round Head, she would not obey the Helm; therefore
we all agreed to make in for the Land, hoping, as it seemed a bold Shore, it
was Tide of Flood, and then we might through Providence land safe. But it
proving Tide of Ebb, we bulg'd upon the Ronoke Sand-Banks, but by lightning the
Ship, and cutting our Masts by the Board, we got clear of that; but keeping
still in for the Shore, we struck upon the second Sand-Bank, but not very
violently, so we threw out our Anchors in hopes we might ride out the Tide; but
the Wind increasing, we dragged 'em, and were violently thrown upon another
Sand-Bank, where our Ship stuck, and the Waves dashed over us. We had several
Women with Children on Board, and their dismal Cries pierced my very Heart. We
ordered the Boat out, to see if we could gain the Shore that way. I jumped into
her one of the first, but ere we could leave the Side of the Ship, she was
stav'd in Pieces. All we could do in this Exigence was get into the Ship again;
and with much difficulty we compassed it, being dragged in by main Force; yet
if I had not held fast hold by the Coat of one that was in the Water with me,
and the Foot of another, I must have inevitably perished, for I was under the
Keel. When I had got Footing upon Deck, I fetched my Box out of my Cabin, and
was for securing my Money, which amounted to Fifty Pound. While I was busying
my self with uncording my Box, the Captain's Sister reprimanded me for thinking
on my Money, when all their Lives were in Danger. I must own, other Thoughts
had been more suitable to my Condition, therefore I was ashamed of what I was
about, and had no other Regard than to assist in saving our selves. It proved a
fruitless Labor in endeavoring to get off the Vessel, therefore we laid aside
all Hopes of saving the Cargo.

We had two Blacks on Board that belonged to Capt. Bayley, that were excellent
Diverse (for the Surge was so violent no one could stem the Billows but by
diving) who offered to get with a Rope on Shore, and fasten it from the Ship to
a Stump of a Tree; and divine Providence had so ordered it, there was not any
Thing like a Tree for half a Mile on each Side of us. I told the Captain it
looked like a good Omen, and, by the Help of God, I did not doubt but we should
get safe on Shore.

The Negroes with much Difficulty did as they had intended, and by the Help of
the Rope came back to the Ship. Capt. Bayley, his Wife, and Mate, ventured into
the Water first, upon the Awning of the Ship, and got safe on Shore; though it
broke as soon as they were landed. But my Ears are even pierced this Moment with
the Cries of his poor Children that were in the Ship, which was more terrible
to me than the Storm. I offered to help 'em upon the Rope, but they were in
such Frights and Terrors that I could not prevail upon 'em to venture.

Two of the Sailors got upon the Rope just as I was going to venture, and with
their Bustling had very near thrown me once more into the Sea. I offered my
Assistance to the Capain's Sister, but she was as timorous as the Children, and
fed her self with vain Hopes that the Waves would leave 'em by degrees, and
they might with less Danger get on Shore. I took my Leave of all that were on
Board, and recommending them and my self to the Care of Heaven, I got into the
Water and laid fast hold on the Rope, and, with the Assistance of one of the
Negroes, got some Distance from the Ship; but the Waves drove back with such an
Impetuosity that I was many times in Danger of losing my Hold, and so be
carried into the main Sea; which had certainly came to pass, if I had not been
assisted by the Black; for every time a great Sea was coming to break over us,
he would cry out, For the Lord's Sake, Master, hold fast: And whenever he
called to me, I settled my self to receive the Force of the Waves, which would
as often overwhelm me; and I poured out my Prayers to God for his Assistance. At
last, with much Struggling, I could feel my Feet touch the Ground sometimes,
and by degrees, with the utmost Difficulty, got Footing; and at every Retire of
the Waves set my self to running. When they drove back upon the Shore, I seized
upon the Rope, or otherwise I had been dashed to pieces on the Sand. But at
last my Strength began to fail me, with the violent Fatigue I had undergone;
and if the Negro had not dragged me on the Sands, (whose Strength also was
almost gone) I must, after all my Strugglings for Life, have resigned my self
to the Waves.

As Soon as I could recover my Spirits, I gave the divine Creator of all things,
Thanks for my wonderful Delivery from the Jaws of Death; which was still more
wonderful, for as soon as I had let go the Rope (some other Persons venturing
the same way) it broke, so that not one of the unfortunate Wretches came on
Shore, but were swallowed up by the Waves.

Awhile after I had got on Shore, Captain Bayley, his Wife, and the Mate came
down to me, and informed me that they could find no Road, nor any Inhabitants.
This News renewed our Griefs, for we seemed to be in as much Danger of Starving
now, as of Drowning before: And to increase our Dread, it was not above three
Hours to Night, and then we had the wild Bears to fear.

While we were lamenting our Condition, we heard somebody hollow up in the
Woods, which revived our drooping Senses: But running to see who it was, we,
much to our Grief, found it to be one of the Sailors that escaped, who was
hollowing to his Companion; and they were both as drunk as 'twas possible for
them to be, with Rum, before they left the Ship. Such Beasts are some Sailors,
that even the greatest Dangers will not deter them from Drinking, if they have
an Opportunity.

When we were all together, (that is, the Captain, his Wife, and Mate, two
white Sailors, two Negroes, and my self,) we resolved to walk to the Southward,
to see if it were possible to find any Habitations; but in less than an Hour,
our Journey was stopped by an impenetrable Wood, and we were obliged to return.

We then went Northward, but were interrupted by large Swamps, and not the
least Mark of any Plantation. Thus, maroon'd as we were, we went back again,
and could perceive the poor Wretches in the Vessel, lifting up their Hands to
us for Succor; but we could neither give 'em Assistance or Comfort. I made 'em
Signs to let 'em know our Condition was as bad as theirs, and that they had
nothing to think on but Heaven.

It growing near Night, some of the poor Creatures ventured into the Water, but
were soon drowned. In short, every Object we beheld increased our Horror. None
of us had eat or drank for two Days, besides our Fatigue. Though quite cast down
my self, I endeavored to cheer my Fellow Sufferers; and that we might be
sheltered from the Inclemency of the Night (which, to add to our wretched
Condition, proved a rainy one) we by joint Consent and Labor, while the Day
lasted, plucked down a good Number of Palmetoe Leaves; and with Pieces of Trees
(which we tore, for we had never a Knife among us) built us up a Hut, and
sheltered it from the Weather as well as we could.

The Palmetoe Leaf is very large, and the same that they make the plaited Straw
of, which forms the finest Hats, that come from Bermuda and Carolina. It was a
very melancholy Reflection to think of our Condition: Nothing to lie upon but
the bare wet Ground, and our Clothes that covered us were those upon our Backs,
dropping with Rain and Salt Water; no Food, nor Hopes of getting any; and I was
even ready to expire with Thirst. While the Hut was preparing, to allay my
Drouth, I stole by my self, urin'd in my Tobacco-Box, and drank it with as
great a Gusto as ever I have done French Claret before or since.

When I came to lie down in our wretched Tenement, the Place was full; but I
even laid my self down upon 'em, (and though a Woman was among us, had no
Thoughts of different Sexes) and by degrees made Room for my self.
Notwithstanding their complaining of Legs and Arms, I held my Tongue, and,
maugre all my Wants and Misfortunes, slept soundly till Morning: But with the
Day Reflection returned, sharpened with the extremest Hunger.

When we had got all together again, (that is, seven of us, for one of the
drunken Sailors was found dead some Distance from our Cabin, as we might well
imagine, with Cold and Want, and spoiled an excellent Proverb, That drunken Men
never get any Harm) by my Advice we addressed our selves to the All-seeing
Power for Succor; all but the Mate, who told us that Praying alone would not
do, therefore while we prayed, he would go seek. After our extempore Orisons
were over, we rose up, and resolved to go into the Woods, to gather, if it was
possible, something to kill our Hunger. But as we turned toward the Beach, we
saw the Mate with another Man, a Stranger to us, coming toward us. The Dove
could not be a more pleasing Sight to the Patriarch Noah, when he returned with
the Olive Branch in his Mouth, than that Stranger was to us. We ran with all
the Speed which our weak Condition would admit of, to meet him. Under his Arm
he had got a little Tub of Butter that the Sea had thrown up; and though mixed
with Sand and Gravel, we as greedily devoured it as if it had been Partridge or
Pheasant; but our Misfortune was, when we had tired our selves with Eating, for
I cannot say we were satisfied, we all of us grew Sick, and cast it up again.

The Stranger, to relieve us, gave us a Couple of Limes among us, which we
greedily devoured, and to the Butter again. But what was a pleasing Surprise to
us, our Mate informed us a Puncheon of fresh Water was thrown on Shore. We
eagerly ran, and my Tobacco-Box served us instead of a Cup. The Mate, who had
slak'd his Thirst before, would not let us drink too much, for fear of
endangering our Lives; but with this indifferent Repast we recovered our
fainting Spirits, and were more able to bear the Fatigue of the Day.

Our Vessel was drove close on Shore, but broke in many Pieces; and it was a
melancholy Sight to behold the dead Bodies covering the Sand: But what had
almost killed Capt. Bayley and his Wife with Sorrow, were the Bodies of his
Sister and one of his Children half buried in the Sands. For my own part, I had
no other thing to grieve for but the Loss of my Cargo, which consisted of
Cotton, Indigo, and Straw Ware; which, if it had arrived safe to England, would
have yielded to my own Share fifteen hundred Pound: Though the Loss of my
Harpsichord and Italian Timbrel I most regretted, whose Remains I discovered
upon the Shore; and the whole Strand was covered with Bermuda Hats. Some we
picked up; and among other pieces of the Wreck, the Mate discovered my Box
floating on the Surface, which by good Fortune he dragged on Shore. In it was
my Money, Linen, and Books of Accounts. We kept this private from the
Stranger, and buried it in a Place I had marked by several Observations: For he
had given us to understand, it was his usual Custom, after a violent Storm, to
come to the Sand-Banks in Expectation of Shipwrecks; therefore we were not
assured he might not find Means to destroy us in Hopes of what we had on Shore,
or leave us without assisting us to some Plantation.

When we had done all we could about our Wreck, we took leave of the miserable
Sight, and set forward to the Stranger's Plantation, which was about ten Miles
off. He led us along the Woods by certain Marks on Trees, which we were
ignorant of; but the Inhabitants know how to find one another's Plantations by
those Marks; and in four Hours (for I had my Watch in my Pocket when I was
shipwrecked) we once more beheld the pleasing Sight of a Chimney smoking,
which was the Habitation of our Guide. You may imagine the Joy we had to enter
once more into a House, after our miserable Hardships. But when we came there,
we found but indifferent Accommodation. There were no other Eatables to be got,
but a little hung Beef, and Humminy, (that is, Indian Corn ground, mixed with
Milk, and dried before the Fire:) but this was Feasting to us; for Hunger is
the best Sauce.

There were but two Beds in the House, which the Family complimented us with.
The Captain and his Wife had one, and Mr. Burnam and I had the other.

I deferred going for my Box till the second Day after our Arrival; for I was
very much out of Order with the Fatigue I had underwent; and by lying on the
wet Ground I had lost my Hearing, which I did not recover thoroughly till my
Arrival in England.

The Mate, 'two Negroes, and my self, set out with one to guide us to the Place
of our Shipwreck; but we were so long in looking for my Box, that we were ready
to give over all Search: But just as we were thinking of returning, the Mate
happily found it out.

The Negroes took it by Turns, and we brought it safe to the Plantation.

I had a good Parcel of Linen in it, which I lent to my Fellow Sufferers: But
it was an odd Sight to discover so many Scare-crows, with tattered Coats and
fine ruffled Shirts on.

Our Host was very well satisfied for our Entertainment with what he found of
the Wreck.

We staid here five Days to refresh our selves, and then resolved to go up the
River to wait on Colonel Carew, Deputy Governor of North Carolina; a Gentleman
I had the Honor of being acquainted with. We hired a Canoo with two Sails, and
embarked, Capt. Baily, his Wife, the Mate, two Blacks and the Sailor, with
another from the Plantation to assist us. We sailed up Ronoke Sound with a
fresh Gale, and at seven a-clock the next Morning stopped at Colonel Carew's
Plantation, who out of his known Courtesy entertained us very handsomely. We
took our leaves, and at eight a-clock the same Evening came before the
Governor's House, situate on the River Notaway, which runs into the Ronoke
about fifty Leagues from the Sea.

I sent up one of the Men to acquaint the Governor I was come to wait on him;
and upon the Instant he came down to the Shore, accompanied by Capt. Cratbach,
a Native of Bermuda Island, and one I had long been acquainted with. He had
left Bermuda since we came away, and the Governor and he had just been wishing
I had escaped the Storm as the Messenger came to him.

As Soon as ever he saw me, he cried out, I am sorry for your Misfortune, I can
easily perceive an ill Wind drove you hither. He would not suffer us to talk
much, but hurried the whole Company into his Dining Room, where stood a Supper
and a Bowl of Punch, with several Genlemen his Guests. He begged their Pardon,
but told 'em they should neither eat nor drink before we had satisfied our
selves; and we soon cleared what was put before us: and then another Supper was
provided for the whole Company, which we had our Shares of, notwithstanding
what we had eaten before.

The Governor was but ill provided with Beds, therefore Capt. Bayley and his
Wife went to Mr. Glover's, a neighboring Gentleman; and the Secretary would
have me home with him, about a Mile from the Governor's. When we came to his
House, we found a Quarter of a Shote (a young Hog) and a Turkey on the Table. I
sat down once more, and made a hearty Supper; and I must own, I never thought I
should bring my Stomach to its proper Tone again. After we had drank very
heartily, we went to Bed. The next Morning we breakfasted upon broiled Fowls
and Chocolate. ( My Readers, if any, I hope will not ridicule my taking Notice
so often of Eating, till* they put themselves in my starved Condition.)

The next Day we went to dine with a Friend of the Secretary's; and as we were
at Dinner, a Messenger came from the Governor and Capt. Bayley, to inform me a
Vessel was going that Instant for Kakatan, (a Harbor where the Virginia Fleet
make up, and with the Convoy set sail all together for England) and that Capt.
Bayley and the rest of my unfortunate Company waited on Board for me.
Notwithstanding my Stomach, I was obliged to make all the Dispatch I could to
the Place where the Vessel lay; but to my great Misfortune, the Wind proving
fair for them, they were obliged to take the Advantage; and when I arrived at
the Port they were almost out of Sight. I was very much concerned at this Loss
of my Passage, for it was very probable I might not get such another
Opportunity till the Fleet was gone, and then I should be obliged to stay till
next Year.

The Governor seeing me so much concerned, offered me his Horse to go to
Kakatan by Land, about 120 Leagues from the Place where we were; and he
procured me a Guide, an honest Quaker, who for ten Pieces of Eight agreed to
accompany me, and bring the Governor's Horse back again.

We set out immediately; for I had no Luggage to carry: because Capt. Bayley,
as imagining I would come time enough, had got all my Things on Board.

We rode that Day about twenty Mile, through unfrequented Woods; but my Guide
knew the Way by the abovementioned Marks upon Trees. We came to a Quaker's
Plantation; and all the Compliments my Guide used to him was only this, Friend,
I have brought along with me a shipwrecked Gentleman, who is going to Kakatan,
and desires a Lodging tonight; who was answered by our new Host, Friend, come
in; thou art welcome. And indeed he made his Words good, for we had plenty of
every thing, and a handsome Apartment to lie in, the best in the House. I was
very much pleased with his Conversation, for I found him a Man of a sound
Understanding.

In the Morning when I was going, I offered to pay him for what I had; but he
seemed much offended at my Proposition. Said he, My House is no Inn, and we see
Strangers so very seldom, that they are always welcome when they come; and God
forbid that I should lessen the Store of an unfortunate Man, like thy self. In
short, this is the Treatment I met with in my six Days Travel. Hospitality is
commendable in all Countries, and England was once famous for it, but it seems
at present banished to America. The third Day my Horse tumbled with me into a
deep Swamp, and I was not only in danger of drowning, but of having my Brains
dashed out with his Hoofs in his Floundering. I continued so long in this
Condition, that I gave my self up for lost; for my Guide could not come to
assist me, without being in the same Danger. At last, my Horse, with much
struggling, got Foot on firm Ground; by good Fortune I had got hold of the
Stirrup, and he drew me up with him, to the great Joy of my Guide, who gave me
for gone.

You must imagine I was not very easy in the rest of my Day's Journey, which I
was obliged to ride all covered with Water and Mud. But our Host, where we lay
at Night, got all my Things clean and dry by the time I rose in the Morning.

Our first four Days we traveled through vast Woods, without seeing any humane
Creature, but at the Plantations where we dined and supped; and our Stages were
very different, sometimes more than twenty Mile asunder, and at other times not
above seven. Monstrous Snakes I saw of different Kinds, but none attempted to
come near us till the fifth Day; when, as we were riding along, my Horse gave a
Start, and ran on with me five hundred Yards before I could stop him. I turned
about, and saw a Rattle-Snake, of a monstrous Bulk, spring at my Guide, who
happened at that time to be behind me; and it was very well he was, for if I
had been in his Place, I should certainly have met with Death, in not knowing
how to avoid it.

Their manner of springing upon any thing is this; they fold themselves up in
Rings, then clap their Tail to the Ground, and dart upon their Prey: But as
they are some time in doing it, a Person may avoid 'em, who knows their Manner.

There is but one Way to cure the Bite of these venomous Creatures, and that is
to apply immediately the Fundament of a Fowl to the Wound, and keep it there
till it be dead; which does not always happen. If the Fowl dies, there is Hope
of a Cure; but if it does not, all the Physicians in the World cannot help you.
My Guide told me, this was one of the largest he had ever seen. I believe it
was near six Yards in Length, and as thick as a lusty Man's Thigh. It is very
rare for 'em to come so near the Roads, but this being little frequented
perhaps was the Reason of it. The Rattle, which is in their Tail, makes an odd
Sort of a Noise. When I was at Philadelphia, a Gentleman showed me the Rattle.
It was about a Yard and a half long, in small Joints, covered with a thin
transparent Skin, like your white Gold-beater's Skin. They say they have a
Joint grows every Year; but I cannot tell who can prove it. The Rattle, as it
lay folded in my Hand, seemed so light that if I had not seen it there I could
not have perceived it by the Weight.

The last Day's Journey was one of the pleasantest I had ever traveled in my
Life, in a fine sweet Road, shaded by Trees for many Miles together, and
through 'em on each side, numerous Plantations, with a well cultivated Glebe.
The whole Prospect put me in Mind of the Vale of Evesham in England.

The sixth Night I lay at the Father's of my Guide, having one Day's Journey
more to reach Kakatan. Mr. Ratcliff, the Name of my Guide's Father, was Owner
of a handsome Plantation upon James River; and there were so many about it that
it looked like a little Town.

The next Day after my Arrival, being Sunday, there was a general Assembly of
the Brethren, and most of the Elders dined with Mr. Ratcliff. When Dinner was
served, they began in their usual manner with their long Graces, and when one
had made an end, another rose up to begin; but Mr. Ratcliff begged, upon my
Account, that they would for once abridge the Motion of the Spirit, and let it
take its full Scope for an After-Grace.

We had Notice from Kakatan, that the Fleet would not sail for some time; so I
staid with my friendly Quaker four Days, who treated me very generously. I
called for his Son to dismiss him back to the Governor, with the Horses: As I
was paying him the Money I agreed for, his Father coming in by Accident, was
very angry with him, and declared he would disown him for his Child if he took
a Penny. I was not at all pleased with the Refusal, for the poor Man had taken
a great deal of Pains with me; wherefore meeting by Chance with four Yards of
Muslin to be sold, I bought it, and made him a Present of it unknown to his
Father; though I had some Difficulty to make him accept of it, after what his
Father had said to him.

The fourth Day after my Arrival, we had Notice the Fleet would sail in a few
Days. This gave me a great deal of Uneasiness; for I could not get to Kakatan
without a Boat, and Mr. Ratcliff's was broke to Pieces some time before I came
there. But he seeing the Uneasiness I labored under, procured one: Yet another
Difficulty arose, we could not gain, even for Money, any Body to row us. Well,
said Mr. Ratcliff, since we have got a Boat, thou shall not be made uneasy for
want of People to work it, I and my Children will go along with thee.
Accordingly we set out, and arrived at Kakatan: But we were surpised not to
find above five Sail there, and one of 'em that Vessel that Capt. Bayley went
in; so I had the Satisfaction of getting my Things again.

Notwithstanding the Fleet's not being there, the Place was so full of People
in Expectation of it, that there was no Lodging to be had. I was not so much
concerned for my self as for my generous Quaker, who was to meet with such bad
Accommodation for his good Nature in accompanying me.

I met with a Gentleman bound for England, one Mr. Le Cruce, at present a
Wine-Merchant in St. Martin's Lane, who seeing the Shifts we were put to,
offered me half his Bed, which I accepted of for my Friendly Quaker, but I
could not prevail upon him to take it: therefore I lay with Mr. Le Cruce my
self, and Mr. Ratcliff with his Sons made what Shift they could upon the Ground.

It was the Report of every one, that the Fleet would not get together in four
Months, so I resolved to take a Trip to Philadelphia in the mean time.

I did not know how to fasten a Present upon Mr. Ratcliff for his Civility, for
he would not hear of any thing like it; but at last I found out this Method. I
bought a Runlet of Rum, a Thing very much in Esteem among the Planters, and I
begged Mr. Ratcliff to add to the Obligations I had already received from him,
by taking Charge of it and a Letter to one Mr. Randal, a Planter in his
Neighborhood. In the Letter I sent to Mr. Randal, was one enclosed for Mr.
Ratcliff, where I informed him the Rum was to him, only as a small
Acknowledgment for the many Obligations he had laid me under.

The next Day he and his Sons took their leave of me, even without taking any
thing for the Hire of the Boat, though I had bargained for it before I left the
Place.

The Vessel that was to carry me to Philadelphia was not cleared of her Lading,
therefore I was obliged to stay seven Days at Kakatan, which is no Place of
Resort but only once a Year, at the Time the Fleet makes up for England; so
there are not many Conveniences expected there.

The Day before I failed for Philadelphia, I received a Letter from my Friendly
Quaker, with a Present of a powdered Shote and several Turkies, which he sent
me by Water.

The Letter was as follows.

Friend Castelman,
I Received thy Present in a very particular manner; and though I am not very
easy about it, yet I give thee my Thanks, with a Promise of a grateful
Remembrance from me and mine. I pray thee to accept what I send thee as from a
real Friend; and I commit thee to God.

J. Ratcliff.


The Vessel had but one Cabin in it, which was taken up by a Woman-Passenger;
so that I was obliged to make shift to warp my self up in the Sail; and the
Spray of the Waves beating over us now and then, I had but a wet Lodging; and
though it was nothing to what I underwent before, yet I got more Cold by it. We
made so good Way that we got up to New Castle in Delaware River the second
Evening; and we prevailed upon the Master to stay there all Night, where I got
a good Lodging at a public House, being the first time I had paid for any
thing since my Shipwreck.

New Castle, the Capital of the County of New Castle, is a handsome well built
Town, standing upon an Eminence, which gives you a pleasant View from the River
Delaware. The Dutch were the first Founders, but did not possess it long. There
are now above 500 handsome Houses, and Foundations for several more. As it is
daily increasing in Wealth by Trade, we may imagine it will increase in
Buildings and Inhabitants. I have been informed they have discovered in the
Neighborhood of this Town a fine Iron Mine.

The Day following we dined at Chester, a little neat Town on the same River,
consisting of near three hundred Houses. We were very handsomely entertained
there by a Gentleman of the Place, who would accompany us to Philadelphia. We
had a pleasant Voyage, with many delightful Prospects of Towns, Villages, and
Plantations, on both sides of the River; and in the Evening we landed at
Philadelphia, the Capital of Pensylvania.

Pensylvania takes its Name from William Penn, Esquire Son to Sir William Penn,
Admiral of a Squadron in the Dutch War, where he behaved like a Man of Courage
and Conduct. His Son, the present Proprietor, met with some Difficulty in
obtaining his Patent, by reason he had declared himself Head of the People
called Quakers.

Pensylvania is composed of all that Tract of Land, with its Islands, Rivers,
Coasts, and Bays, which lies from forty to forty-five Degrees of North
Latitude, and is one of the richest Countries in his Majesty's foreign
Dominions.

The Air is pleasant, wholesome, and unclouded, or very rarely overcast. Though
the Winter is something colder, and the Summer hotter than in England, yet the
Inhabitants have known several Winters together without Frosts. The Day in the
Summer is two Hours shorter than ours, and in Winter two Hours longer; which is
really better for Business of all kinds. And certainly this is a Tract of
Ground as well seated as any in the World, for Pleasure and Profit. It is
bounded on the East by West-Jersey, on the West by Virginia, Canada on the
North, and Maryland on the South; all, except Canada, fine English Settlements.

The original Inhabitants of all these Places are supposed to be the ten Tribes
of the Jews that were scattered; but from whence they derive their Authority,
even for this Supposition, I cannot imagine. It Is true, some of the ancient
Jewish Customs are among the Indians; but as every Nation and People have
Customs peculiar to themselves, in my Opinion there is nothing to be gathered
from thence. It Is certain they have something of the Countenance of the Jews,
they observe New Moons, and offer their First Fruits to their Idols. They are
most of 'em well made, and exactly proportioned in their Features, without the
thick Lips and flat Noses of the Negroes. They are generally good natured and
inoffensive, slow to Anger, but hard to be appeased; a courteous and humane
Behavior will gain upon 'em more than Severity: It is very seldom they wrong a
good Master, but I have known 'em frequently venture their Lives for 'em. Their
Language is very lofty and high sounding, but not copious, for one Word has
several Meanings. I Will give you, from my Friend Mr. Thomas, a short Specimen.

Hodi hita nee huska apeechi, nee machi Pensylvania huska dogwachi keshow
apeechi nowa, huska hayly chetena koon peo.

Thus in English:

Farewell, my Friend. I shall go shortly to Pensylvania. We shall have a cold
Moon presently, and hard Frosts will soon follow.

They throw their Children into the Water as soon as born, to harden their
Bodies. The Business of the Men is to fish or hunt, and the Women to Till their
Ground, and look after their Children, who commonly go alone at nine Months.
They are most of them knowing in Botany; and if at any time visited with
Sickness, cure themselves by their Knowledge in Herbs and Roots. They are
exceeding charitable; and if any among 'em have the Misfortune to be lame or
blind, they take care they shall want for nothing. The Boys go a hunting or
fishing with the Father at six Years old; and when they are experienced in
both, and arrive to their sixteenth Year, they may marry. The Girls stay at
home with their Mother, who instructs them in her Business. The Women are very
modest and chaste, and you cannot affront them more than by saying any thing to
the contrary of either. Adultery is punished with Death among 'em.

Their Habitations are generally mean and small, and their Utensils a Pot, and
two or three Calabashes, with a Bowl; and when they travel, they lie in the
Woods about a Fire, to keep the wild Beasts from them. They are People of a
merry Disposition, continually laughing and singing, even at their Work. They
have some particular Songs among 'em, though but indifferent Tunes, and their
Instruments of Music are as poor. They are generally given to Sobriety; but if
they once get Liquor of the Europeans, they never give over till dead drunk;
and I have seen 'em lie in the middle of the Roads and Streets, like so many
Dogs. As Soon as ever they come to themselves, they plunge into the Water, and
gather some Herbs, squeeze 'em into a Calabash, which they drink; by which
Means they are recovered, and are never sick after their Debauches. Their Age
generally comes up to seventy, and very few to eighty. I have heard one Indian
speaking to another, when on his Deathbed, of the Uncertainty of this Life,
and how happy he should be in the Company of their God, where would be no want
of Corn, or Wood, or any Thing that was needful for him. But there is a great
Number instructed in the Christian Faith. There are Indian Schools to teach 'em
Writing as well as Reading; and most of 'em are very docile.

The Country of Pensylvania abounds with every thing necessary for the Life of
Man, even for the most luxurious.

The Woods afford fine Pigeons, Pheasants, Quails, Partridges, Woodcocks,
Snipes, wild Turkies, and various other Birds. About the Rivers, Geese, Ducks,
Swans, Teal, Diverse, Brands, etc. In the Rivers (generally a gravelly Bottom)
are to be found Herrings, Smelts, Roach, Dace, Eels, Perch, Salmon, Trout,
Gurnets, Shadds, Cats-heads, Sheeps-heads, and many more; with fine large
Oysters, preferable to any I ever tasted in England; and when any of these are
brought to Market, you may buy 'em very reasonably.

The Wood produce Cedar, Mulberry, Vines, (...) Ash, Chestnut, and the finest
(...) Ships. I am informed some of (...) have made Wine with Grapes (...)
Growth; but I have heard nothing in Commendation of it.

The Dutch were the first Foreigners that came to these Parts; but they made
but few Settlements; their chief Business was to trade with the Indians for
Skins, Furrs, etc. and give them in Exchange, Rum, Beer, and Sugar. The next
that appeared was a Colony from Sweden, who began to plant and manure the
Ground. The Dutch were offended at these Interlopers, as they called 'em, and
threatened to make War upon 'em; which was prevented by the Swedes surrendering
the Plantations to 'em, who returned home.

In the Dutch War, Sir Robert Carr made a Descent upon 'em, outed 'em quite,
and took Possession of it for the Crown of England in the Year 1666, and left a
Relation of his, of the same Name, as Governor; but the next Year the Dutch
got the Mastery again; and the few English that were there, settled themselves
in the other English Colonies, better provided with Defense against an Invader.

The Dutch remained Possessors of this pleasant Country till the Peace was
concluded between England and Holland, and then it was delivered once again to
the English; but no great Progress was made there till 1682, the Year after Mr.
Penn had gained the Patent for it. In less than a Year there were a hundred
Houses built, and formed into a Town, to which Mr. Penn gave the Name of
Philadelphia, (or Brotherly Love.) A Place for its Situation very agreeable,
seated high upon a Neck of Land, formed by two fine navigable Rivers, two
hundred Miles from the Sea; yet Ships of five hundred Ton can unlade on the Key.

The Country about it is rich, well watered and wooded; the Earth producing a
vast Increase. They reap their Corn about the Beginning of July.

The Gardens and Orchards yield all Roots, Fruits and Flowers we have in
England, and several peculiar only to the Country. The Air is so healthy that
there is no Occasion for Physicians, being they find Cures for their accidental
Diseases by Simples; and the People so peaceful, there is no want of a Lawyer
among them; and if any Difference happens, a third Person makes up the Matter,
without the Charge of a Lawsuit. This Country is divided into six Counties or
Divisions, and each County sends six Members to the Assembly at Philadelphia.
Chester 6; New Castle 6; Kent 6; Bucks 6; Sussex 6; and Philadelphia 6. All
these mentioned Places have Yearly Fairs, and Weekly Markets, being very
conveniently situated for Commerce with the Country about 'em.

They have excellent Copper Mines, which produce better Copper than any in
England, both for Color and Finess. Coal Mines have been lately found; and
several mineral Waters that perform the same Office as Bath, Tunbridge, or
Epsom. There is also found good Stone for Building, that proves handsome and
lasting, and another thin Stone which they Tile their Houses with, being much
neater than our English Tile. Also Loadstones, and the Salamander Stone, having
a Substance like Cotton in the Veins, which will not consume in the Fire.

The Woods produce Wolves, Panthers, Bears, Deer, Hares, Antelopes, Foxes,
Rackoons, Rabbets, Squirrels, Bevers, etc. whose Skins yield great Profit to
the Taker; and a Creature called a Possum, that has a false Belly into which
the young ones retire in time of Danger: Also the Flying-Squirrel, with Wings
like those of a Bat; and I have often seen it fly from Tree to Tree.

Red Deer, Buffalos, and Elks are common in the Woods, and delicious Food; but
they are generally purchased from the Indians, (though at a very reasonable Rate)
they being the People that best know how to hunt them. There is a Reward given
'em for killing a Bear or Wolf, which has very much lessened the Number of
both; though any Person has the Liberty to hunt, fish, or fowl, without being
molested. There Is also Plenty of Otters about the Rivers, and such a multitude
of Frogs in the Swamps A Swamp is much of the same kind as the Boggs in Ireland.
that they disturb you with their Croaking; especially the Bull-Frog, that
makes a Noise something like that Beast, and is the Base to all the others.

If the distressed People of England knew the Comforts of Pensylvania, and the
casy Means there is of a Livelihood, they would never stay where they are, in a
continual Scene of Want and Misery. Even the meanest Servant has better Wages
than those in England. If criminal Persons were sent over there, they would
find Employment, and yet be restrained in the Vices for which they were
punished: For a Thief there is to return Fourfold what he has stole; and if he
has not wherewithal to do that, he is compelled to work it out. But every thing
is in such Plenty there, they would have no Occasion to exercise their Talents
that Way.

Their Beef, Mutton, Pork, Lamb, Veal, etc. is equal to our Meat in England,
with which they trade to the Leeward-Islands, and bring in Return, Rum, Sugar,
Molossos, and Pieces of Eight. Their Horses are strong, handsome, and hardy,
and seldom feed on any thing but Grass; and after the hardest Day's Work, are
turned out hot into the Fields, yet get no Harm.

The Country produces great Numbers of Apple and Pear Trees, with which they
make great Quantities of Cider and Perry, that is very wholesome and well
tasted.

There are many large, beautiful, well built Towns in the Province of
Pensylvania, of which, as I said before, Philadelphia is the chief. It is a
noble, large, and populous City, standing on as much Ground as our English City
of Bristol, seated upon a Neck of Land formed by the Rivers Delaware and the
Schuylkill, both navigable many Leagues above the City. It is built square in
Form of a Chess-Board, with each Front facing one of the Rivers.

There are several Streets near two Mile long, as wide as Holborn, and better
built, after the English Manner. The chief are Broad-street, King Street, and
High Street, though there are several other handsome Streets that take their
Names from the Productions of the Country; as Mulberry, Walnut, Beech,
Sassafras, Cedar, Vine, Ash, and Chestnut Streets. From these Streets run great
Numbers of Courts, Yards, and Allies, with well built Houses in 'em. There are
several Coves and Docks where large Ships are built; and by a moderate
Computation, there has been launched from the Stocks of this City in forty
Year, near 300 Sail of Ships, besides Small-Craft, which may in some sort give
us an Idea of the Opulency of the Place. Many of their Merchants keep their
Coaches, and the Tradesmens Shops and Streets are well frequented. All
Religions are tolerated here, which is one Means to increase the Riches of the
Place. The People of the Church of England as by Law established, have a neat,
well built Church, founded in the Year 1695, and I am informed the Foundation
is laid for another. The Quakers (who are the major Part of the Inhabitants)
have several Meetings. There is a Swedish reformed Church, Mr. Rudman the
Incumbent, a Man of singular Learning and Piety; who is as much followed by the
Quakers, when he preaches, as the Protestants. I shall beg leave to give one
Instance of his Humility and Piety. When Subscriptions were taking in to build
the Church, he subscribed a considerable Sum; but when called upon for the
Money, he had it not in his Power to pay it; yet to keep his Word, he
contracted with the Master Builder for so much a day, to carry the Hod, till he
had worked his Subscription-Money out. This was an Instance of his Piety and
Zeal for Religion; and I fancy if Churches were to be built after the same
Manner in a certain Island, the Work would go but slowly on. There are single
Houses upon the Key that have cost 6000 l. the Building. Mr. Badcock's
Brewhouse is a noble, large Building, and has in it one single Vessel that will
hold eight Ton of Liquor.

In this City is held the Courts of the Province, and the Assembly meet here,
which is in the nature of a dependant Parliament, as in those Cities of France
that are distant from the Capital. There are three Fairs in the Year, and every
Week two Markets. In time of the Fairs the City is so thronged, as well as the
adjacent Plantations, that it is hard to find a Lodging.

The Government and Constitutions are the same as in England.

Their Council is composed of the Protestants and Quakers, but the Public
Officers are taken out of the former. The Governor is nominated by the King of
England, and the rest of the civil Officers are, Master of the Rolls, four
Judges, a Judge of the Admiralty, Secretary, Attorney General, Treasurer,
Public Register, Clerk of the Peace, as also a Commissary, and a
Survey-or-General. These, with eight Members of the Council, form the
Government of the City. The Number of the Inhabitants is generally supposed to
be upwards of 15000, besides Slaves. There is hardly any Trade in England but
the same may be met with in Philadelphia; and every Mechanic has better Wages;
a Journeyman Tailor has twelve Shillings a Week, besides his Board; and every
other Trade in Proportion has the same Advantage.

There is a Post Office lately erected, which goes to Boston in New England,
Charlestown in Carolina, and the other neighboring Places. The uncultivated
Ground, which is not grubb'd, sells for ten times the Value it did at first;
though there is none of that sort within ten Miles round the City: And that
within the Neighborhood that was sold for ten Pound at first, will fetch above
three hundred now. All Women's Work is very dear there, and that proceeds from
the smallness of the Number, and the Scarcity of Workers; for even the meanest
single Women marry well there, and being above Want are above Work. The
Proprietor of this fine Country (as I said before) is William Pen, Esquire who has
a sine Seat called Pensbury, built on three Islets, if I may so call 'em; for a
Branch of the River Delaware runs thrice round it. In his Orchards and Gardens
may be found all the Fruits, Roots, and Herbs that are in England, and many
more peculiar to the Country. There is very good Paper made in Pensylvania,
Linen, Druggets, Crapes, Camblets, and Serges, with which they trade. Most of
the Merchants, and some Tradesmen, have handsome Country Houses, well and
conveniently furnished. No Insults from the Indians were ever heard of here,
which is more than any of our other Plantations upon the Continent can say;
neither are there any of them used as Slaves, but they are paid as well as the
Europeans for their Commodities or Labor; and there are more Christians among
'em than in any other Nation in America, for their Number. Most of them bring
up their Children to read and write, and some of them are bound Apprentice to
the Europeans, who prove as good Workmen at the Business they follow as their
Masters. In short, in the midst of War they enjoy the Tranquillity of Peace.
They are too far distant from the Sea to fear the Invasion of a foreign Enemy,
and there are several Places of Strength upon the River of Delaware, before
they can arrive at Philadelphia. Yet when I was there, the Town was alarmed
with a false Report that the French had landed within the Bay, and committed
several Acts of Hostility. It was judged by some, that this Report was spread
abroad, on purpose to see how active the People would be to defend themselves,
and whether the Quakers were to be depended upon in case of an Invasion. The
Governor got at the Head of about 700 Men, and exhorted the Brethren to stand
up for the Defense of their Lives and Estates; but they declared the carnal
Weapon did not belong to them, yet they would retire and pray for us. The
People of the Town brought out their Provision and Liquor, and freely gave it
among the Soldiers, who made as free with it. Before Night, News came that it
was a false Alarm, which I believe did not displease any of us.

In the Heat of the Day I sometimes took a Walk with some of the Town to Fair
Mount, a pleasant Place shaded with Trees on the River Schuylkill. As we were
coming home one Day, deep in Discourse with one another, as I was stepping over
a Style, I saw stretched on the Ground before me a Snake, as I suppose asleep.
I had not Power to draw my Leg back again, but my Foot fell just upon the Head
and part of the Neck of the Reptile, more by the particular Direction of
Providence, than my Design. It sprung up so quick, and twisted round my Right
Leg and Body with such Force that I was in Fear of being strangled; however, I
kept my Foot fixed fast upon its Head, and in a little time it fell down dead.
It is almost impossible for Words to describe what I felt at this Accident; the
very Touch of it about my Leg and Body had very near taken away my Breath: and
it was the greatest Providence in the World I did not take my Foot from the
Head of the Snake; for if I had, it would certainly have bit me. It was a
considerable time before I could shake off my Apprehension, and I was downright
sick with the Fright the whole Day after. Some of my Companions had the
Curiosity to measure it: It was in Length two Yards nine Inches, and ten Inches
about from the Neck to within a Yard of the Tail. I remember very well, after
this Accident, whenever I had Occasion to cross a Style, in Pensylvania or Old
England, I ever took Care to look before me; so lasting is the Impression of
Fear and Danger upon the Minds of Men.

I continued at Philadelphia near four Months, and was very well entertained by
the Gentlemen of the Place: I am pleased I have it in my Power to pay 'em my
public Acknowledgment of Thanks for all their Favors; particularly the
Reverend Mr. Brooks, whom I met with by Chance at Philadelphia: His Business
there was to raise Subscriptions for a new Church near New York: When he heard
of my Misfortunes, he was so generous and charitable as to offer to lend me a
Sum of Money he had in his Hands, upon my bare Word only, which I was to return
to him from England by the Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts.
As I was not in want of it, I did not accept his intended Favor, but I shall
ever gratefully remember his kind Intentions.

I must not forget the many Obligations I had the Honor to receive from his
Excellency Governor Evans, nor Mr. Evans the Commissary, who was particularly
civil to me. These Gentlemen, though of the same Name, are no otherwise related
than by marrying the Daughters of Mr. Moor, the Collector of the King's
Customs. The Commissary is just gone for Philadelphia again, having been in
England near a Twelvemonth, about an Affair between the present Governor Sir
William Keith and him, relating to the King's Customs. Among the rest of my
Friends, I must not forget the facetious Mr. Staples, Dancing Master, who was
the first Stranger of Philadelphia that did me the Honor of a Visit, and to
his merry Company I owe the passing of many a dull Hour, that probably might
have lain heavy upon the Hands of a Man under my Circumstances, deprived of
Fortune, in a strange Country, having no Friends, in whose Power it was to
assist me, nearer than England; for Mr. Jones was too much involved in his own
troublesome Affairs at Bermuda, to expect any thing from him. But the
Generosity of the Philadelphians is rooted in their Natures; for it is the
greatest Crime among them not to show the utmost Civility to Strangers: And if
I were obliged to live out of my native Country, I should not be long puzzled
in finding a Place of Retirement, which should be Philadelphia. There the
oppressed in Fortune or Principles may find a happy Asylum, and drop quietly to
their Graves without Fear or Want.

In the Beginning of August, News arrived that the Fleet would be ready to sail
from Kakatan the latter End of the Month, so that I now began to bend my
Thoughts toward my native Country. I picked up at Philadelphia four more
Companions that intended the same Voyage; and August 5 we took leave of our
Friends, and the lovely City of Philadelphia, which I shall always remember
with the utmost Satisfaction. We hired a Boat to carry us down the Delaware,
and lay the first Night at a Planter's, an Acquaintance of one of my
Companions, who treated us with the usual Civilities of the Country. The next
Day we dined on Board our Boat, and at Night arrived at Lewis, about 50 Leagues
from Philadelphia, and 20 from the Sea. We staid here three Days. This Town is
the Capital of Sussex County, and is built upon the Hoorkill, a River that runs
into the Delaware. A little below begins the Bay of Delaware, which is formed
by Cape William and Cape James, this last is the utmost Bounds of Pensylvania.
While we staid here, I had the Curiosity to go into the Woods to see 'em gather
Honey, it being free for any one, which proceeds from its great Plenty; and you
may buy the best Beeswax at Philadelphia for four Pence a Pound. At Lewis we
had some of the largest Oysters and Cockles I ever saw in my Life; some of the
former were six Inches Diameter out of the Shell, and very well tasted. At this
Place they make a rich Soup, composed of these, and other Shellfish, which is
very nourishing and palatable. From Lewis we were to walk over an Isthmus of
eight Mile, that parts Delaware River, and Chesapeak Bay, which would save us
three or four Days Sailing, for we had Notice of a Ship called the Globe, a new
Vessel of near five hundred Ton, and twenty-four Guns, that was at Kakatan, and
would be willing to receive Passengers. We set out from Lewis with Horses to
carry what little Baggage we had, but we chose to walk it on Foot our selves.
We dined at a pleasant Plantation about the midway of our Journey, but found
it a difficult matter to prevail upon a Couple of young Girls to come near us
at first, for they took us for Privateers; but at last we prevailed upon 'em,
and they called their Father, etc. who made very much of us. One of the Girls
perceiving I had a Watch in my Hand to see what time of Day it was, begged to
look upon it; but it was very pleasant to see her Fear, when she touched it,
and would not be persuaded but it was alive, from its going and the Noise it
made. I asked her if she had never seen or heard of a Watch before. She told me
she had never seen one, but her Sister had read of 'em. I only mention this to
show the Simplicity and Innocence of those Inhabitants of America, that live
retired in the Country; for they told me they had neither of 'em been four Mile
from their own House in their Lives.

We took Leave of our Planter and his Family, and got that Night to a
Plantation on Chesapeak Bay, where we lay all Night, and were well entertained.
The next Day we set about getting a Boat to carry us to Kakatan; but we met
with a great deal of Difficulty in procuring one, and were three Days before we
could succeed; but at last we got one by Accident, that was coming up the Bay.
We got on Board, and arrived at Kakatan the same Evening. Kakatan is no more
than a large Cove, where all the Fleet rendezvous in order to set Sail for
England. There are some few Houses scattered up and down the Bay, which go at
great Rates upon this Occasion. It lies about ten Leagues up the River of
Chesapeak; which River divides Virginia and Maryland. It is the greatest River
upon the Continent in the English Dominions, and the farthest navigable up in
the Country; and many other Rivers fall into it. We inquired for the Globe, and
soon agreed with the Captain for his great Cabin, at a reasonable Rate, and he
seemed pleased with his Company. We provided what little Necessaries we wanted,
as some fresh Provisions, Liquor, etc. and on Sept. 4. the Commadore hung out
the Signal for Sailing.

I thought it was a noble Sight to see so many Ships under Sail all together.
There were upwards of two hundred Sail of Merchantmen, besides four Sail of
Men of War for our Convoy.

We drove down the River, and at Night got over against the Virginia Capes,
Cape Henry and Cape Charles, which form the Mouth of Chesapeak Bay. The next
Day we left the main Land astern, and we had Orders from the Commadore to
spread our selves, for fear we should fall foul of each other in the Night. We
continued sailing several Days together with a prosperous Gale. Sept. 28, the
Skies threatened us with a Storm; we reev'd our Sails in Expectation of it, but
it blew so violently at last that we were obliged to lie under a reeft
Foresail; and it was well we had a good stout Ship under us, or we had
perished. Our Fleet was soon scattered, and we saw several of them sink in
View, with their whole Crew; and it was not in the Power of the other Ships to
succor 'em. I now began to think I should be buried in the Deep, though our
Captain always gave us great Hopes in the Goodness and Strength of the Ship;
for she was well rigged and fitted, it being her first Voyage. We were terribly
tossed all Night, and when the Morning dawned, we could not perceive one of the
Fleet; so we were obliged to sail alone, which gave me many melancholy
Reflections: However, we had this to comfort us, that the Storm was abated; and
the next Day, to my great Joy, we discovered forty of our scattered Fleet, and
one Man of War. When we could come within Hailing, we received a dismal Account
of the Loss of above thirty of the Fleet, that foundered at Sea. Some of the
Men were saved, as also part of the Cargo of seven or eight, but the rest went
to the Bottom.

One Reason of the Weakness of the Ships was their being unsheathed; and
staying four Months beyond their usual Time, the Worms had got into their
Bottoms.

We sailed together with a fair Wind till we came upon the Coast of France, and
then we had the Misfortune of being dispersed in the Night; and our Danger was
the greater in being so near an Enemy's Country. The next Day we perceived a
Sail making up to us: We soon discovered it was a French Privateer. There were
three Ships of us in Company: we got together to consult, and at last it was
agreed to prepare for the Fight, though in a very poor Condition for an
Engagement. Some of the Sailors advised us to meet 'em, which Advice was taken.
We immediately crowded all the Sail we could, and got our Hands upon Deck,
Passengers and all; and having the Wind of 'em, we bore down upon 'em, which
had the desired Effect; for as soon as they perceived us chasing 'em, they made
all the Sail they could to get from us, and in a little time got out of our
Sight. We were very well pleased with our Stratagem, and continued our Course.

November 3, we discovered England, whose Chalky Cliffs gave us all a vast
Delight. We coasted along the Channel with the pleasing Hopes of once more
fetting our Feet upon our native Country; and Nov. 7. we got safe into Deal
Harbor. We staid there but one Night, and hired Horses to go to Canterbury;
from whence we took a Coach to Gravesend, and the next Day went in the
Passage-Boat to London. As we were going up the River, a Ship outward-bound
came so suddenly upon us, that we were in the utmost Danger of being run over.
Most of the Passengers got up, ready to lay hold of the Tackling of the Ship to
save themselves; but by Providence, she mist us by about two Inches. This put
me in Mind of the Uncertainty of Human Life, and that a Man may meet with
Death, when he imagines himself past all Danger.

I landed at London, Nov. 15, 1710. I gave God Thanks for his many and signal
Mercies, where I hope I am settled for the Remnant of my Life, without trusting
my self any more to the Dangers of the tempestuous Sea.

FINIS.

