map of author's voyage round the world A MAP OF THE WORLD Showing the Course
of MR. DAMPIERS Voyage Round it: From 1679. to 1691.


A New Voyage ROUND THE WORLD.

Describing particularly, The Isthmus of America, several Coasts and Islands in
the West Indies, the Isles of Cape Verd, the Passage by Terra del Fuego, the
South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico; the Isle of Guam one of the
Ladrones, Mindanao, and other Philippine and East India Islands near Cambodia,
China, Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc. New Holland, Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the
Cape of Good Hope, and Santa Hellena. THEIR Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants,
Fruits, Animals, and Inhabitants. THEIR Customs, Religion, Government, Trade,
etc.


VOL. I.

By Captain William Dampier.

Illustrated with Particular Maps and Draughts.

The Fifth Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St Paul's Churchyard. 1703.

To the Right Honorable Charles Mountague, Esquire President of the Royal Society,
One of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, etc.
SIR,
MAY it please you to pardon the Boldness of a Stranger to your Person, if upon
the encouragement of Common Fame, he presumes so much upon your Candor, as to
lay before you this Account of his Travels. As the Scene of them is not only
Remote, but for the most part little frequented also, so there may be some
things in them new even to you; and some possibly not altogether unuseful to
the Public: And that just Veneration which the World pays, as to your General
Worth, so especially to that Zeal for the advancement of Knowledge, and the
Interest of your Country, which you express upon all occasions, gives you a
particular Right to whatever may any way tend to the promoting these Interests,
as an Offering due to your Merit. I have not so much of the vanity of a
Traveller, as to be fond of telling Stories, especially of this kind; nor can I
think this plain piece of mine, deserves a place among your more Curious
Collections: much less have I the Arrogance to use your Name by way of
Patronage for the too obvious faults, both of the Author and the Work. Yet dare
I avow, according to my narrow sphere and poor abilities, a hearty Zeal for the
promoting of useful knowledge, and of any thing that may never so remotely tend
to my Countries advantage: And I must own that Ambition of transmitting to the
public through your hands, these Essays I have made toward those great ends,
of which you are so deservedly esteemed the Patron. This has been my design in
this publication, being desirous to bring in my Gleaning, here and there in
Remote Regions, to that general Magazine of the knowledge of Foreign Parts,
which the Royal Society thought you most worthy the Custody of, when they chose
you for their President: and if in perusing these Papers, your Goodness shall
so far distinguish the Experience of the Author from his Faults as to judge him
capable of serving his Country, either immediately, or by serving you, he will
endeavor by some real proofs to show himself,

SIR, Your Most Faithful, Devoted, Humble Servant, W. Dampier.

THE PREFACE.
BEfore the Reader proceed any further in the perusal of this Work, I must
bespeak a little of his Patience here, to take along with him this short
account of it. It is composed of a mixed relation of Places and Actions, In the
same order of time in which they occurred: for which end I kept a Journal of
every days Observation.

In the description of Places, their Product, etc. I have endeavored to give
what satisfaction I could to my Countrymen; tho possibly with the describing
several things that may have been much better accounted for by others: Choosing
to be more particular than might be needful, with respect to the intelligent
Reader, rather than to omit what I thought might tend to the information of
persons no less sensible and inquisitive, tho not so Learned or Experienced.
For which reason, my chief care has been to be as particular as war consistent
with my intended brevity, insetting down such Observables as I met with: Nor
have I given my self any great trouble since my return to compare my
discoveries with those of others: The rather, because, should it so happen,
that I have described some places or things which others have done before me,
yet i^ different accounts, even of the same things, it canhardly be but there
will be some new light afforded by each of (...). But after all, considering
that the main of this Voyage has its Scene laid in long Tracts of the Remoter
parts has of the East and West Indies, some of which very seldom visited by
English men, and others as rarely by any Europeans, I may without vanity
encourage the Reader to expect many things wholly new to him, and many others
more fully described than be may have seen elsewhere; for which not only this
Voyage, tho it self of many years continuance, but also several former long and
distant ones have qualified me.

As for the Actions of the Company, among whom I made the greatest part of this
Voyage, a Thread of which I have carried on through it, it is not to divert the
Reader with them that I mention them, much less that I take any pleasure in
relating them: but for methods sake, and for the Readers satisfaction; who
could not so well acquiesce in my description of Places, etc. without knowing
the particular Traverses I made among them; nor in these, without an account of
the Concomitant Circumstances. Besides that, I would not prejudice the truth
and sincerity of my Relation, tho by omissions only. And as for the Traverses
themselves they make for the Readers advantage, how little soever sor mine;
since thereby I have been the better enabled to gratify his Curiosity; as one
who rambles about a Country can give usually a better account of it, than a
Carrier who jogs on to his Inn, without ever going out of his Road.

As to my Style, it cannot be expected, that a Seaman should affect Politeness;
for were I able to do it, yet I think I should be little sollicitous about it,
in a work of this Nature. I have frequently indeed divested my self of Sea
Phrases, to gratify the Land Reader; for which the Seamen will hardly forgive
me: And yet possibly I shall not seem Complaisant enough to the other, because
I still retain the use of so many Sea terms. I consess I have not been at all
scrupulous in this matter, either as to the one or the other of these; for I am
persuaded, that if what I say be intellig^ (...) matters not greatly in what
words it is expressed.

For the same reason I have not been curious art the spelling of the Names of
Places, Plants, Fruits, Animals, etc. which in many of the remoter parts are
given at the pleasure of Travelers, and vary according to their different
Humors: Neither have I confined my self to such Names as are given by Learned
Authors, or so much as enquired after many of them. I write for my Countrymen,
and have therefore for the most part used such Names as are familiar to our
English Seamen, and those of our Colonies abroad, yet without neglecting others
that occurred. As it may suffice me to have given such Names and Descriptions
as I could, I shall leave to those of more leisure and opportunity, the trouble
of comparing them with those which other Authors have assigned.

The Reader will find as he goes along, some References to an Appendix, which I
once designed to this Book; as to a Chapter about the Winds in di^ferent parts
of the World, to a description of the Bay of Campeachy in the West Indies,
where I lived long in a former Voyage; and to a particular Chorographical
description of all the South Sea Coast of America, partly from a Spanish MSS,
and partly from my own and other Travelers Observations, beside those
contained in this Book. But such an Appendix would have swelled it too
unreasonably: and therefore I chose rather to publish it hereafter by its self,
as opportunity shall serve. And the same must be said also to a particular
Voyage from Achin in the Isle of Sumatra, to Tonquin, Malacca, etc. which
should have been inserted as part of this General one; but it would have been
too long; and therefore omitting it for the present, I have carried on this,
next way from Sumatra to England; and so made the Tour of the World,
correspondent to the Title.

For the better apprehending the Course of the Voyage, and the Situation of the
Places mentioned in it, I have caused several Maps to be engraven, and some
particular Draughts of my own Composure. Among them, there is in the Map of the
American Isthmus, a new Scheme of the adjoining Bay of Panama and its Islands,
which to some may seem superfluous after that which Mr Ringrose has published
in the History of the Buccaneers; and which he offers as a very exact Draught.
I must needs disagree with him in that, and doubt not but this which I here
publish will be found more agreeable to that Bay, by any who shall have
opportunity to examine it; for it is a contraction of a larger Map, which I
took from several Stations in the Bay it self. The Reader may judge how well I
was able to do it, by my several Traverses about it mentioned in this Book;
those particularly, which are described in the 7th Chapter, which I have caused
to be marked out with a pricked Line: as the Course of my Voyage is generally
in all the Maps, for the Readers more easy tracing it.

I have nothing more to add, but that there are here and there some mistakes
made, as to expression and the like, which will need a favorable Correction as
they occur upon reading. For instance, the Log of Wood lying out at some
distance from the sides of the Boats described at Guam, and parallel to their
Keel, which for distinctions sake, I have called the little Boat^ might more
clearly and properly have been called the side Log, or by some such name; for
though f^ned at the bottom and ends Boatwise, yet is not hollow at top, but
solid throughout. In other places also I may not have ex^ress'd my self so
fully as I ought; but any considerable Omissi^n that I shall recollect, or be
informed of, I shall endeavor to make it up in those Accounts I have yet to
publish; and for any faults, I leave the Reader to the j^int use of his
Judgment and Candor.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, containing the Authors departure from England, into the West
Indies and the South Seas, to the time of his leaving Captain Sharp. Chap. I.
His return out of the South Seas, to his Landing at the Isthums of America. II.
His return by Land over the Isthmus. III. His Traverses among the West India
Islands and Coasts, and Arrival in Virginia. IV. His departure for the South
Seas again; his touching at the Islands of Cape Verd, and the African Coast,
and Arrival at the Isle of John Fernando in the South Seas. V. His Course
thence Northward, to the Isles Lobos, and Gallapagos, to Caldera Bay, Reo Leja,
and Amapalla, in the K. of Mexico. VI. He goes back toward Peru, to the Isle
Plata, Point Santa Hellena, Manta, Paita, Lobos, Puna, Guiaquil, and Plata
again. VII. His Progress Northward again to the R Saint Jago, Tomacco, the Isle
of Galleo, I. Gorgonia, the Pearl Isles, etc. in the Bay of Panama. VIII. He
proceeds along the Mexican Coast, to the Keys of Quibo, Rea Lejo, and the
Harbor of Guatulco. IX. He Coasts along to Acapula, Petaplan, Estapa, Colima,
Sallagua, Cape Corrientes: thence to the Isle of Chametly, Bay of Valderas,
Isles of Pon tique, other Isles of Chametly; Massaclan, Rosario, R. Saint Jago,
Santa Pecaque; Isles of Santa Maria, Valderas, and Cape Corrientes, again. X.
He stands over the Southern Ocean for the East Indies, and arrives at Guam, one
of the Ladrone Isles. XI. His arrival at Mindanao, one of the Philippine
Islands; and its Natural State. XII. The Political State of Mindanao. XIII.
Occurrences during the Authors stay at Mindanao. XIV. He departs toward
Manila, in the Isle of Luconia; touching at Bat Island, and the Isle of
Mindora, and leaving Luconia, he goes to Pulo Condore, on the Coast of
Cambodia, to Pulo Uby, in the Bay of Siam, and to Pulo Condore again. XV. He
goes to the I. of St John on the Coast of China, to the Isles of Piscadores
near Formosa; and the Bashee, or 5 Islands, between Formosa and Luconia, called
Orange, Monmouth, Grafton, Bashee, and Goat Isles. XVI. He Coasts along the
East side 'of Luconia, Mindanao. and other of the Philippines: and touching at
the I. Celebes, and Callasusung in the I. of Bouton, he arrives at New Holland.
XVII. I Will goes thence, touches at the I. Triste, and another; and steering
along the West Coast of Sumatra, arrives at the I. of Nicobar, where he stays
ashore and the Ship departs. XVIII. He stands over from thence in an open Boat
to Passange Jonca; and thence to Achin; and after several Traverses come to
Bencouli, all on the I. of Sumatra. XIX. He Ships himself for England, and
arrives at the Cap: of Good Hope. XX. His departure thence to the I. Santa
Hellena, and Arrival in the Downs.


Mr William Dampier's VOYAGE ROUND THE Terrestrial Globe.
The Introduction.
The Authors Departure from England, and arrival in Jamaica. His first going
over the Isthmus of America into the South Seas: His coasting along Peru and
Chili, and back again, to his parting with Captain Sharp near the Isle of
Plata, in order to return over Land.

England on this Voyage, at the beginning of the year 16^ in the Loyal Merchant
of (...) for Jamaica, Captain Knapman Commander. I went a Passenger, designing
when I came thither, to go from thence to the Bay of Campeachy, in the Gulf of
Mexico, to cut Log-wood: where in a former Voyage I had spent about three years
in that employ; and so was well accquainted with the place and the work.

We sailed with a prosperous gale without any impediment, or remarkable passage
in our Voyage: unless that when we came in sight of the Island Hispaniola, and
were coasting along on the South side of it, by the little Isles of Vacca or
Ash, I observed Captain Knapman was more vigilant than ordinary, keeping at a
good distance off shore, for fear of coming too near those small low slands; as
he did once in a Voyage from England, about the year 1673, losing his Ship
there, by the carelessness of his Mates. But we succeeded better; and arrived
safe at Port Royol in Jamaica some time in April 1679, and went immediately
ashore.

I had brought some goods with me from England, which I intended to sell here,
and stock my self with Rum and Sugar, Saws, Axes, Hats, Stockings, Shoes, and
such other Commodities, as I knew would sell among the Campeachy
Log-woodcutters. Accordingly I sold my English Cargo at Port Royal; but upon
some maturer considerations of my intended Voyage to Campeachy, I changed my
thoughts of that design, and continued at Jamaica all that year, in expectation
of some other business.

I shall not trouble the Reader with my Observations at that Isle, so well
known to English men: nor with the particulars of my own Affairs during my stay
there. But in short, having there made a purchase of a small Estate in
Dorsetshire, near my Native Country of Somerset, of one whose Title of it I was
well assured of; I was just embarking my self for England about Christmas 1679,
when one Mr Hobby invited me to go first a short Trading Voyage to the Country
of the Moskito's, of whom I shall speak in my first Chapter. I was willing to
get up some Money before my return, having laid out what I had at Jamaica; so I
sent the VVriting of my new Purchase along with the same Friends whom I should
have accompanied to England, and went on board Mr Hobby.

Soon after our setting out we came to an anchor again in Negril Bay, at the
West end of Jamaica; but finding there Captain Soxon, Sawkings, Sharp, and
other Privateers, Mr Hobby's men all left him to go with them, upon an
expedition they had contrived, leaving not one with him beside my self; and
being thus left alone, after 3 or 4 days stay with Mr Hobby, I was the more
easily persuaded to go with them too.

Christmas 1679, when we set out. The first expedition was to Portobel; which
being accomplished, it was resolved to march by Land over the Isthmus of
Darien, upon some new Adventures in the South Seas. Accordingly on the 5th of
April 1680, we went ashore on the Isthumus, near Golden Island, one of the
Sambaloes, to the number of between 3 and 400 men, carrying with us such
Provisions as were necessary, and Toys wherewith to gratify the Wild Indians,
through whose Country we were to pass. In about nine days march we arrived at
Santa Maria, and took it, and after a stay there of about three days, we went
on to the South Sea Coast, and there embarked our selves in such Canoas and
Periago's, as our Indian friends furnished us withal. We were in sight of
Panama by the 23d of April, and having in vain attempted Puebla Nova, before
which Sawkings, then Commander in chief, and others were killed, we made some
stay at the Neighboring Isles of Quibo.

Here we resolved to change our course, and stand away to the Southward of the
Coast of Peru. Accordingly we left the Keys or Isles of Quibo the 6th of June,
and spent the rest of the year in that Southern course; for touching at the
Isles of Gorgonia and Plata, we came to Ylo, a small Town on the Coast of Peru,
and took it. This was in October, and in November we went thence to Coquimbo on
the same Coast, and about Christmas were got as far as the Isle of John
Fernando, which was the farthest of our Course to the Southward.

Christmas we went back again to the Northward, having a design upon Arica, a
strong Town advantageously situated in the hollow of the Elbow, or bending of
the Peruviam Coast. But being there repulsed with great loss, we continued our
course Northward, till by the middle of April we were come in sight of the Isle
of Plata, a little Southward to the Equinoxial Line.

I have related this part of my Voyage thus summarily and concisely, as well
because the World has accounts of it already, in the relations that Mr
Ringrose and others have given of Capt. Sharp's Expedition, who was made chief
Commander, upon Sawking's being killed; as also, because in the prosecution of
this Voyage I shall come to speak of these parts again, upon occasion of my
going the second time into the South Seas: and shall there describe at large
the places both of the North and South America, as they occurred to me. And for
this reason, that I might ^void needless Repetitions, and hasten to such
particulars, as the Public has hitherto had no account of, I have chosen to
comprize the Relation of my Voyage hitherto, in this short compass, and place
it as an Introduction before the rest, that the Reader may the better perceive
where I mean to begin to be particular; for there I have placed the Title of my
first Chapter.

All therefore that I have to add to the Introduction is this; That while we
lay at the Isle of John Fernando, Captain Sharp was by general consent
displaced from being Commander; the Company being not satisfied either with his
Courage or Behavior. In his stead Captain Watling was advanced: but he being
killed shortly after before Arica, we were without a Commander during all the
rest of our return toward Plata. Now Watling being killed, a great number of
the meaner sort began to be as earnest for choosing Captain Sharp again into
the vacancy, as before they had been as forward as any to turn him out: And on
the other side, the abler and more experienced men, being altogether
dissatisfied with Sharp's former Conduct, would by no means consent to have him
chosen. In short, by that time we were come in sight of the Island Plata, the
difference between the contending Parties was grown so high, that they resolved
to part Companies; having first made an Agreement, that which Party soever
should upon Polling appear to have the majority, they should keep the Ship: And
the other should content themselves with the Launch or Longboat, and Canoas,
and return back over the Isthmus, or go to seek their fortune other ways, as
they would.

Accordingly we put it to the Vote; and upon dividing, Captain Sharp's party
carried it. I, who had never been pleased with his management, tho I had
hitherto kept my mind to my self, now declared my self on the side of those
that were Outvoted; and according to our agreement, we took our shares of such
Necessaries as were fit to carry over Land with us, (for that was our
Resolution:) and so prepared for our Departure.

map of the north coast of the Isthmus of America [Panama] The North Sea Coast
of the Isthmus of AMERICA to the west of Portobel
map of the south coast of the Isthmus of America [Panama] The South Sea Coast
of the Isthmus of AMERICA to the west of Panama
map of the Isthmus of Darien and the Bay of Panama A Map of the ISTHMUS of
DARIEN, and Bay of PANAMA


THE TRAVELS OF Mr. William Dampier.
CHAP. I.
An Account of the Authors Return out of the South Sea, to his Landing near
Cape St Lawrence, in the Isthmus of Darien: With an Occasional Description of
the Moskito Indians.

APril the 17th 1681. about Ten a Clock in the morning, being 12 Leagues N. W.
from the Island Plata, we left Captain Sharp and those who were willing to go
with him in the Ship, and embarked into our Lanch and Canoas, designing for the
River of Santa Maria, in the Gulf of St Michael, which is about 200 leagues
from the Isle of Plata. We were in number 44 white Men who bore Arms, a Spanish
Indian, who bore Arms also: and two Moskito Indians, who always bear Arms
amongst the Privateers, and are much valued by them for striking Fish and
Turtle, or Tortoise and Manatee or Sea Cow; and five Slaves taken in the South
Sas, who fell to our share.

The Craft which carried us was a Lanch, or Long Boat, one Canoa, and another
Canoa which had been sawn asunder in the middle, in order to have made Bumkins,
or Vessels for carrying water, if we had not separated from our Ship. This we
joined together again and made it tight; providing Sails to help us along: And
for 3 days before we parted, we sifted so much Flower as we could well carry,
and rubbed up 20 or 30 pound of Chocolate with Sugar to sweeten it; these
things and a Kettle the Slaves carried also on their backs after we landed. And
because there were some who designed to go with us that we knew were not well
able to march, we gave out, that if any man faultred in the Journey over Land,
he must expect to be shot to death; for we knew that the Spaniards would soon
b^ after us, and one man falling into their hands might be the ruin of us all,
by giving an account of our strength and condition: yet this would not de'er
'em from going with us. We had but little Wind when we parted from the Ship;
but before 12 a clock the Sea-breeze came in strong which was like to founder
us before we got in with the shore; for our security therefore, we cut up an
old dry Hide that we brought with us, and barricadoed the Lanch all round with
it to keep the water out. About 10 a clock at night we got in about 7 leagues
to windward of Cape Passao under the Line, and then it proved calm; and we lay
and drove all night, being fatigued the preceding day. The 18th day we had
little wind till the afternoon; and then we made sail, standing along the shore
to the Northward, having the wind at S. S. W. and fair weather.

At 7 a clock we came abrest of Cape Passao, and found a small Bark at an
Anchor in a small Bay to Leeward of the Cape, which we took, our own Boats
being too small to transport us. We took her just under the Equinoctial Line;
she was not only a help to us, but in taking her we were safe from being
described: we did not design to have meddled with any when we parted with our
consorts, nor to have seen any if we could have helped it. The Bark came from
Gallio laden with Timber, and was bound for Guiaquil.

The 19th day in the morning we came to an anchor about 12 leagues to the
Southward of Cape St Francisco, to put our new Bark into a better trim. In 3 or
4 hours time we finished our business, and came to sail again, and steered
along the Coast with the Wind at S. S. W. intending to touch at Gorgonia.

Being to the Northward of Cape St Francisco we met with very wet weather; but
the Wind continuing we arrived at Gorgonia the 24th day in the morning, before
it was light; we were afraid to approach it in the day time, for fear the
Spaniards should lie there for us, it being the place where we careened lately,
and where they might expect us.

When we came ashore we found the Spaniards had been there to seek after us, by
a House they had built, which would entertain 100 Men, and by a great Cross
before the Doors. This was token enough that the Spaniards did expect us this
day again; therefore we examined our Prisoners if they knew any thing of it,
who confessed they had heard of a Pereago, (or a large Canoa) that rowed with
14 Oars, which was kept on the River on the Main, and once in 2 or 3 days came
over to Gorgonia purposely to see for us, and that having discovered us, she
was to make all speed to Panama with the News; where they had 3 Ships ready to
send after us.

We lay here all the day, and scrubb'd our new Bark, that if ever we should be
chased we might the better escape: we filled our Water, and in the evening went
from thence, having the Wind at S. W. a brisk gale.

The 25th day we had much Wind and Rain, and we lost the Canoa that had been
cut and was joined together; we would have kept all our Canoas to carry us up
the River, the Bark not being so convenient.

The 27th day we went from thence with a moderate gale of Wind at S W. In the
afternoon we had excessive showers of Rain.

The 28th day was very wet all the morning; betwixt 10 or 11 it cleared up, and
we saw two great Ships about a league and half to the Westward of us, we being
then two leagues from the shore, and about 10 leagues to the Southward of point
Garrachina. These Ships had been cruising between Gorgonia and the Gulf 6
months; but whether our Prisoners did know it I cannot tell.

We presently furled our Sails, and rowed in close under the shore, knowing
that they were Cruisers; for if they had been bound to Panama this Wind would
have carried them thither; and no Ships bound from Panama come on this side the
Bay, but keep the North side of the Bay till as far as the Keys of Quibo to the
Westward; and then if they are bound to the Southward they stand over and ^ay
setch Gallco, or betwixt it and Cape St. Francisco.

The Glare did not continue long before it rained again, and kept us from the
sight of each other: but if they had seen and chaced us, we were resolved to
run our Bark and Canoas ashore, and take our selves to the Mountains and travel
over Land; for we knew that the Indians which lived in these parts never had
any Commerce with the Spaniards; so we might have had a chance for our Lives.

The 29th day, at 9 a clock in the morning, we came to an Anchor at Point
Garrachina, about 7 leagues from the Gulf of St Michael, which was the place
were we first come into the South Seas, and the way by which we designed to
return.

Here we lay all the day, and went ashore and dried our Clothes, cleaned our
Guns, dried our Ammunition, and fixed our selves against our Enemies, if we
should be attacked; for we did expect to find some opposition at Landing: we
likewise kept a good Look-out all the day, for fear of those two Ships they saw
the day before.

The 30th day in the morning at 8 a Clock we came into the Gulf of St Michael's
mouth; for we put from Point Garrachina in the Evening, designing to have
reached the Islands in the Gulf before day; that we might the better work our
escape from our Enemies, if we should find any of them waiting to stop our
passage.

About 9 a clock we came to an Anchor a mile without a large Island, which lies
4 miles from the mouth of the River; we had other small Islands without us, and
might have gone up into the River, having a strong tide of flood, but would not
adventure farther till we had looked well about us.

We immediately sent a Canoa ashore on the Island, where we saw (what we always
feared) a Ship at the mouth of the River, lying close by the shore, and a large
Tent by it, by which we found it would be a hard task for us to escape them.

When the Canoa came aboard with this news, some of our men were a little
disheartened; but it was no more than I ever expected.

Our care was now to get safe over land, seeing we could not land here
according to our desire: Therefore before the Tide of flood was spent, we
manned our Canoa and rowed again to the Island to see if the Enemy was yet in
motion. When we came ashore we dispersed our selves all over the Island, to
prevent our Enemies from coming any way to view us: and presently after
high water we saw a small Canoa coming over from the Ship to the Island that we
were on, which made us all get into our Canoa, and wait their coming; and we
lay close till they came within Pistol-shot of us, and then being ready, we
started out and took them; there were in her one white man and two Indians, who
being examined, told us that the Ship which we saw at the Rivers mouth, had
lain there six months, guarding the River, waiting for our coming; that she had
12 Guns and 150 Seamen and Soldiers; that the Seamen all lay aboard, but the
Soldiers lay ashore in their Tents; that there were 300 men in the Mines, who
had all small Arms, and would be abroad in two Tides time; they likewise told
us, that there were two Ships cruising in the Bay, between this place and
Gorgonia; the biggest had 20 Guns, and 200 Men, the other 10 Guns, and 150 Men:
Besides all this, they told us that the Indians on this side the Country were
our Enemies, which was the worst news of all. However we presently brought
these Prisoners aboard, and got under sail, turning out with the Tide of Ebb,
for it was not convenient to stay longer there.

We did not long consider what to do, but intended to land that night, or the
next day betimes; for we did not question but we should either get a good
commerce with the Indians, by such toys as we had purposely brought with us, or
else force our way through their Country, in spite of all their opposition:
and we did not fear what these Spaniards could do against us, in case they
should land and come after us. We had a strong Southerly Wind, which blew right
in; and the Tide of Ebb being far spent, we could not turn out.

I persuaded them to run into the River of Congo which is a large River, about
three leagues from the Islands where we lay; which with a Southerly Wind we
could have done: and when we were got so high as the Tide flows, then we might
have landed. But all the arguments I could use were not of force sufficient to
convince them that there was a large River so near us, but they would land
somewhere, they neither did know how, where, nor when.

When we had rowed and towed against the wind all night; we just got about Cape
St. Lorenzo in the morning, and sailed about 4 miles farther to the Westward,
and run into a small Creek within two Keys, or little Islands, and rowed up to
the head of the Creek, being about a mile up, and there we landed May 1. 1681.

We got out all our Provision and Clothes, and then sunk our Vessel.

While we were landing, and fixing our Snapsacks to march, our Moskito Indians
struck a plentiful dish of Fish, which we immediately dressed, and therewith
satisfied our hunger.

Having made mention of the Moskito Indians, it may not be amiss to conclude
this Chapter with a short account of them. They are tall, well made, raw boned,
lusty, strong, and nimble of foot, long visaged, lank black hair, look stern,
hard favored, and of a dark Copper-colour Complexion. They are but a small
Nation or Family, and not 100 men of them in number, inhabiting on the Main, on
the North side, near Cape Gratia Dios; between Cape Honduras and Nicaragua.
They are very ingenious at throwing the Lance, Fisgig, Harpoon, or any manner
of Dart, being bred to it from their Infancy, for the Children imitating their
Parents, never go abroad without a Lance in their hands, which they throw at
any object, till use has made them masters of the Art. Then they learn to put
by a Lance, Arrow or Dart; the manner is thus. Two Boys stand at a small
distance, and Dart a blunt stick at one another, each of them holding a small
stick in his right hand, with which he strikes away that which was darted at
him. As they grow in years they become more dexterous and courageous, and then
they will stand a fair mark to any one that will shoot Arrows at them; which
they will put by with a very small stick, no bigger than the rod of a
Fowling-piece; and when they are grown to be men, they will guard themselves
from Arrows, tho they come very thick at them, provided two do not happen to
come at once. They have extraordinary good Eyes, and will discry a Sail at Sea
farther, and see any thing better than we. Their chiefest Employment in their
own Country is to strike Fish, Turtle or Manatee; the manner of which I
describe elsewhere, Chap. 3. For this they are esteemed and coveted by all
Privateers; for one or two of them in a Ship will maintain 100 men. So that
when we careen our Ships, we choose commonly such places, where there is plenty
of Turtle or Manatee for these Moskito men to strike; and it is very rare to
find Privateers destitute of one or more of them, when the Commander, or most
os the men are English; but they do not love the French, and the Spaniards they
hate mortally. When they come among Privateers, they get the use of Guns, and
prove very good Marks-men: They behave themselvis very bold in fight, and never
seem to flinch nor hang back; for they think that the white men with whom they
are, know better than they do when it is best to fight; and let the
disadvantage of their party be never so great, they will never yield not give
back while any of their party stand. I could never perceive any Religion nor
any Ceremonies, or superstitious Observations among them, being ready to
imitate us in whatsoever they saw us do at any time. Only they seem to fear the
Devil, whom they call Wallesaw; and they say he often appears to some among
them, whom our men commonly call their Priests, when they desire to speak with
him on urgent business; but the rest know not any thing of him, nor how he
appears, otherwise than as these Priests tell them. Yet they all say they must
not anger him, for then he will beat them, and that sometimes he carries away
these their Priests. Thus much I have heard from some of them who speak good
English.

They marry but one Wife, with whom they live till death seperates them. At
their first coming together the man makes a very small Plantation, for there is
Land enough, and they may choose what spot they please. They delight to settle
near the Sea, or by some River, for the sake of striking Fish, their beloved
Employment.

Far within Land there are other Indians, with whom they are always at War.
After the man has cleared a spot of Land, and has planted it, he seldom minds
it afterward, but leaves the managing of it to his Wife, and he goes out a
striking: Sometimes he seeks only for Fish, at other times for Turtle or
Manatee, and whatever he gets he brings home to his Wife, and never stirs out
to seek for more till it is all eaten. When hunger begins to bite, he either
takes his Canoa and s^s for more game at Sea, or walks out into the Woods and
hunts about for Peccary, Warree, each a sort of wild Hogs or Dear, and seldom
returns empty handed, nor seeks for any more so long as any of it lasts. Their
Plantations are so small, that they cannot subsist with what they produce; for
their largest Plantations have not above 20 or 30 Plantain-Trees, a bed of Yams
and Potatoes, a bush of Indian Pepper, and a small spot of Pine-apples which
last fruit is a main thing they delight in, for with these they make a sort of
drink which our men call Pine-drink, much esteemed by these Moskito's, and to
which they invite each other to be merry, providing Fish and Flesh also.
Whoever of them makes of this Liquor treats his Neighbors, making a little
Canoa full at a time, and so enough to make them all drunk; and it is seldom
that such Feasts are made, but the party that makes them has some design,
either to be revenged for some injury done him, or to debate of such
differences as have happened between him and his Neighbors, and to examine into
the truth of such Matters. Yet before they are warmed with drink, they never
speak one word of their grievances; and the Women, who commonly know their
Husbands designs, prevent them from doing any injury to each other by hiding
their Lances, Harpoons, Bows and Arrows, or any other weapon that they have.

These Moskito's are in general very civil and kind to the English, of whom
they receive a great deal os respect, both when they are aboard their Ships,
and also ashore, either in Jamaica, or elsewhere, whither they often come with
the Seamen. We always humor them, letting them go any where as they will, and
return to their Country in any Vessel bound that way if they please. They will
have the management of themselves in their striking, and will go in their own
little Canoa, which our men could not go in without danger of eversetting; nor
will they then let any white man come into their Canoa, but will go a striking
in it just as they please: All which they allow them. For should we cross them,
tho they should see Shoals of Fish, or Turtle, or the like, they will purposely
stride their Harpoons and Turtle irons aside, or so glance them as to kill
nothing. They have no form of Government among them, but acknowledge the King
of England for their Sovereign: They learn our Language, and take the Governor
of Jamaica to be one of the greatest Princes in the World.

While they are among the English they wear good Clothes, and take delight to
go neat and tight; but when they return again to their own Country they put by
all their Clothes, and go after their own Country fashion, wearing only a small
piece of Linen tied about their wastes, hanging down to their knees.

CHAP. II.
The Author's Land Journey from the South to the North Sea, over the Terra
Firma, or Isthmus of Darien.

BEing landed, May the 1st, we began our march about 3 a Clock in the
afternoon, directing our course by our Pocket Compasses N. E. and having gone
about 2 miles, we came to the foot of a Hill where we built small Huts and lay
all night; having excessive Rains till 12 a Clock.

The 2d day in the morning having sair weather we ascended the Hill, and found
a small Indian path, which we followed till we found it ran too much Easterly,
and then doubting it would carry us out of our way, we climbed some of the
highest Trees on the Hill, which was not meanly furnished with as large tall
Trees as ever I saw: At length we discovered some Houses in a Valley on the
North side of the Hill, but it being steep could not descend on that side, but
followed the small path which led us down the Hill on the East side, where we
presently found several other Indian Houses. The first that we came to at the
foot of the Hill, had none but women at home, who could not speak Spanish, but
gave each of us a good Calabash or Shell full of Corn-drink. The other Houses
had some men at home, but none that spoke Spanish; yet we made shift to buy
such food as their Houses or Plantations afforded, which we dressed, and eat
altogether, having all sorts of our Provision in common, because none should
live better than others, or pay dearer for any thing than it was worth. This
day we had marched 6 mile.

In the evening the Husbands of those women came home, and told us in broken
Spanish, that they had been on board of the Guard Ship, which we fled from two
days before, that we were now not above 3 mile from the mouth of the River
Congo, and that they could go from thence aboard the Guard Ship in half a Tides
time.

This evening we supped plentifully on Fowls, and Pecary, a sort of wild Hogs
which we bought of the Indins; Yams, Potatoes and Plantains served us for
Bread, whereof we had enough. After Supper we agreed with one of these Indians
to guide us a days march into the Country, toward the North side; he was to
have for his pains a Hatchet, and his bargain was to bring us to a certain
Indians habitation, who could speak Spanish; from whom we were in hopes to be
better satisfied of our Journey.

The 3d day having fair weather, we began to stir betimes, and set out batween
6: nd 7 a clock, marching through several old ruined Plantations. This morning
one of our men being tired gave us the slip. By 12 a Clock we had gone 8 mile,
and arrived at the Indians house, who lived on the bank of the River Congo, and
spoke very good Spanish; to whom we declared the reason of this visit.

At first he seemed to be very dubious of enter^ining any discourse with us,
and gave very im^ertinent answers to the questions that we demand^d of him; he
told us he knew no way to the North side of the Country, he could carry us to
Cheapo or Santa Maria, which we knew to be Spanish Garrisons, the one lying to
the Eastward of us, the other to the Westward: either of them at least 20 miles
out of our way. We could get no other answer from him, and all his discourse
was in such an angry tone, as plainly declared he was not our friend. However,
we were forced to make a virtue of necessity, and humor him, for it was
neither time nor place to be angry with the Indians; all our lives lying in
their hands.

We were now at a great loss, not knowing what course to take, for we tempted
him with Beads, Money, Hatchets, Macheats, or long Knives; but nothing would
work on him, till one of our men took a Sky-colored Petticoat out of his bag
and put it on his Wife; who was so much pleased with the Present, that she
immediately began to chatter at her Husband, and soon brought him into a better
humor. He could then tells us he knew the way to the North side, and would
have gone with us, but that he cut his foot 2 days before, which made him
incapable of serving us himself: But he would take care that we should not want
a guide; and therefore he hired the same Indian who brought us hither, to
conduct us 2 days march further for another Hatchet. The old man would have
stayed us here all the day, because it rained very hard; but our business
required more haste, our Enemies lying so near us, for he told us that he could
go from his house aboard the Guard-Ship in a Tides time; and this was the 4th
day since they saw us, so we marched 3 mile farther, and then built Hutts,
where we stayed all night; it rained all the afternoon, and greatest part of
the night,

The 4th day we began our march betimes, for the forenoons were commonly fair,
but much rain afternoon: tho whether it rained or shined it was much at one
with us, for I verily believe we crossed the Rivers 30 times this day: the
Indians having no paths to travel from one part of the Country to another: and
therefore guided themselves by the Rivers. We marched this day 12 miles, and
then built our Hutts and lay down to sleep; but we always kept two men on the
watch, otherwise our own Slaves might have knocked us on the head while we
slept. It rained violently all the afternoon, and most part of the night. We
had much ado to kindle a fire this evening, our Hutts were but very mean and
ordinary. and our fire small, so that we could not dry our Clothes, scarce warm
our selves, and no sort of food for the Belly; all which made it very hard with
us, I confess these hardships quite expelled the thoughts of an Enemy; for now
having been 4 days in the Country we began to have but few other cares than how
to get Guides and Food, the Spaniards were seldom in our thoughts.

The 5th day we set out in the morning betimes, and having traveled 7 miles in
those wild pathless Woods, by 10 a clock in the morning we arrived at a young
Spanish Indian's House who had formerly lived with the Bishop of Panama. The
young Indian was very brisk, spoke very good Spanish, and received us very
kindly. This Plantation afforded us store of Provision, Yams, and Potaroes, but
nothing of any flesh, beside 2 fat Monkeys we shot, part whereof we distributed
to some of our Company who were weak and sickly; for others we got Eggs, and
such refreshments as the Indians had, for we still provided for the sick and
weak. We had a Spanish Indian in our company, who first took up Arms with
Captain Sawkins, and had been with us ever since his death. He was persuaded to
live here by the master of the house, who promised him his Sister in marriage,
and to be assistant to him in clearing a Plantation; but we would not consent
to part ftom him here, for fear of some treachery, but promised to release him
in two or three days, when we were certainly out of danger of our Enemies. We
stayed here all the Afternoon and dried our Clothes and Ammunition, cleared our
Guns, and provided ourselves for a march the next morning.

Our Chyrurgeon, Mr Waser, came to a sad disaster here: being drying his
Powder, a careless fellow passed by with his Pipe lighted, and set fire to his
Powder, which blew up and scorched his Knee; and reduced him to that condition,
that he was not able to march; wherefore we allowed him a Slave to carry his
things, being all of us the more concerned at the accident, because liable our
selves every moment to misfortune, and none to look after us but him. This
Indian Plantation was seated on the bank of the River Congo, in a very fat
Soil; and thus far we might have come in our Canoa, if I could have persuaded
them to it.

The 6th day we set out again, having hired another guide. Here we first crossed
the River Congo in a Canoa, having been from our first Landing on the West side
of the River; and being over, we marched to the Eastward 2 mile, and came to
another River, which we forded several times, though it was very deep. Two of
our men were not able to keep company with us, but came after us as they were
able. The last time we forded the River, it was so deep, that our tallest men
stood in the deepest place, and handed the sick, weak, and short men; by which
means we all got over safe, except those two who were behind. Foreseeing a
necessity of wading through Rivers frequently in our Land-march, I took care
before I left the Ship to provide my self a large Joint of Bambo, which I stopped
at both ends, closing it with Wax, so as to keep out any Water. In this I
preserved my Journal and other Writings from being wet, tho I was often forced
to swim. When we were over this River we sat down to wait the coming of our
Consorts who were left behind, and in half an hour they came. But the River by
that time was so high, that they could not get over it, neither could we help
them over, but bid them be of good comfort and stay till the River did fall,
But we marched 2 mile farther by the side of the River, and there built our
Hutts, having gone this day 6 miles. We had scarce finished our Hutts before
the River rose much higher, and overflowing the Banks, obliged us to remove
into higher ground: But the next night came on before we could build more
Hutts, so we lay straggling in the Woods, some under one Tree, some under
another, as we could find convenience, which might have been indifferent
comfortable if the weather had been fair, but the greatest part of the night we
had extraordinary hard Rain, with much Lightening and terrible claps of
Thunder. These hardships and inconveniences made us all careless, and there
was no Watch kept, (tho I believe no body did sleep:) So our Slaves taking
opportunity, went away in the night; all but one, who was hid in some hole and
knew nothing of their design, or else fell asleep. Those that went away:
carried with them our Chyrurgeons Gun and all his Money.

The next morning being the 8th day, we went to the Rivers side, and found it
much fallen; and here our Guide would have us ford it again, which being deep,
and the current running swift, we could not. Then we contrived to swim over,
those that could not swim, we were resolved to help over as well as we could:
But this was not feizable: for we should not be able to get all our things
over. At length we concluded to send one man over with a Line, who should hale
over all our things first, and then get the men over. This being agreed on, one
George Gayny took the end of a Line, and made it fast about his neck, and left
the other end ashore, and one man stood by the Line to clear it away to him.
But when Gayny was in the midst of the water, the Line in drawing after him
chanced to kink, or grow entangled; and he that stood by to clear it away,
stopped the Line, which turned Gayny on his back, and he that had the Line in his
hand threw it all into the River after him, thinking he might recover himself,
but the stream running very swift, and the man having three hundred Dollars at
his back, was carried down, and never seen more by us. Those two men whom we
left behind the day before, told us afterward that they found him lying dead
in a Creek, where the Eddy had driven him ashore, and the Money on his back;
but they meddled not with any of it, being only in care how to work their way
through a wild unknown Country. This put a period to that contrivance. This was
the fourth man that we lost in this Land Journey; for those two men that we
left the day before, did not come to us till we were in the North Seas, so we
yielded them also for lost. Being frustrated of getting over the River this
way, we looked about for a Tree to fell across the River. At length we found
one, which we cut down, and it reached clear over: on this we passed to the
other side, where we found a small Planta in-walk, which we soon ransackt.

While we were busy getting Plantains, our Guide was gone, but in less than two
hours came to us again, and brought with him an old Indian, to whom he
delivered up his charge; and we gave him a Hatchet and dismissed him, and entered
our selves under the conduct of our new Guide, who immediately led us away, and
crossed another River, and entered into a large Valley of the fattest Land I did
ever take notice of: the Trees were not very thick, but the largest that I saw
in my Travels: we saw great tracks which were made by the Pecaries, but saw
none of them. We marched in this pleasantCountry till 3 a Clock in the afternoon,
in all about 4 Miles, and then arrived at the old man's Country House, which
was only a Habitation for Hunting: there was a small Plantain walk, some Yams
and Potatoes. Here we took up our quarters for this day, and refreshed our
selves with such food as the place afforded, and dried our Clothes and
Ammunition. At this place our Indian provided to leave us, for now we thought
our selves past danger. This was he that was persuaded to stay at the last
House we came from, to marry the young man's Sister; and we dismissed him
according to our promise.

The 9th day the old man conducted us toward his own habitation. We marched
about 5 miles in this Valley, and then ascended a Hill, and travel led about 5
miles farther over two or three small Hills, before we came to any settlement.
Half a mile before we came to the Plantations, we light of a path, which
carried us to the Indians habitation. We saw many wooden Crosses erected in the
way, which created some jealousy in us that here were some Spaniards: Therefore
we new primed all our Guns, and provided our selves for an Enemy; but coming
into the Town found none but Indians, who were all got together in a large
house to receive us: for the old man had a little boy with him, that he sent
before.

They made us welcome to such as they had, which was very mean; for these were
new Plantations, the Corn being not eared. Potatoes, Yams, and Plantains they
had none, but what they brought from their old Plantations. There was none of
them spoke good Spanish: Two young men could speak a little; it caused us to
take more notice of them. To these we made a present, and desired them to get
us a Guide to conduct us to the North side, or part of the way, which they
promised to do themselves, if we would reward them for it, but told us we must
lie still the next day. But we thought our selves nearer the North Sea than we
were, and proposed to go without a Guide, rather than stay here a whole day.
However, some of our men who were tired, resolved to stay behind; and Mr Wafer
our Chyrurgeon, who marched in great pain ever since his Knee was burned with
powder, was resolved to stay with them.

The tenth day we got up betimes resolving to march, but the Indians opposed it
as much as they could, but seeing they could not persuade us to stay, they came
with us; and having taken leave of our friends, we set out.

Here therefore we left the Chyrurgeon and two more, as we said, and marched
away to the Eastward following our Guides. But we often looked on our Pocket
Compasses, and showed them to the Guides, pointing at the way that we would go,
which made them shake their heads, and say, they were pretty things, but not
convenient for us After we had descended the Hills on which the Town stood, we
come down into a Valley, and guided our selves by a River, which we crossed 32
times; and having marched 9 miles, we built Hutts and lay there all night. This
evening I killed a Quaum, a large Bird as big as a Turkey, wherewith we treated
our Guides, for we brought no Provision with us. This night our Slave run away.

The eleventh day we marched 10 miles farther, and built Hutts at night; but
went supperless to bed.

The twelfth in the morning we crossed a deep River, passing over it on a Tree,
and marched 7 mile in a low swampy ground: and came to the side of a great deep
River, but could not get over. We built Hutts upon its Banks and lay there all
night, upon our Barbecu's, or frames of Sticks raised about 3 foot from the
ground.

The thirteenth day, when we turned out, the River had overflowed its Banks,
and was 2 foot deep in our Hutts, and our Guides went from us not telling us
their intent, which made us think they were returned home again. Now we began
to repent our haste in coming from the last settlements, for we had no food
since we came from thence. Indeed we got Macaw-berries in this place, wherewith
we satisfied our selves this day, though coursly.

The fourteenth day in the morning betimes, our Guides came to us again; and
the Waters being fallen within their bounds, they carried us to a Tree that
stood on the Bank of the River, and told us if we could fell that Tree cross
it, we might pass; if not we could pass no further. Therefore we set two of the
best Ax men that we had, who felled it exactly cross the River, and the boughs
just reached over; on this we passed very safe. We afterward crossed another
River three times, with much difficulty, and at 3 a clock in the afternoon we
came to an Indian settlement, where we met a drove of Monkeys, and killed 4 of
them, and stayed here all night; having marched this day 6 miles. Here we got
Plantains enough, and a kind reception of the Indian that lived here all alone,
except one Boy to wait on him.

The fifteeenth day when we set out, the kind Indian and his Boy went with us
in a Canoa, and set us over such places as we could not ford: and being past
those great Rivers, he returned back again, having helped us at least 2 mile.
We marched afterward 5 mile, and came to large Plantain walks, where we took
up our quarters that night; we there fed plentifully on Plantains, both ripe
and green, and had fair weather all the day and night. I think these were the
largest Plantain walks, and the biggest Plantains that ever I saw, but no house
near them: We gathered what we pleased by our Guides orders.

The sixteenth day we marched 3 mile, and came to a large settlement, where we
abode all day: Not a man of us but wished the Journey at an end; our Feet being
blistered, and our Thighs stripped with wading through so many Rivers; the way
being almost continually through Rivers or pathless Woods. In the afternoon
five of us went to seek for game, and killed 3 Monkeys, which we dressed for
Supper. Here we first began to have fair weather, which continued with us till
we came to the North Seas.

The eighteenth day we set out at 10 a Clock, and the Indians with 5 Canoas
carried us a league up a River; and when we landed, the kind Indians went with
us and carried our burdens. We marched 3 mile farther and then built our
Hutts, having traveled from the last settlements 6 miles.

The nineteenth day our Guides lost their way, and we did not march above 2
miles.

The twentieth day by 12 a Clock we came to Cheapo River. The Rivers we crossed
hitherto run all into the South Seas; and this of Cheapo was the last we met
with that run that way. Here an old man who came from the last settlements,
destribu^ed his burden of Plantains amongst us, and taking his leave returned
home. Afterward we forded the River and marched to the foot of a very high
Mountain, where we lay all night. This day we marched about 9 miles.

The 21st day some of the Indians returned back, and we marched up a very high
mountain; being on the top we went some miles on a ridge, and steep on both
sides; then descended a little and came to a fine Spring, where we lay all
night, having gone this day about 9 miles, the weather still very fair and
clear.

The 22d day we marched over another very high Mountain, keeping on the ridge 5
miles. When we came to the North end, we, to our great comfort, saw the Sea;
then we descended and parted our selves into ^ Companies, and lay by the side
of a River, which was the first we met that runs into the North Sea.

The 23d day we came through several large Plantain walks, and at 10 a clock
came to an Indians habitation, not far from the North Sea. Here we got Canoas
to carry us down the River Conception to the Sea side; having gone this day 7
miles. We found a great many Indians at the mouth of this River. They had
settled themselves here, for the benefit of Trade with the Privateers; and
their Commodities were Yams, Potatoes, Plantains, Sugar, C^es, Fowls and Eggs.

These Indians told us, that there had been a great many English and French
Ships here, which were all gone but one Barco-longo, a French Privateer that
lay at La Sounds Key or Island. This Island is about; leagues from the mouth of
the River Conception, and is one of the Samballoes, a range of Islands reaching
for about ^ leagues, from point Samballas to G^den Island Eastward. These
Islands or Keys, as we call them, were first made the Rendezvous of Pri^eers in
the year 1679, being very convenient (...) ca^ing, and had names given to some
of them by the Captains of the Privateers; as this La Sounds Key particularly.

Thus we finished our Journey from the South Sea to the North in 23 days; in
which by my account we traveled 110 miles, crossing some very high Mountains;
but our common march was in the Valleys among deep and dangerous Rivers. At our
first landing in this Country, we were told that the Indians were our Enemies;
we knew the Rivers to be deep, the wet season to be coming in; yet, excepting
those we left behind, we lost but one man, who was drowned as I said. Our first
landing place on the South Coast was very disadvantageous, for we traveled at
least fifty miles more than we need to have done, could we have gone up Cheapo
River, or Santa Maria River; for at either of these places a man may pass from
Sea to Sea in 3 days time with ease. The Indians can do it in a day and a half,
by which you may see how easy it is for a party of men to travel over. I must
confess the Indians did assist us very much, and I question whether ever we had
got over without their assistance, because they brought us from time to time to
their Plantations, where we always got Provision, which else we should have
wanted. But if a party of 500 or 600 men, or more, were minded to travel from
the North to the South Seas, they may do it without asking leave of the
Indians; tho it be much better to be friends with them.

On the 24th of May, (having lain one night at the Rivers mouth) we all went on
board the Privateer, who lay at La Sounds Key. It was a French Vessel Captain
Tristian Commander. The first thing we did was to get such things as we could
to gratify our Indian Guides, for we were resolved to reward them to their
hearts content. This we did by giving them Beads, Knives, Scissars and
Looking-glasses, which we bought of the Privateers Crew; and a half Dollar a
man from each of us; which we would have bestowed in goods also, but could not
get any, the Privateer having no more toys. They were so well satisfied with
these, that they returned with joy to their friends; and were very kind to our
Consorts whom we left behind, as Mr. Wafer our Chyrurgeon and the rest of them
told us, when they came to us some months afterward, as shall be said
hereafter.

I might have given a further account of several things relating to this
Country; the Inland parts of which are so little known to the Europeans. But I
shall leave this province to Mr. Wafer, who made a longer abode in it than I,
and is better able to do it that any man than I know; and is now preparing a
particular Description of this Country for the Press.

map of central America a Map of the Middle Part of AMERICA


CHAP. III.
The Authors cruising with the Privateers in the North Seas on the West India
Coast. They go to the Isle of St Andreas. Of the Cedars there. The Corn
Islands, amd their Inhabitants. Blewfields River, and an Account of the
Manattee there, or Sea Cow; with the manner how the Moskito Indians kill them,
and Tortoise, etc. The Maho tree. The Savages of Bocca toro. He touches again
at Point Samballas, and its Islands. The Groves of Sapadillaes there, the
Soldier Insect, and Manchaneel Tree. The River of Darien, and the Wild Indians
near it; Monastery of Madre de Popa, Rio Grande, Santa Martha Town, and the
high Mountain there; Rio laHacha Town, Rancho Reys, and Pearl Fishery there;
the Indian Inhabitants and Country, Dutch Isle of Querisao, etc. Count
D'Estree's unfortunate Expedition thither. Isle of Bon Airy. Isle of Aves, the
Booby and Man of War Bird: The Wreck of D' Estree's Fleet, and Captain Pain's
Adventure here. Little Isle of Aves. The Isles Roca's; the Noddy and Tropic
Bird, Mineral Water, Egg Birds; the Mangrove Trees, black, red and white. Isle
of Tortuga, its Salt-Ponds. Isle of Blanco; the Guano Animal, their Variety and
the best Sea Tortoise. Modern Alterations in the West Indies. The Coast of
Caraccus, its remar^able Land, and product of the best Cocoa Nuts. The Cacoa
described at large, with the Husbandry of it. City of Caraccos. La Guiare Fort
and Haven. Town of Comana. Verina its famous best Spanish Tobacco. The rich
Trade of the Coast of Caraccos. Of the Sucking Fish or Remora. The Authors
arrival in Virginia.

THe Privateer on board which we went being now cleaned, and our Indian Guides
thus satisfied and set ashore, we set sail in two days for Springer's Key,
another of the Samballoes Isles, and about 7 or 8 leagues from La Sound's Key.
Here lay 8 sail of Privateers more, viz. Capt. Coxon, 10 Guns, 100 Men. Capt.
Pain, 10 Guns, 100 Men. Capt. Wright, a Barcolongo 4 Guns, 40 Men. Capt.
Williams, a small Barcolongo
English Commanders and English men Capt. Yanks a Barcolongo 4 Guns, about 60
Men.
English, Dutch and French; himself a Dutchman Capt. Achemboe, 8 Guns, 40 Men.
Capt Tucker, 6 Guns, 70 Men. Capt. Rose, a Barcolongo.
French Commanders and Men.


An hour before we came to the Fleet, Captai^ Wright, who had been sent to
Chagra River, arrive^ at Springer's Key, with a large Conoa or Pereag^ laden
with Flower, which he took there. Some o^ the Prisoners belonging to the
Pereago, came from Panama not above 6 days before he took her, an^ told the
news of our coming over land, and likewise related the condition and strength
of Panama^ which was the main thing they enquired after; for Captain Wright was
sent thither purposely to get ^ Prisoner that was able to inform them of the
strength of that City, because the Privateers designed to join all their force,
and by the assistanc^ of the Indians, (who had promised to be their Guides) to
march over land to Panama; and there is no other way of getting Prisoners for
that purpose, but by absconding between Chagra and Portabell, because there are
much Goods brought that way for Panama; especially when the Armado lies at
Portabell. All the Commanders were aboard of Captain Wright when we came into
the Fleet; and were mighty inquisitive of the Prisoners to know the truth of
what they related concerning us. But as soon as they knew we were come, they
immediately came aboard of Captain Tristian, heing all overjoyed to see us, for
Captain Coxon, and many others, had left us in the South Seas about 12 months
since, and had never heard what became of us since that time. They enquired of
us what we did there? how we lived? how far we had been? and what discoveries
we made in those Seas? After we had answered these general questions, they
began to be more particular; in examining us concerning our passage through the
Country from the South Seas. We related the whole matter, giving them an
account of the fatigues of our march, and the inconveniences we suffered by
the rains, and disheartened them quite from that design.

Then they proposed several other places where such a party of men as were now
got together might make a Voyage, but the objections of some or other still
hindered any proceeding; for the Privateers have an account of most Towns
within 20 leagues of the Sea, on all the Coast from Trinidado down to La Vera
Cruz; and are able to give a near guess of the strength and riches of them: For
they make it their business to examine all Prisoners that fall into their hands,
concerning the Country, Town, or City that they belong to; whether born there,
or how long they have known it? how many families? whether most Spaniards? or
whether the major part are not Copper-colour'd, as Mulattoe^ Mustesoes, or
Indians? whether rich, and what the^ riches do consist in? and what their
chiefest man^factures? If fortified? how many great Guns, a^ what number of
small Arms? Whether it is possib^ to come undescried on them? How many Look-ou^
or Sentinels? for such the Spaniards always keep^ and how the Look-outs are
placed? Whether possib^ to avoid the Look-outs, or take them? If any Riv^ or
Creek comes near it, or where the best Landing^ with innumerable other such
questions, which the^ curiosities lead them to demand. And if they ha^ had any
former discourse of such places from oth^ Prisoners, they compare one with the
other; the^ examine again, and enquire if he or any of the^ are capable to be
Guides to conduct a party of me^ thither: if not, where and how any Prisoner
man be taken that may do it; and from thence they a^terwards lay their Schemes
to prosecute whateve^ design they take in hand.

It was 7 or 8 days after before any resolution wa^ taken, yet consultations
were held every day. The French seemed very forward to go to any Town tha^ the
English could or would propose, because the Governor of Petit Guavos (from
whom the Privateer^ take Commissions) had recommended a Gentleman lately come
from France to be General of the Expedition, and fent word by Captain Tucker,
wit^ whom this Gentleman came, that they should, i^ possible, make an attempt
on some Town before he returned again. The English, when they were in company
with the French, seemed to approve o^ what the French said, but never looked on
that General to be fit for the service in hand.

At length, it was concluded to go to a Town^ the name of which I have forgot;
it lies a great wa^ in the Country, but not such a tedious march as i^ would be
from hence to Panama. Our way to i^ lay up Carpenters River, which is about 60
leagues to the Westward of Portabell. Our greatest obstruction in this design
was our want of Boats: therefore it was concluded to go with all our Fleet to
St Andreas, a small uninhabited Island lying near the Isle of Providence, to
the Westward of it in 13 degrees. 15 m. North Lat. and from Portabell N. N. W.
about 70 leagues; where we should be but a little way from Carpenter's River.
And besides at this Island we might build Canoas, it being plentifully stored
with large Cedars for such a purpose, and for this reason the Jamaica-men come
hither frequently to build Sloops; Cedar being very fit for building, and it
being to be had here at free cost, beside other Wood. Jamaica is well stored
with Cedars of its own, chiefly among the Rocky Mountains: these also of St
Andreas grow in stony ground, and are the largest that ever I knew or heard of;
the Bodies alone being ordinarily 40 or 50 foot long, many 60 or 70, and
upwards, and of a proportionable bigness. The Bermudas Isles are well stored
with them, so is Virginia, which is generally a sandy soil. I saw none in the
East Indies, nor in the South Sea Coast, except on the Isthmus as I came over
it. We reckon the Pereagos and Canoas that are made of Cedar to be the best of
any; they are nothing but the Tree it self made hollow Boatwise, with a flat
bottom, and the Canoa generally sharp at both ends, the Pereago at one only,
with the other end flat. But what is commonly said of Cedar, that the Worm will
not touch it, is a mistake, for I have seen of it very mucb worm eaten.

All things being thus concluded on, we sailed from hence, directing our course
toward St Andreas. We kept company the first day, but at night it blew a hard
gale at N. E. and some of our Ships bore away, the next day others were forced
to leave us, and the second night we lost all our company. I was now belonging
to Captain Archembo, for al^ the rest of the Fleet were overmann'd: Captain
Archembo wanting men, we that came out of the South Seas must either sail with
him, or remain among the Indians. Indeed we found no cause to dislike the
Captain; but his French Seamen were the saddest creatures that ever I was
among: for tho w^ had bad weather that required many hands aloft, ye^ the
biggest part of them never stirred out of their Hammocks, but to eat and ease
themselves. W^ made a shift to find the Island the fourth day, where we met
Captain Wright, who came thither the da^ before; and had taken a Spanish
Tartan, wherei^ were 30 men, all well armed: She had 4 Pater^roes, and some
long Guns placed in a Swivel on the Gunnel. They fought an hour before they
yielde^ The news they related was, that they came from Cartagena in company of
11 Armadilloes (which a^ small Vessels of War) to seek for the Fleet of
Priv^teers lying in the Samballoes: that they parted from the Armadilloes 2
days before: that they were o^der'd to search the Sambaloes for us, and if they
di^ not find us, then they were ordered to go to Port^bel, and lie there till
they had farther intelligen^ of us; and he supposed those Armadilloes to be n^
there.

We that came over Land out of the South Seas being weary of living among the
French, desired Captain Wright to fit up his Prize the Tartan, and mak^ a Man
of War of her for us, which he at first seem'^ to decline, because he was
settled among the Fren^ in Hispaniola, and was very well beloved both b^ the
Governor of Petit-Guavos, and all the Gentry^ and they would resent it ill,
that Captain Wrigh^ who had no occasion of Men, should be so unkin^ to Captain
Archembo, as to seduce his Men from him; he being so meanly manned that he
could hardly sail his Ship with his Frenchmen. We tol^ ^im we would no longer
remain with Captain Ar^hembo, but would go ashore there, and build Ca^oas to
transport our selves down to the Moskitoes, ^f he would not entertain us; for
Privateers are not ^bliged to any Ship, but free to go ashore where ^hey
please, or to go into any other Ship that will ^ntertain them, only paying for
their Provision.

When Captain Wright saw our resolutions, he ^greed with us on condition we
should be under his ^ommand, as one Ships company, to which we ^nanimously
consented.

We staid here about 10 days, to see if any more of our Fleet would come to us;
but there came no more of us to the Island but three, viz. Captain Wright,
Captain Archembo and Captain Tucker. Therefore we concluded the rest were bore
away either for Bocca-toro or Bluefields River on the Main; and we designed to
seek them. We had fine wea^her while we lay here, only some Tornadoes, or
Thunder-showers: But in this Isle of St Andreas, there being neither Fish, Fowl
nor Deer, and it being therefore but an ordinary place for us, who had but
little Provision, we sailed from hence again ^n quest of our scattered Fleet,
directing our course for some Islands lying near the Main called by the
Privateers the Corn-Islands; being in hopes to get Corn there. These Islands I
take to be the same which are generally called in the Maps the Pearl Islands,
lying about the Lat. of 12 D. 10 M. North. Here we arrived the next day, and
went ashore on one of them, but found none of the Inhabitants; for here are but
a few poor naked Indians that live ^ere; who have been so often plundered by
the Privateers that they have but little Provision; and when they see a Sail
they hide themselves; otherwise Ships that come here would take them, and make
Slaves of them; and I have seen some of them that have been Slaves. They are
people of a mean stature, yet strong Limbs; they are of a dar^ copper color,
black Hair, full round Faces, smal^ black Eyes, their Eyebrows hanging over
their Eye^ low Foreheads, short thick Noses, not high, bu^ flattish: full Lips,
and short Chins. They have a fashion to cut holes in the Lips o^ the Boys when
they are young^ close to their Chin; which the^ keep open with little Pegs till
the^ are 14 or 15 years old: then the^ wear Beards in them, made of Tu^tle or
Tortoise-shell, in the for^ you see in the Margin. The little notch at the
upper end they put i^ through the Lip, where it remain^ between the Teeth and
the Lip^ the under part hangs down over their Chin. Thi^ they commonly wear all
day, and when they slee^ they take it out. They have likewise holes bore^ in
their Ears both Men and Women, when young^ and by continual stretching them
with great Pegs^ they grow to be as big as a milled five shilling-piec^ Herein
they wear pieces of Wood cut very roun^ and smooth, so that their Ear seems to
be all Wood^ with a little skin about it. Another Ornament the Women use is
about their Legs, which they a^ very curious in; for from the infancy of the
Girl^ their Mothers make fast a piece of Cotton Cloat^ about the small of their
Leg, from the Ankle to the Calf very hard; which makes them have a ver^ full
Calf: this the Women wear to their dying day^ Both Men and Women go naked, only
a Clout about their Wastes; yet they have but little Fee^ though they go
barefoot. Finding no Provisio^ here, we sailed toward Bluefield River, where
w^ careened our Tartane; and there Captain Archemb^ and Captain Tucker left us,
and went toward Boccotoro

This Blewfields River comes out between the Rivers of Nicuragua and Veragua.
At its mouth is a fine sandy Bay; where Barks may clean: It is deep at its
mouth, but a shoal within; so that Ships may not enter, yet Barks of 60 or 70
Tuns may. It had this name from Captain Blewfield, a famous Privateer living on
Providence Island long before Jamaica was taken. Which Island of Providence was
settled by the English, and belonged to the Earls of Warwick.

In this River we found a Canoa coming down the stream; and tho we went with
our Canoas to seek for Inhabitants, yet we found none, but saw in 2 or 3 places
signs that Indians had made on that side the River. The Canoa which we found
was but meanly made for want of Tools, therefore we concluded these Indians
have no commerce with the Spaniards, nor with other Indians that have.

While we lay here our Moskito men went in their Canoa, and struck us some
Manatee, or Sea-cow. Besides this Blewfields River, I have seen of the Manatee
in the Bay of Campechy, on the Coasts of Bocca del Drago, and Bocca del Toro,
in the River of Darien, and among the South Keys or little Islands of Cuba. I
haveheard of there being found on the North of Jamaica, a few, and in the
Rivers of Surinam in great multitudes, which is a very low Land. I have seen of
them also at Mindanao one of the Philippine Islands, and on the Coast of
New-Holland. This Creature is about the bigness of a Horse, and 10 or 12 foot
long. The mouth of it is much like the mouth of a Cow, having great thick lips.
The Eyes are no bigger than a small Pea, the Ears are only 2 small holes on
each side of the head. The Neck is short and thick, bigger than the Head. The
biggest part of this Creature is at the Shoulders, where it has 2 large Fins
one on each side of its Belly. Under each of these Fins the Female has a small
Dug to suckle her young. From the Shoulders toward the Tail it retains its
bigness for about a foot, then it grows smaIler and smaller to the very Tail,
which is flat, and about 14 inches broad, and 20 inches long, and in the middle
4 or 5 inches thick, but about the edges of it not above 2 inches thick. From
the Head to the Tail it is round and smooth without any Fin but those two
before mentioned. I have heard that some have weighed above 1200 l. but I never
saw any so large. The Manatee delights to live in a brackish Water; and they
are commonly in Creeks or Rivers near the Sea. It Is for this reason possibly
they are not seen in the South Seas (that ever I could observe) where the Coast
is generally a bold Shore, that is, high Land and deep Water close home by it,
with a high Sea or great Surges; except in the Bay of Panama: yet even there is
no Manatee. Whereas the West Indies, being as it were one great Bay composed of
many smaller, are mostly low Land and shoal Water, and afford proper pasture
(as I may say) for the Manatee. Sometimes we find them in Salt Water, sometimes
in fresh; but never far at Sea. And those that live in the Sea at such places
where there is no River nor Creek fit for them to enter, yet do commonly come
once or twice in 24 hours to the mouth of any fresh water River, that is near
their place of abode. They live on Grass 7 or 8 inches long, and of a narrow
blade, which grows in the Sea in many places, especially among Islands near the
Main. This Grass grows likewise in Creeks, or in great Rivers, near the sides
of them, in such, places where there is but little tide or current. They never
come ashore, nor into shallower water than where they can swim. Their flesh is
white, both the fat and the lean, and extraordinary sweet wholesome meat. The
tail of a young Cow is most esteemed; but if old, both head and tail are very
tough. A Calf that sucks is the most delicate meat: Privateers commonly roast
them; as they do also great pieces cut out of the Bellies of the old ones.

The Skin of the Manatee is of great use to Privateers, for they cut them into
straps, which they make fast on the side of their Canoas, through which they put
their Oars in rowing, instead of tholes or pegs. The Skin of the Bull, or of
the Back of the Cow is too thick for this use; but of it they make Horse-whips,
cutting them 2 or 3 foot long: at the handle they leave the full substance of
the Skin, and from thence cut it away tapering, but very even and square all
the four sides. While the Thongs are green they twist them, and hang them to
dry: which in a weeks time become as hard as Wood. The Moskito-men have always
a small Canoa for their use to strike Fish, Tortoises or Manatee, which they
keep usually to themselves, and very neat and clean. They use no Oars, but
Paddles, the broad part of which does not go tapering toward the staff, pole,
or shandle of it, as in the Oar; nor do they use it in the same manner, by
laying it on the side of the Vessel; but hold it perpendicularly, griping the
staff hard with both hands, and putting back the water by main strength, and
very quick strokes. One of the Moskitoes (for there go but 2 in a Canoa) sits
in the stern, the other kneels down in the head, and both paddle till they come
to the place where they expect their game. Then they lie still or paddle very
softly, looking well about them, and he that is in the head of the Canoa lays
down his paddle, and stands up with his striking staff in his hand. This staff
is about 8 foot long, almost as big as a man's Arm, at the great end, in which
there is hole to place his Harpoon in. At the other end of his staff there is a
piece of light wood called Bobwood, with a hole in it, through which the small
end of the staff comes; and on this piece of Bobwood there is a line of 10 or
12 fathom wound neatly about, and the end of the line made fast to it. The
other end of the line is made fast to the Harpoon, which is at the great end of
the staff, and the Moskito man keeps about a fathom of it loose in his hand.
When he strikes, the Harpoon presently comes out of the staff, and as the
Manatee swims away, the line runs off from the bob; and although at first both
staff and bob may be carried under water, yet as the line runs off it will rise
again. Then the Moskito men paddle with all their might to get hold of the bob
again, and spend usually a quarter of an hour before they get it. When the
Manatee begins to be tired, it lies still, and then the Moskito men paddle to
the bob and take it up, and begin to hale in the line. When the Manatee feels
them he swims away again with the Canoa after him; then he that steers must be
nimble to turn the head of the Canoa that way that his consort points, who
being in the head of the Canoa, and holding the line, both sees and feels which
way the Manatee is swimming. Thus the Canoa is towed with a violent motion,
till the Manatee's strength decays. Then they gather in the line, which they
are often forced to let all go to the very end. At length when the Creatures
strength is spent, they hale it up to the Canoas side, and knock it on the
head, and tow it to the nearest shore where they make it fast, and seek for
another; which having taken, they go ashore with it, to put it into their
Canoa: For it is so heavy that they cannot lift it in, but they hale it up in
shoal water as near the shore as they can, and then overset the Canoa, laying
one side close to the Manatee. Then they roll it in, which brings the Canoa
upright again; and when they have heaved out the water, they fasten a line to
the other Manatee that lies aflout, and tow it after them. I have known two
Moskito men for a week every day bring aboard two Manatee in this manner; the
least of which has not weighed less than 600 pound, and that in a very small
Canoa, that 3 English men would scarce adventure to go in. When they strike a
Cow that has a young one, they seldom miss the Calf, for she commonly takes
her young one under one of her Fins. But if the Calf is so big that she cannot
carry it, or she so frighted that she only minds to save her own life, yet the
young never leaves her till the Moskito men have an opportunity to strike her.

The manner of striking Manatee and Tortoise is much the same; only when they
seek for Manatee they paddle so gently, that they make no noise, and never
touch the side of the Canoa with their paddle, because it is a creature that
hears very well. But they are not so nice when they seek for Tortoise, whose
Eyes are better than his Ears. They strike the Tortoise with a square sharp
Iron peg, the other with a Harpoon. The Moskito men make their own striking
Instruments as Harpoons, Fishhooks, and a Tortoise-Iron or Pegs. These Pegs, or
Tortoise-Irons are made 4 square, sharp at one end, and not much above an inch
in length, of such a figure as you see in the Margin. The small spike at the
broad end has the line fastened to it, and goes also into a hole at the end of
the striking staff: which when the Tortoise is struck flies off, the Iron and
end of the line fastened to it going quite within the Shells where it is so
buried, that the Tortoise cannot possibly escape.

They make their lines both for Fishing and Striking with the bark of Maho;
which is a sort of Tree or Shrub that grows plentifully all over the
West Indies, and whose Bark is made up of strings, or threads very strong. You
may draw it off either in flakes or small threads, as you have occasion. It Is
fit for any manner of Cordage; and Privateers often make their Rigging of it.
So much by way of digression.

When we had cleaned our Tartane we sailed from hence bound for Bocca-toro,
which is an opening between 2 Islands about 10 Degrees. 10 Min. North Lat. between
the Rivers of Veragne and Chagre. Here we met with Captain Yanky, who told us
that there had been a Fleet of Spanish Armadilloes to seek us: that Captain
Tristian having fallen Leeward, was coming to Bocca-toro, and fell in amongst
them, supposing them to be our Fleet: that they fired and chased him, but he
rowed and towed, and they supposed he got away: that Capt. Pain was likewise
chaced by them, and Capt. Williams; and that they had not seen them since they
lay within the Islands: that the Spaniards never came in to him; and that
Captain Coxon was in at the careening place.

This Bocca-toro is a place that the Privateers use to resort to, as much as
any place on all the Coast, because here is plenty of green Tortoise, and a
good careening place. The Indians here have no commerce with the Spaniards, but
are very barbarous and will not be dealt with. They have destroyed many
Privateers, as they did not long after this some of Captain Pain's men; who
having built a Tent ashore to put his goods in while he careened his Ship, and
some men lying there with their Arms, in the night the Indians crept softly
into the Tent, and cut off the heads of 3 or 4 men, and made their escape; nor
was this the first time they had served the Privateers so. There grow on this
Coast Vinelloes in great quantity, with which Chocolate is perfumed. These I
shall describe elsewhere.

Our Fleet being thus scattered, there was now no hopes of getting together
again; therefore every one did what they thought most conducing to obtain their
ends. Capt. Wright, with whom I now was, was resolved to cruise on the Coast of
Cartagene; and it being now almost the Westerly wind season, we sailed from
hence, and Captain Yanky with us; and we consorted, because Captain Yanky had
no Commission, and was afraid the French would take away his Bark. We past by
Scuda, a small Island (where it is said Sir Francis Drake's bowels were buried)
and came to a small River to the Westward of Chagre; where we took two new
Canoas, and carried them with us into the Sambaloes. We had the Wind at West,
with much rain; which brought us to Point Samballas. Here Captain Wright and
Captain Yanky left us in the Tartane to fix the Conoas, while they went on the
Coast of Cartagene to seek for provision. We cruised in among the Islands, and
kept our Moskito-men, or strikers out, who brought aboard some half-grown
Tortoise; and some of us went ashore every day to hunt for what we could find
in the Woods: Sometimes we got Pecary, Warree, or Deer; at other times we light
on a drove of large fat Monkeys, or Quames, Corrosoes, (each a large sort of
Fowl) Pigeons, Parrots, or Tuttledoves. We lived very well on what we got, not
staying long in one place; but sometimes we would go on the Islands, where
there grow great Groves of Sapadillies, which is a sort of Fruit much like a
Pear, but more juicy; and under those Trees we found plenty of Soldiers, that
live in Shells, a little kind of Animals, and have two great Claws like a Crab,
and are good food. One time our men sound a great many large ones, and being
sharp set had them dressed, but most of them were very sick afterward, being
poisoned by them: For on this Island were many Manchaneel Trees, whose Fruit is
like a small Crab, and smells very well, but they are not wholesome; and we
commonly take care of meddling with any Animals that eat them. And this we take
for a general rule; when we find any Fruits that we have not seen before, if we
see them peck'd by Birds, we may freely eat, but if we see no such sign, we let
them alone; for of this Fruit no Birds will taste. Many of these Islands have
of these Manchaneel-Trees growing on them.

Thus cruising in among these Islands, at length we came again to La Sound's
Key; and the day before having met with a Jamaica Sloop that was come over on
the Coast to trade, she went with us. It was in the evening when we came to an
Anchor, and the next morning we fired 2 Guns for the Indians that lived on the
Main for to come aboard; for by this time we concluded we should hear from our
5 men, that we left in the heart of the Country among the Indians, this being
about the latter end of August, and it was in the beginning of May when we
parted from them. According to our expectation the Indians came aboard, and
brought our friends with them: Mr Wafer wore a Clout about him, and was painted
like an Indian; and he was some time aboard before I knew him. One of them,
named Riehard Cobson, dyed within 3 or 4 days after, and was buried on La
Sound's Key.

After this we went to other Keys, to the Eastward of these to meet Captain
Wright and Captain Yanky, who met with a Fleet of Pereagos laden with Indian
Corn, Hog and Fowls, going to Cartagene; being conveyed with a small Armadilly
of 2 Guns and 6 Patereroes. Her they ch^sed ashore, and most of the Pereagoes;
but they got 2 of them off, and brought them away.

Here Captain Wright's and Captain Yanky's Barks were cleaned; and we stocked
our selves with Corn and then went toward the Coast of Cartagene. In our way
thither we passed by the River of Darien; which is very broad at the mouth but
not above 6 foot water on a Spring tide; for the Tide rises but little here.
Captain Coxen, about 6 months before we came out of the South Sea, went up this
River with a party of men: Every man carried a small strong Bag to put his Gold
in; expecting great Riches there, tho they got little or none. They rowed up
about 100 leagues before they came to any settlement, and then found some
Spaniards, who lived there ^o truck with the Indians for Gold; there being Gold
Scales in every house. The Spaniards admire how they came so far from the mouth
of the River, because there are a sort of Indians living between that place and
the Sea, who are very dreadful to the Spaniards, and will not have any commerce
with them, nor with any white people. They use Trunks about ^ foot long, out of
which they blow poisoned Darts; and are so silent in their attacks on their
Enemies, and retreat so nimbly again, that the Spaniards can never find them.
Their Darts are made of Macaw-wood, being about the bigness and length of a
Knitting-needle: one end is wound about with Cotton, the other end is
extraordinary sharp and small; and is jagged with notches like a Harpoon: so
that whatever it strikes into it immediately ^reaks off by the weight of the
biggest end; which ^t is not of strength to bear, (it being made so slen^er for
that purpose) and it is very difficult to be got ^ut again, by reason of those
notches. These Indi^ns have always War with our Darien friendly Indi^ns, and
lived on both sides this great River 50 or 60 ^egues from the Sea, but not near
the mouth of ^he River. There are abundance of Manatee in this ^iver, and some
Creeks belonging to it. This re^tion I had from several men who accompanied
Captain Coxon in that discovery; and from Mr Cook ^ particular, who was with
them, and is a very ^ntelligent person; He is now chief Mate of a Ship ^ound to
Guinea. To return therefore to the prose^ution of our Voyage; meeting with
nothing of ^ote we passed by Cartagene, which is a City so ^ell known, that I
shall say nothing of it. We ^iled by in sight of it, for it lies open to the
Sea; and had a fair view of Madre de Popa, or Nuestra a Sennora de Popa, a
Monastery of the Virgin Mary's, standing on the top of a very steep hill just
behind Cartagene. It is a place of incredible wealth, by reason of the
offerings made here continually; and for this reason often in danger of being
visited by the Privateers, did not the neighborhood of Cartagene keep them in
awe. It Is, in short, the very Loretto of the West Indies: it has innumerable
Miracles related of it. Any misfortune that befalls the Privateers is attributed
to this Lady's doing, and the Spaniards report that she was abroad that night
the Oxford Man of War was blown up at the Isle of Vacca near Hispaniola, and
that she came home all wet; as belike, she often returns with her Clothes dirty
and torn with passing through the Woods, and bad ways, when she has been out upon
any expedition; deserving doubtless a new suit for such eminent pieces of
service.

From hence we passed on to the Rio Grande, where we took up fresh Water at
Sea, a league off the mouth of that River. From thence we sailed Eastward,
passing by St Martha, a large Town, and good Harbor belonging to the
Spaniards: yet has it within these few years been twice taken by the
Privateers. It stands close upon the Sea, and the Hill within Land is a very
large one, towering up a great height from a vast body of Land. I am of
opinion that it is higher than the Pike of Tenariff; others also that have seen
both think the same; tho its bigness makes its height less sensible. I have
seen it in passing by, 30 leagues off at Sea; others as they told me, above 60:
and several have told me, that they have seen at once, Jamaica, Hispaniola and
the high Land of Santa Martha; and yet the nearest of these two places is
distant from it 120 leagues; and Jamaica, which is farthest off, is accounted
near 150 leagues; and I question whether any Land or either of those 2 Islands
may be seen 50 leagues^ ^ts head is generally hid in the Clouds; but in clear
weather, when the top appears, it looks white; supposed to be covered with
Snow. St Martha ^ieth in the Lat. of 12 Degrees. North.

Being advanced 5 or 6 leagues to the Eastward of Santa Martha, we left our
Ships at Anchor, and re^urn'd back in our Canoa's to the River Grande; en^ring
it by a mouth of it that disembogues it self near Santa Martha: purposing to
attempt some Towns that lie a pretty way up that River. But this design meeting
with discouragements, we re^urned to our Ships, and set sail to Rio la Hacha.
This has been a strong Spanish Town, and is well built; but being often taken
by the Privateers, the Spaniards deserted it some time before our arrival. It
lies to the Westward of a River; and right against the Town is a good Road for
Ships, the bottom clean and sandy. The Jamaica Sloops used often to come over
to trade here: and I am informed that the Spaniards have again settled
themselves in it, and made it very strong. We entered the Fort and brought 2
small Guns aboard. From thence we went to the Rancheries, one or 2 small Indian
Villages, where the Spaniards kept 2 Barks to fish for Pearl. The Pearl-banks
lie about 4 or 5 leagues off from the shore, as I have been told; thither the
Fishing Barks go and Anchor; then the Diverse go down to the bottom, and fill a
Basket (which is let down before) with Oysters; and when they come up, others
go down, 2 at a time; this they do till the Bark is full, and then go ashore,
where the Old men, Women and Children of the Indians, open the Oysters, there
being a Spanish Overseer to look after the Pearl. Yet these Indians do very
often secure the best Pearl for themselves, as many Jamaica men can testify,
who daily trade with them. The meat they string up, and hang it a drying. At
this place we went ashore, where we found one of the Barks, and saw great heaps
of Oyster-shells, but the people all fled: Yet in another place, between this
and Rio la Hacha, we took some of the Indians; who seem to be a stubborn sort
of people: They are long-visaged, black hair, their noses somewhat rising in
the middle, and of a stern look. The Spaniards report them to be a very
numerous Nation; and that they will not subject themselves to their yoke: Yet
they have Spanish Priests among them; and by trading have brought them to be
somewhat sociable; but cannot keep a severe hand over them. The Land is but
barren, it being of a light sand near the Sea; and most Savanah, or Champion;
and the grass but thin and course, yet they feed plenty of Cattle. Every man
knows his own, and looks after them: but the Land is in common except only
their Houses or small Plantations where they live, which every man maintains
with some fence about it. They may remove from one place to another as they
please, no man having right to any Land but what he possesses. This part of
the Country is not so subject to Rain, as to the Westward of Santa Martha; yet
here are Tornadoes or Thunder-showers; but neither so violent as on the Coast
of Portabell, nor so frequent. The Westerly Winds in the Westerly Wind season
blow here, tho not so strong nor lasting as on the Coasts of Cartagene and
Portabell.

When we had spent some time here, we returned again toward the Coast of
Cartagene; and being between Rio Grande and that place, we met with Westerly
Winds, which kept us still to the Eastward of Cartagene 3 or 4 days; and then
in the morning we descryed a Sail off at Sea, and we chaced her at noon:
Captain Wright who sailed best, came up with her, and engaged her; and in half
an hour after, Captain Yankey, who sailed better than the Tartan (the Vessel
that I was in) came up with he^ likewise, and laid her aboard, then Captain
Wright also; and they took her before we came up. They lost 2 or 3 men, and had
7 or 8 wounded. The Prize was a Ship of 12 Guns and 40 men, who had all good
small Arms: She was laden with Sugar and Tobacco, and had 8 or 10 Tuns of
Marmalet on board: She came from Saint Jago on Cuba, and was bound to Cartagene.

We went back with her to Rio Grande, to fix our Rigging, which was shattered
in the Fight, and to consider what to do with her; for these were commodities
of little use to us, and not worth going into a Port with. At the Rio Grande
Capt. Wright demanded the Prize as his due by virtue of his Commission: Captain
Yanky said it was his due by the Law of Privateers. Indeed Captain Wright had
the most right to her, having by his Commission protected Captain Yanky from
the French, who would have turned him out because he had no Commission; and he
likewise began to engage her first. But the company were all afraid that
Captain Wright would presently carry her into a Port; therefore most of Captain
Wright's men stuck to Captain Yanky, and Captain Wright losing his Prize burned
his own ^ark, and had Captain Yanky's, it being bigger than ^is own; the Tartan
was sold to a Jamaica Trader, and Captain Yanky commanded the Prize Ship. We
^ent again from hence to Rio la Hach, and set the ^risoners ashore, and it
being now the beginning of ^ov. we concluded to go to Querisao to sell ^our
^ugar, if favored by westerly winds, which were ^ow come in. We sailed from
thence, having fair ^eather and winds to our mind, which brought us (...)
Querisao, a Dutch Island. Captain Wright went a^ar to the Governor, and offered
him the Sale of ^e Sugar: but the Governor told him, he had a ^eat Trade with
the Spaniards, therefore he could ^t admit us in there; but if we would go to
St Thomas, which is an Island, and Free Port, belonging to the Danes, and a
Sanctuary for Privateers, he would send a Sloop with such Goods as we wanted,
and Money to buy the Sugar, which he would take at a certain rate; but it was
not agreed to.

Querisao is the only Island of importance that the Dutch have in the West
Indies. It is about 5 leagues in length, and may be 9 or 10 in circumference:
the Northermost point is laid down in North lat. 12 d. 40 m. and it is about 7
or 8 leagues from the Main, near Cape Roman. On the South side of the East end
is a good Harbor called Santa Barbara; but the chiefest harbor is about 3
leagues from the S. E. end, on the South side of it; where the Dutch have a
very good Town, and a very strong Fort. Ships bound in thither must be sure to
keep close to the Harbors mouth, and have a Hasar or Rope ready to send one
end ashore to the Fort: for there is no Anchoring at the entrance of the
Harbor, and the Current always sets to the Westward. But being got in, it is a
very secure Port for Ships, either to Careen, or lie safe. At the East end are
two hills, one of them is much higher than the other, and steepest toward the
North side. The rest of the Island is indifferent level; where of late some
rich Men have made Sugar Works; which formerly was all pasture for Cattle:
there are also some small Plantations of Potatoes and Yames, and they have
still a great many Cattle on the Island; but it is not so much esteemed for its
produce, as for its situation for the Trade with the Spaniard. Formerly the
Harbor was never without Ships from Cart^egne and Portobell, that did use to
buy of the Dutch here 1000 or 1500 Negroes at once, besides great quantities of
European Commodities; but of late that Trade is fallen into the hands of the
English at Jamaica: yet still the Dutch have a vast Trade over all the West
Indies, sending from Holland Ships of good force laden with European goods,
whereby they make very profitable returns. The Dutch have 2 other Islands here,
but of little moment in comparison of Querisao; the one lies 7 or 8 leagues to
the Westward of Querisao, called Aruba; the other 9 or 10 leagues to the
Eastward of it, called Bon Airy. From these Islands the Dutch fetch in Sloops
Provision for Querisao, to maintain their Garrison and Negroes. I was never at
Aruba, therefore cannot say any thing of it as to my own knowledge; but by
report it is much like Bon Airy, which I shall describe, only not so big.
Between Querisao and Bon Airy is a small Island called Little Querisao, it is
not above a league from Great Querisao. The King of France has long had an eye
on Querisao, and made some attempts to take it, but never yet succeeded. I have
heard that about 23 or 24 years since the Governor had sold it to the French,
but dyed a small time before the Fleet came to demand it; and by his death that
design failed. Afterward, in the year 1678, the Count D' Estree, who a year
before had taken the Isle of Tobago from the Dutch, was sent thither also with
a Squadron of stout Ships very well manned, and fitted with Bombs and
Carcasses; intending to take it by storm. This Fleet came first to Martinico;
where while they stayed, orders were sent to Petit Guavers, for all Privateers
to repair thither, and assist the Count in his design. There were but 2
Privateers Ships that went thither with him, which were manned partly with
French, partly with English men. These set ^ut with the Count; but in their way
to Querisao ^he whole Fleet was lost on a Riff or Ridge of ^ocks, that runs off
from the Isle of Aves; not above 2 Ships escaping, 1 of which was 1 of the
Pri^teers; and so that design perished.

Wherefore not driving a Bargain for our Sugar ^ith the Governor of Querisao,
we went from thence (...) Bon Airy, another Dutch Island, where we met a Dutch
Sloop come from Europe, laden with Irish B^, which we bought in exchange for
some of our S^.

Bon (...) is the Eastermost of the Dutch Islands, and is the largest of the 3,
tho not the most confiderable. The middle of the Island is laid down in Lat. 12
d. 16 m. It is about 20 leagues from the Main, and 9 or 10 from Querisao, and
is accounted 16 or 17 leagues round. The Road is on the S. W. side, near the
middle of the Island; where there is a pretty deep Bay runs in. Ships that come
from the Eastward luff up close to the Eastern shore; and let go their Anchor
in 60 fathom water, within half a Cables length of the shore. But at the same
time they must be ready with a Boat to carry a Hasar or Rope, and make it fast
ashore; otherwise, when the Land-wind comes in the night, the Ship would drive
off to Sea again; for the ground is so steep, that no Anchor can hold if once
it starts. About half a mile to the Westward of this Anchoring place there is a
small low land, and a Channel between it and the main Island.

The Houses are about half a mile within Land, right against the Road: there is
a Governor lives here, a Deputy to the Governor of Querisao, and 7 or 8
Soldiers, with 5 or 6 Families of Indians. There is no Fort; and the Soldiers
in peaceable times have little to do but to eat and sleep, for they never
watch, but in time of War. The Indians are Husbandmen, and plant Maiz and
Guinea Corn, and some Yams, and Potatoes: But their chiefest business is about
Cattle; for this Island is plentifully stocked with Goats, and they send great
quantities every year in Salt to Querisao. There are some Horses, and Bulls and
Cows; but I never saw any Sheep, tho I have been all over the Island. The South
side is plain low Land, and there are several sorts of Trees, but none very
large. There is a small Spring of Water by the Houses, which serves the
Inhabitants, tho it is blackish. At the West end of the Island there is a good
Spring of fresh Water, and 3 and 4 Indian Families live there, but no Water nor
Houses at any other place. On the South side, near the East end, is a good
Salt-pond, where Dutch Sloops come for Salt.

From Bon-Airy we went to the Isle of Aves, or Birds; so called from its great
plenty of Birds, as Men-of-War and Boobies; but especially Boobies. The Booby
is a Waterfowl, somewhat less than a Hen, of a light greyish color. I
observed the Boobies of this Island to be whiter than others. This Bird has a
strong Bill, longer and bigger than a Crows, and broader at the end; her Feet
are flat like a Ducks feet. It is a very simple Creature, and will hardly go
out of a Man's way. In other places they build their Nests on the Ground, but
here they build on Trees, which I never saw any where else; though I have seen of
them in a great many places. Their Flesh is black and eats Fishy, but are often
eaten by the Privateers. Their numbers have been much lessened by the French
Fleet, which was lost here, as I shall give an account.

The Man-of-War (as it is called by the English) is about the bigness of a
Kite, and in shape like it, but black; and the Neck is red. It lives on Fish,
yet never lights on the Water, but soars alost like a Kite, and when it sees
its prey, it flys down head foremost to the Waters edge, very swiftly takes its
prey out of the Sea with his Bill, and immediately mounts again as swiftly; and
never touching the Water with his Bill. His Wings are very long; his Feet are
like other Land-fowl; and he builds on Trees, where he finds any; but where
they are wanting, on the Ground.

This Island Aves lies about 8 or 9 leagues to the Eastward of the Island
Bon-Airy, about 14 or 15 leagues French Fleet was lost, as I mentioned above,
runs along from the East end to the Northward about 3 mile, then trends away to
the Westward, making as it were, a Half Moon. This Riff breaks off all the Sea,
and there is good Riding in even sandy ground to the Westward of it. There are
2 or 3 small low sandy-Keys, or Island, within this Riff, about 3 miles from
the Main Island. The Count d'Estree lost his Fleet here in this manner. Coming
from the Eastward, he fell in on the back of the Riff, and fired Guns to give
warning to the rest of his Fleet: But they supposing their Admiral was engaged
with Enemies, hoisted up their Topsails, and crowded all the Sail they could
make, and ran full sail ashore after him; all within half a mile of each other.
For his Light being in the Main-Top was an unhappy Beacon for them to follow;
and there escaped but one Kings-Ship and one Privateer. The Ships continued
whole all day, and the Men had time enough, most of them, to get ashore, yet
many perished in the Wreck: and many of those that got safe on the Isl^nd, for
want of being accustomed to such hardships, died like rotten Sheep. But the
Privateers who had been used to such accidents lived merrily, from whom I had
this relation: and they told me, that if they had gone to Jamaica with 3 cl. a
Man in their Pockets, they could not have enjoyed themselves more: For they
kept in a Gang by themselves, and watched when the Ships broke, to get the
Goods that come from them; and though much was staved against the Rocks, yet
abundance of Wine and Brandy floated over the Riff, where these Privateers
waited to take it up. They lived here about 3 weeks, waiting an opportunity to
transport themselves back again into Hispaniola; in all which time, they were
never without 2 or 3 Hogsheads of Wine and Brandy in their Tents, and Barrels
of Beef and Pork; which they could live on without Bread well enough, tho the
new-comers out of France could not. There were about forty Frenchmen on board
in one of the Ships where there was good store of Liquor, till the after part
of her broke away, and floated over the Riff, and was carried away to Sea, with
all the Men drinking and singing, who being in drink, did not mind the danger,
but were never heard of afterward.

In a short time after this great Shipwreck, Captain Pain, Commander of a
Privateer of 6 Guns, had a pleasant accident befell him at this Island. He came
hither to careen, intending to fit himself very well; for here lay driven on
the Island, Mast, Yards, Timbers, and many things that he wanted, therefore he
haled into the Harbor, close to the Island, and unrigg'd his Ship. Before he
had done, a Dutch Ship of 20 Guns, was sent from Querisao to take up the Guns
that were lost on the Riff: But seeing a Ship in the Harbor, and knowing her
to be a French Privateer, they thought to take her first, and came within a
mile of her, and began to fire at her, intending to warp in the next day, for
it is very narrow going-in. Capt. Pain got ashore some of his Guns, and did
what he could to resist them; though he did in a manner conclude he must be
taken. But while his Men were thus busied, he spied a Dutch Sloop turning to
get into the Road, and saw her at the evening Anchor at the West end of the
Island. This gave him some hope of making his escape; which he did, by sending
two Canoas in the night aboard the Sloop, who took her, and got confiderable
purchase in her; and he went away in her, making a good Reprizal, and leaving
his own empty Ship to the Dutch Man of War.

There is another Island to the Eastward of the Isle of Aves about 4 leagues,
called by Privateers the little Isle of Aves, which is overgrown with Mangrove
Trees. I have seen it, but was never on it. There are no Inhabitants, that I
could learn, on either of these Islands, but Boobies and a few other Birds.

While we were at the Isle of Aves, we careen'd Capt. Wright's Bark, and
scrubb'd the Sugar-prize, and got 2 Guns out of the Wrecks; continuing here
till the beginning of Feb. 1681/2.

We went from hence to the Isles Roca's, to careen the Sugar-prize, which the
Isle of Aves was not a place so convenient for. Accordingly we haled close to
one of the small Islands, and got our Guns ashore the first thing we did, and
built a Breast-work on the Point, and planted all our Guns there, to hinder an
Enemy from coming to us while we lay on the Careen: Then we made a House, and
covered ir with our Sails, to put our Goods and Provisions in. While we lay
here, a French Man of War of 36 Guns, came through the Keys; or little Islands;
to whom we sold about 10 Tun of Sugar. I was aboard twice or thrice, and very
kindly welcomed both by the Capt. and his Lieutenant, who was a Cavalier of
Malta; and they both offered me great Encouragement in France, if I would go
with them; but I ever designed to continue with those of my own Nation.

The Islands Roca's are a parcel of small uninhabited Islands, lying about the
lat. of 11 degrees. 40 min. about 15 or 16 leagues from the Main, and about 20
leagues N. W. by W. from Tortuga, and 6 or 7 leagues to the Westward of
Orchilla, another Island lying about the same distance from the Main; which
Island I have seen, but was never at it. Roca's stretch themselves East and
West about 5 leagues, and their breadth about 3 leagues. The Northermost of
these Islands is the most remarkable by reason of a high white rocky Hill at
the west end of it, which may be seen a great way; and on it there are
abundance of Tropic Birds, Men-of-War, Booby and Noddys, which breed there.
The Booby and Man-of-War, I have described already. The Noddy is a small black
Bird, about the bigness of the English Blackbird, and indifferent good Meat.
They build in Rocks. We never find them far off from shore. I have seen of them
in other places, but never saw any of their Nests, but in this Island, where
there is great plenty of them. The Tropic Bird is as big as a Pidgeon, but
round and plump like a Partridge. They are all white, except two or three
Feathers in each Wing of a light gray. Their Bills are of a yellowish color,
thick and short. They have one long Feather, or rather a Quill, about 7 inches
long, grows at the Rump, which is all the Tail they have. They are never seen
far without either Tropic, for which reason they are called Tropic Birds.
They are very good food, and we meet with them a great way at Sea, and I never
saw of them any where but at Sea, and in this Island, where they build, and are
found in great plenty.

By the Sea, on the South side of that high Hill, there is fresh Water comes out
of the Rocks, but so slowly, that it yields not above 40 Gallons in 24 hours,
and it tastes so copperish, or aluminous rather, and rough in the Mouth, that
it seems very unpleasant at first drinking: But after 2 or 3 days any Water
will seem to have no taste.

The middle of this Island low plain Land, over grown with long Grass, where
there are multitudes of small gray Fowls no bigger than a Black Bird, yet lay
Eggs bigger than a Magpy's; and they are therefore by Privateers called Egg
Birds. The East end of the Island is overgrown with black Mangrove Trees.

There are 3 sorts of Mangrove Trees, black, red and white. The black Mangrove
is the largest Tree; the body about as big as an Oak, and about 20 foot high.
It is very hard and serviceable Timber, but extraordinary heavy, therefore not
much made use of for Building. The red Mangrove grows commonly by the Sea
side, or by Rivers or Creeks. The Body is not so big as that of the black
Mangrove, but always grows out of many Roots about the bigness of a Man's Leg,
some bigger, some less, which is about 6, 8, or 10 foot above the Ground, join
into one trunk or body, that seems to be supported by so many Artificial
Stakes. Where this sort of Tree grows, it is impossible to march, by reason of
these Stakes, which grow so mixed one amongst another, that I have, when forced
to go through them gone half a mile, and never set my foot on the Ground,
stepping from Root to Root. The Timber is hard and good for many uses. The
inside of the Bark is red, and it is used for tanning of Leather very much all
over the West Indies. The white Mangrove never grows so big as the other two
sorts, neither is it of any great use: Of the young Trees Privateers use to
make Loom, or Handles for their Oars, for it is commonly straight, but not very
strong, which is the fault of them. Neither the black nor white Mangrove grow
towering up from stilts or rising root, as the red does; but the Body
immediately out of the Ground, like other Trees.

The Land of this East end is light sand, which is sometimes over-flown with
the Sea at Spring-tides. The Road for Ships is on the South side, against the
middle of the Island. The rest of the Islands of Roca's are low. The next to
this on the South side is but small, flat, and even, without Trees, bearing
only Grass. On the South side of it is a Pond of brackish water, which
sometimes Privateers use instead of better; there is likewise good Riding by it
About a league from this are two other Islands, not 200 yards distant from each
other; yet a deep Channel for Ships to pass through. They are both overgrown
with red Mangrove Trees; which Trees, above any of the Mangroves, do flourish
best in wet drowned Land, such as these two Islands are; only the East point of
the Westermost Island is dry sand, without Tree or Bush. On thispoint we
careened, lying on the South side of it.

The other Islands are low, and have red Mangroves, and other Trees on them.
Here also Ships may ride, but no such place for careening as where we lay,
because at that place Ships may hale close to the shore; and if they had but
four Guns on the point, may secure the Channel, and hinder any Enemy from
coming near them. I observe, that within among the Islands, was good riding in
many places, but not without the Islands, except to the Westward, or South West
of them. For on the East, or N. E. of these Islands, the common Trade Wind
blows, and makes a great Sea: and to the Southward of them, there is no ground
under 70, 80, or 100 fathom, close by the Land.

After we had filled what water we could from hence, we set out again in April
1682. and came to Salt-Tortuga, so called to distinguish it from the shoals of
Dry Tortugas, near Capt Florida, and from the Isle of Tortugas by Hispamola,
which was called formerly French Tortugas; though not having heard any mention
of that name a great while, I am apt to think it is swallowed up in that of
Petit-Guavres, the chief Garrison the French have in those parts. This Island
we arrived at is pretty large, uninhabited, and abounds with Salt. It is in
lat. 11 d. North, and lies West and a little Northerly from Margarita, an
Island inhabited by the Spaniards, strong, and wealthy; it is distant from it
about 14 leagues, and 17 or 18 from Cape Blanco on the Main: A Ship being
within these Islands, a little to the South ward, may see at once the Main,
Margarita, and Tortuga, when it is clear weather. The East end of Tortuga is
full of rugged, bare, broken Rocks, which stretch themselves a little way out
to Sea. At the S. E. part is of an indifferent good Road for Ships, much
frequented in peaceable times by Merchantships, that come thither to lade Salt,
in the months of May, June, July and August. For at the East end is a large
Salt-pond, within 200 paces of the Sea. The Salt begins to kern or grain in
April, except it is a dry season; for it is observed that Rain makes the Salt
kern. I have seen above 20 Sail at a time in this Road come to lade Salt; and
these Ships coming from some of the Caribbe Islands, are always well stored
with Rum, Sugar and Lime-juice to make Punch, to hearten their Men when they
are at work, getting and bringing aboard the Salt; and they commonly provide
the more, in hopes to meet with Privateers, who resort hither in the aforesaid
Months, purposely to keep a Christmas, as they call it; being sure to meet with
Liquor enough to be merry with, and are very Liberal to those that treat them.
Near the West end of the Island, on the South side, there is a small Harbor
and some fresh Water: That end of the Island is full of shrubby Trees, but the
East end is rocky and barren as to Trees, producing only course Grass. There
are ^me Goats on it, but not many, and Turtle or Tortoise come upon the sandy
Bays to lay their Eggs, and from them the Island has its name. There is no
riding any where but in the Roads where the Salt-ponds are, or in the Harbor.

At this Isle we thought to have sold our Sugar among the English Ships that
come hither for Salt; but failing there, we designed for Trinidada, an Island
near the main, inhabited by the Spaniards, tolerably strong and wealthy: but
the Current and Easterly winds hindering us, we passed through between Margarita
and the main, and went to Blanco, a pretty large Island almost North of
Margarita; about 30 leagues from the main, and in 11 d. 50 m. North Lat. It is
a flat, even, low, uninhabited Island, dry and healthy: most Savannah of long
Grass, and has some Trees of Lignum Vitae growing in Spots, with shrubby
bushes of other Wood about them. It is plentifully stored with Guano's which
are an Animal like a Lizard, but much bigger. The body is as big as the small
of a man's Leg, and from the hind quarter the Tail grows tapering to the end
which is very small. If a man takes hold of the Tail, except very near the hind
quarter, it will part and break off in one of the joints, and the Guano will
get away. They lay Eggs as most of those amphibious creatures do, and are very
good to eat. Their flesh is much esteemed by Privateers, who commonly dress
them for their sick men; for they make very good Broth. They are of diverse
colors, as almost black, dark brown, light brown, dark green, light green,
yellow and speckled. They all live as well in the Water as on Land, and some of
them are constantly in the Water and among Rocks: These are commonly black.
Others that live in swampy wet ground are commonly on Bushes and Trees, these
are green. But such as live in dry ground, as here at Blanco are commonly
yellow; yet these also will live in the Water, and are sometimes on Trees. The
Road is on the N. W. end, against a small Cove, or little sandy Bay. There is
no riding any where else, for it is deep water, and steep, close to the Land.
There is one small Spring on the West side, and there are sandy Bays round the
Island, where Turtle or Tortoise, come up in great abundance, going ashore in
the night. These that frequent this Island are called green Turtle, and they
are the best of that sort, both for largness and sweetness of any in all the
West Indies. I would here give a particular description of these, and other
sorts of Turtle in these Seas; but because I shall have occasion to mention
some other sort of Turtle when I come again into the South Seas, that are very
different from all these, I shall there give a general account of all these
several sorts at once, that the difference between them may be the better
discerned. Some of our modern Descriptions speak of Goats on this Island. I
know not what there may have been formerly, but there are none now to my
certain knowledge; for my self, and many more of our Crew, have been all over
it. Indeed these parts have undergone great changes in this last Age, as well
in places themselves, as in their Owners, and Commodities of them; particularly
Nombre deDios, a City once famous, and which still retains a considerable name
in some late accounts, is now nothing but a Name. For I have lain ashore in the
place where that City stood; but it is all overgrown with Wood, so as to leave
no sign that any Town has been there.

We staid at the Isle of Blanco not above ten days, and then went back to
Salt-Tortuga again, where Captain Yanky parted with us: And from thence, after
about 4 days, all which time our men were drunk and quarrelling, we in Capt.
Wright's Ship went to the Coast of Caraccos on the Main Land. This Coast is
upon several accounts very remarkable: It Is a continued tract of high Ridges of
Hills, and small Valleys intermixed for about 20 leagues, stretching East and
West, but in such manner, that the Ridges of Hills and the Valleys alternately
run pointing upon the shore from South to North: The Valleys some of them about
4 or 5, others not above one or two furlongs wide, and in length from the Sea
scarce any of them above 4 or 5 mile at most; there being a long ridge of
Mountains at that distance from the Seacoast, and in a manner parallel to it
that joins those shorter Ridges, and closes up the South end of the Valleys,
which at the North ends of them lie open to the Sea, and make so many little
sandy Bays, that are the only landing places on the Coast. Both the main Ridge
and these shorter Ribs are very high Land, so that 3 or 4 leagues off at Sea
the Valleys scarce appear to the Eye, but all looks like one great Mountain.
From the Isles of Roca's about 15, and from the Isle of Aves about 20 leagues
off, we see this Coast very plain from on board our Ships, yet when at Anchor
on this Coast, we cannot see those Isles; tho again from the tops of these
Hills, they appear as if at no great distance, like so many Hillocks in a Pond.
These Hills are barren, except the lower sides of them that are covered with
some of the same rich black Mould that fiills the Valleys, and is as good as I
have seen. In some of the Valleys there is a strong red Clay, but in the general
they are extremely fertile, well watered, and inhabited by Spaniards and their
Negroes. They have Maiz and Plantains for their support, with Indian Fowls and
some Hogs. But the main product of these Valleys, and indeed the only Commodity
it vends, are the Cacao Nuts, of which the Chocolate is made. The Cacao-Tree
grows no where in the North Seas but in the Bay of Campeachy, on Costa Rica,
between Portabel and Nicaragua, chiefly up Carpenters River; and on this Coast
as high as the Isle of Trinidada. In the South Seas, it grows in the River of
Guiaquil, a little to the Southward of the Line, and in the Valley of Collima,
on the South side of the Continent of Mexico; both which places I shall
hereafter describe. Besides these, I am confident there is no place in the World
where the Cacao grows, except those in Jamaica, of which there are now but few
remaining, of many and large Walks or Plantations of them found there by the
English at their first arrival, and since planted by them; and even these, tho
there is a great deal of pains and care bestowed on them, yet seldom come to
any thing being generally blighted. The Nuts of this Coast of Caraccos, tho
less than those of Costa Rica which are large flat Nuts, yet are better and
fatter in my opinion, being so very oily, that we are forced to use Water in
rubbing them up; and the Spaniards that live here, instead of parching them, to
get off the Shell before they pound or rub them to make Chocalate, do in a
manner burn 'em to dry up the Oil; for else they say, it would fill them too
full of blood, drinking Chocolate as they do five or six times a day. My worthy
Consort Mr Ringrose commends most the Guiaquil Nut; I presume, because he had
little knowledge of the rest, for being intimately acquainted with him, I know
the course of his Travels and Experience: But I am persuaded, had he known the
rest so well as I pretend to have done, who have at several times been long
used to, and in a manner lived upon all the several sorts of 'em
abovementioned, he would prefer the Caraccos Nuts before any other; yet
possibly the drying up of these Nuts so much by the Spaniards here, as I said,
may lessen their esteem with those Europeans, that use their Chocolate ready
rubbed up: So that we always chose to make it up our selves.

The Cacao Tree has a Body about a foot and an half thick (the largest sort)
and 7 or 8 foot high to the Branches, which are large, and spreading like an
Oak, with a pretty thick, smooth, dark-green leaf, shaped like that of a
Plumb-Tree, but larger. The Nuts are enclosed in Cods as big as both a Man's
Fists put together: At the broad end of which there is a small, tough, limber
stalk, by which they hang pendulous from the Body of the Tree, in all parts of
it from top to bottom, scattered at irregular distances, and from the greater
branches a little way up, especially at the joints of them, or partings, where
they hang thickest, but never on the smaller boughs: there may be ordinarily
about 20 or 30 of these Cods upon a well bearing Tree; and they have 2 Crops of
them in a year, one in December, but the best in June. The Cod it self or Shell
is almost half an Inch thick; neither spongy nor woody, but of a substance
between both, brittle, yet harder than the Rind of a Lemmon; like which its
surface is grained or knobb'd, but more course and unequal: the Cods at first
are of a dark-green, but the side of them next the Sun of a muddy red. As they
grow ripe, the green turns to a fine bright yellow, and the muddy to a more
lively beautiful red, very pleasant to the Eye. They neither ripen, nor are
gathered at once: but for three weeks or a month when the Season is, the
Overseers of the Plantations go every day about to see which are turned yellow;
cutting at once it may be, not above one from a Tree. The Cods thus gathered,
they lay in several heaps to sweat, and then bursting the Shell with their
hands, they pull out the Nuts, which are the only substance they contain,
having no stalk or pith among them, and (excepting that these Nuts lie in
regular rows) are placed like the grains of Maiz, but sticking together, and so
closely stowed, that after they have been once separated, it would be hard to
place them again in so narrow a compass. There are generally near 100 Nuts in a
Cod; in proportion to the greatness of which, for it varies, the Nuts are
bigger or less. When taken out they dry them in the Sun upon Mats spread of the
Ground; after which they need no more care, having a thin hard skin of their
own, and much Oil which preserves them. Salt water will not hurt them; for we
had our Baggs rotten, lying in the bottom of our Ship, and yet the Nuts never
the worse. They raise the young Trees of Nuts, set with the great end down-ward
in fine black Mould, and in the same places where they are to bear; which they
do in 4 or 5 years time, without the trouble of transplanting. There are
ordinarily of these Trees, from 500 to 2000 and upward in a Plantation or Cacao
walk, as they call them; and they shelter the young Trees from the Weather with
Plantains set about them for 2 or 3 years; destroying all the Pantains by such
time the Cacao-Trees are of a pretty good Body, and able to endure the heat;
which I take to be the most pernicious to them of any thing; for tho these
Valleys lie open to the North Winds, unless a little sheltered here and there,
by some Groves of Plantain Trees, which are purposely set near the Shores of
the several Bays yet by all that I could either observe or learn, the Cacaos in
this Country are never blighted, as I have often known them to be in other
places. Cacao Nuts are used as Money in the Bay of Campeachy.

The chief Town of this Country is called Caraccos, a good way within Land,
it is a large we we^y place, where live most of the Owners of ^se Cacao-walks,
that are in the Valleys by the; the Plantations being managed by Overseers and
Negroes. It is in a large Savannah Country, (...) abounds with Cattle, and a
Spaniard of my acqu^tance, a very sencible Man who has been there, tells me
that it is very populous, and he judges it to be 3 times as big as Corunna an
Gallicia. The way to it is very steep and craggy over that ridge of Hills,
which I say closes up the Valleys and partition Hills of the Cacao Coast. In
this Coast it self the chief place is la Guiare, a good Town close by the Sea,
and though it had but a bad Harbor, yet it is much frequented by the Spanish
Shipping; for the Dutch and English Anchor in the sandy Bays that lie here and
there in the mouths of several Valleys, and where there is a good riding. The
Town is open, but has a strong Fort; yet both were taken some years since by
Captain Wright and his Privateers. It Is seated about 4 or 5 leagues to the
Westward of Cape Blanco, which Cape is the Eastermost boundary of this Coast of
Caraccos. Further Eastward about 20 leagues, is a great Lake or Branch of the
Sea called Laguna de Venezaela; about which are many rich Towns, but the mouth
of the Lake is so shallow, that no Ship can enter. Near this mouth is a place
called Comana, where the Privateers were once repulsed without daring to
attempt it any more, being the only place in the North Seas they attempted in
vain for many years; and the Spaniards since throw it in their teeth
frequently, as a word of reproach or defiance to them. Not far from that place
is Verina, a small Village and Spanish Plantation, famous for its Tobacco;
reputed the best in the World.

But to return to Caraccos, all this Coast is subject to dry Winds, generally
North East, which caused us to have scabby Lips; and we always sound it thus,
and that in different Seasons of the year, for I have been on this Coast
several times. In other respects it is very healthy, and a sweet clear Air. The
Spaniards have Look-outs or Scouts on the Hills, and Breast-works in the
Valleys, and most of their Negroes are furnished with Arms also for defense of
the Bays. The Dutch have a very profitable Trade here almost to themselves. I
have known three or four great Ships at a time on the Coast, each it may be of
30 or 40 Guns. They carry hither all sorts of European Commodities, especially
Linen, making vast returns, chiefly in Silver and Cacao. And I have often
wondered and regretted it, that none of my own Countrymen find the way thither
directly from England; for our Jamaica-men trade thither indeed, and find the
sweet of it, tho they carry English Commodities at second or third hand.

While we lay on this Coast, we went ashore in some of the Bays, and took 7 or
8 Tun of Cacao; and after that 3 Barks, one laden with Hides, the second with
European Commodities, the third with Earthen ware and Brandy. With these 3
Barks we went again to the Island Roca's where we shared our Commodities and
separated, having Vessels enough to transport us all whither we thought most
convenient. Twenty of us (for we were about 60) took one of the Vessels and our
share of the Goods, and went directly for Virginia. In our way thither we took
several of the Sucking fishes; for when we see them about the Ship, we cast out
a Line and Hook, and they will take it with any manner of Bait, whether Fish or
Flesh: the Sucking fish is about the bigness of a large Whiting, and much of
the some shape toward the Tail, but the Head is flatter. From the head to the
middle of it^ back, there grows a sort of flesh of a hard gristl^ substance,
like that of the Limpit (a Shellfish^ tapering up piramidically) which sticks
to the Rocks; or like the head or mouth of a Shell Snai^ but harder. This
Exerescence is of a flat oval for^ about 7 or 8 inches long, and 5 or 6 broad,
and r^sing about half an inch high. It is full of sma^ ridges, with which it
will fasten it self to any thing that it meets with in the Sea, just as a Snail
does to a Wall. When any of them happen to come about a Ship they seldom leave
her, for they will feed on such filth as is daily thrown overboard, or on mere
Excrements. When it is fair weather, and but little wind, they will play about
the Ship; but in blustering weather, or when the Ship sails quick, they
commonly fasten themselves to the Ships bottom, from whence neither the Ships
motion, tho never so swift, nor the most tempestuous Sea can remove them. They
will likewise fasten themselves to any other bigger Fish; for they never swim
fast themselves, if they meet with any thing to carry them. I have found them
sticking to a Shark, after it was haled i^ on the Deck, though a Shark is so
strong and boisterous a Fish, and throws about him so vehemently for half an
hour together, it may be, when caught, that did not the Sucking-fish stick at
no ordinary rate, it must needs be cast off by so much violence. It is usual
also to see them sticking to Turtle, to any old Trees, Planks or the like, that
lie driving at Sea. Any knobs or inequalities at a Ships bottom, are a great
hindrance to the swiftness of its sailing; and 10 or 12 of these sticking to
it, must needs retard it as much in a manner, as if its bottom were foul. So
that I am inclined to think that this Fish is the Remora, of which the Ancients
tell such stories; if it be not, I know no other that is, and I leave the
Reader to judge. I have seen of these Sucking fishes in great plenty in the Bay
of Campeachy, and in all the Sea between that and the Coast of C^ces, as about
those Islands particularly. I have lately described, Rocas, Blanco, Tortugas,
etc. they have no scales, and are very good meat.

We met nothing else worth remark in our Voyage to Virginia, where we arrived
in July 1682. That Country is so well known to our Nation, that I shall say
nothing of it, nor shall I detain the Reader with the story of my own Affairs,
and the troubles that befell me during about 13 months of my stay there; but in
the next Chapter, enter immediately upon my second Voyage into the South Seas,
and round the Globe.

CHAP. IV.
The Author's Voyage to the Isle of John Fernando in the South Sea. He arrives
at the Isle of Cape Verd. Isle of Sall; its Salt ponds. The Flamingo, and its
remarkable Nest. Ambergriese where found. The Isles of St Nicholas, Mayo, St
Jago, Fogo, a burning Mountain; with the rest of the Isles of Cape Verd.
Sherborough River on the Coast of Guinea. The Commodities and Negroes there: A
Town of theirs described. Tornadoes, Sharks, Flyingfish. A Sea deep and clear,
yet pale. Isles of Sibble de Ward. Small red Lobsters. Straight Le Mair. States
Island. Cape Horn in Terra del Fuego. Their meeting with Captain Eaton in the
South Seas, and their going together to the Isle of John Fernando. Of a
Moskito-man left there alone 3 years: His Art and Sagacity; with that of other
Indians. The Island described. The Savannahs of America. Goats at John
Fernando's Seals. Sea Lions. Snappers a sort of Fish. Rock-fish. The Bays and
natural strength of this Island.

BEing now entering upon the Relation of a new Voyage, which makes up the main
body of this Book, proceeding from Virginia by the way of Terra del Fuego, and
the South Seas, the East Indies, and so on, till my return to England by the
way of the Cape of good hope, I shall give my Reader this short Account of my
first entrance upon it. Among those who Sharp into the South Seas in our former
Expedition, and leaving him there, returned over Land, as is said in the
Introduction, and in the 1st and 2d Chapters; there was one Mr Cook, an English
Native of St Christophers, a Cirole, as we call all born of European Parents in
the West Indies. He was a sensible man, and had been some years a Privateer. At
our joining our selves with those Privateers we met at our coming again to the
North Seas, his lot was to be with Captain Yanky, who kept company for some
considerable time with Capt. Wright, in whose Ship I was, and parted with us at
our 2d Anchoring at the Isle of Tortugas, as I have said in the last Chapter.
After our parting, this Mr Cook being Quartermaster under Captain Yanky, the
second place in the Ship, according to the Law of Privateers, laid claim to a
Ship they took from the Spaniards; and such of Captain Yanky's men as were so
disposed, particularly all those who came with us over Land, went aboard this
Prize Ship under the new Capt Cook. This destribution was made at the Isle of
Vacca, or the Isle of Ash, as we call it; and here they parted also such Goods
as they had taken. But Capt. Cook having no Commission, as Captain Yanky,
Captain Tristian, and some other French Commanders had, who lay then at that
Island, and they grutching the English such a Vessel, they all joined together,
plundered the English of their Ship, Goods and Arms, and turned them ashore.
Yet Capt. Tristian took in about 8 or 10 of these English and carried them with
him to Petit Guavers: of which number Captain Cook was one, and Capt. Davis
another, who with the rest found means to seize the Ship as she lay at anchor
in the Road, Capt. Tristian and many of his men being then ashore: and the
English sending ashore such French men as remained in the Ship and were
mastered by them, though superior in number, stood away with her immediately for
the Isle of Vacca, before any notice of this surprise could reach the French
Governor of that Isle; so deceiving him also by a Stratagem, they got on board
the rest of their Countrymen, wha had been left on that Island; and going
thence they took a Ship newly come from France, laden with Wines. They also
took a Ship of good force, in which they resolved to embark themselves, and
make a new Expedition into the South Seas, to cruise on the Coast of Chili and
Peru. But first they went for Virginia with their Prizes; where they arrived
the April after my coming thither. The best of the Prizes carried 18 Guns: this
they fitted up there with Sails, and every thing necessary for so long a
Voyage; selling the Wines they had taken for such Provisions as they wanted. My
self and those of our Fellow-travellers over the Isthmus of America, who came
with me to Virginia the year before this, (most of which had since made a short
Voyage to Carolina, and again returned to Virginia) resolved to join our selves
to these new Adventurers, and as many more engaged tn the same design as made
our whole Crew consist of 70 men. So having furnished our selves with necessary
Materials, and agreed upon some particular Rules, especially of Temperance and
Sobriety, by reason of the length of our intended Voyage, we all went on board
our Ship.

August 23. 1683. We sailed from Achamack to Virginia, under the command of
Capt. Cook, bound for the South Seas. I shall not trouble the Reader with an
account of every days run, but hasten to the less known parts of the World, to
give a description of 'em; only relating such memorable Accidents as happened
to us, and such places as we touched at by the way.

We met nothing worth observation till we came to the Islands of Cape Verd,
except a terrible Storm, which could not escape it: This happened in a few days
after we left Virginia, with a S. S. E. wind just in our Teeth. The storm
lasted above a week: it drencht us all like so many drowned Rats, and was one
of the worst storms I ever was in. One I met with in the East Indies was more
violent for the time, but of not above 24 hours continuance. After that storm
we had favorable winds and good weather, and in short time we arrived at the
Island Sall, which is one of the Eastermost of the Cape Verd Islands. Of these
there are ten in number (so considerable as to bear distinct names) and they
lie several degrees off from Cape Verd in Africa whence they receive that
Appellation; taking up about 5 degrees. of Longitude in breadth, and about as many
of Latitude in their length, viz. from near 14 to 19 North. They are most
inhabited by Portuguese Banditti. This of Sall is an Island lying in the Lat.
of 16 in Long. 19 degrees. 33 m. West from the Lizard in England, stretching from
North to South about 8 or 9 leagues, and not above a league and an half or 2
leagues wide. It has its name from the abundance of Salt that is naturally
congealed there, the whole Island being full of large Salt-ponds. The Land is
very barren, producing no Tree that I could see, but some small shrubby Bushes
by the Sea side Neither could I discern any Grass, yet there are some poor
Goats on it.

I know not whether there are any other Beasts on the Island: There are some
wild Fowl, but I judge not many. I saw a few Flamingos, which is a sort of
large Fowl, much like a Heron in shape but bigger, and of a reddish color.
They delight to keep together in great companies, and feed in Mud or Ponds, or
in such places where there is not much Water: They are very shy, therefore it
is hard to shoot them. Yet I have lain obscured in the evening near a place
where they resort, and with two more in my company have killed 14 of them at
once; the first shot being made while they were standing on the ground, the
other two as they rose. They build their Nests in shallow Ponds, where there is
much Mud, which they scrape together, making little Hillocks, like small
Islands, appearing out of the Water, a foot and half high from the bottom. They
make the foundation of these Hillocks broad, bringing them up tapering to the
top, where they leave a small hollow pit to lay their Eggs in; and when they
either lay their Eggs, or hatch them, they stand all the while, not on the
Hillock, but close by it with their Legs on the ground and in the water,
resting themselves against the Hillock, and covering the hollow Nest upon it
with their Rumps: For their Legs are very long; and building thus, as they do,
upon the ground they could neither draw their Legs conveniently into their
Nests, nor sit down upon them otherwise than by resting their whole bodies
there, to the prejudice of their Eggs or their young, were it not for this
admirable contrivance, which they have by natural instinct. They never lay more
than two Eggs, and seldom fewer. They young ones cannot fly till they are
almost full grown; but will run prodigiously fast; yet we have taken many of
them. The Flesh of both young and old is lean and black, yet very good meat,
tasting neither fishy, nor any way unsavory. Their Tongues are large, having a
large knob of fat at the root, which is an excellent bit: a Dish of Flamingo's
Tongues being fit for a Princes Table.

When many of them are standing together by a Ponds side, being half a mile
distant from a Man, they appear to him like a Brick Wall; their Feathers being
of the color of new red Brick: and they commonly stand upright, and single,
one by one, exactly in a row (except when feeding) and close by each other. The
young ones at first are of a light gray; and as their Wing-feathers spring out,
they grow darker; and never come to their right color, or any beautiful shape,
under 10 or 11 months old. I have seen Flamingos at Rio la Hacha, and at an
Island lying near the Main of America, right against Querisao, called by
Privateers Flamingo Key, from the multitude of these Fowls that breed there:
and I never saw of their Nests and young but here.

There are not above 5 or 6 Men on this Island of Sall, and a poor Governor, as
they called him, who came on board in our Boat, and brought 3 or 4 poor lean
Goats for a Present to our Captain, telling him they were the best that the
Island did afford. The Captain, minding more the poverty of the Giver than the
value of the Present, gave him in requital a Coat to cloth him; for he had
nothing but a few Rags on his back, and an old Hat not worth 3 farthings; which
yet I believe he wore but seldom, for fear he should want before he might get
another; for he told us there had not been a Ship in 3 years before. We bought
of him about 20 bushels of Salt for a few old Clothes: and he begged a little
Powder and Shot. We stayed here 3 days; in which time one of these Partuguese
offered to some of our Men a lump of Ambergriese in exchange for some Clothes,
desiring them to keep it secret, for he said if the Governor should know it, he
should be hanged. At length one Mr Coppinger bought it for a small matter; yet
I believe he gave more than it was worth. We had not a Man in the Ship that
knew Ambergriese; but I have since seen it in other places, and therefore am
certain it was not right. It was of a dark color, like Sheeps Dung, and very
soft, but of no smell, and possibly 'twas some of their Goats Dung. I
afterward saw some sold at the Nequebars in the East Indies, which was of a
light color, but very hard, neither had it any smell; and this also, I
suppose, was a cheat. Yet it is certain that in both these places there is
Ambergriese found.

I was told by one John Read, a Bristol Man, that he was Prentice to a Master
who traded to these Islands of Cape Verd, and once as he was riding at an
Anchor at Fogo, another of these Islands, there was a lump of it swam by the
Ship, and the Boat being ashore he mist it; but knew it to be Ambergriese,
having taken up a lump swimming in the like manner the Voyage before, and his
Master having at several times bought pieces of it of the Natives of the Isle
of Fogo, so as to enrich himself thereby. And so at the Necquebars, English men
have bought, as I have been credibly informed, great quantities of very good
Ambergriese. Yet the Inhabitants are so subtle that they will counterfeit it,
both there and here: and I have heard that in the Gulf of Florida, whence much
of it comes, the Native Indians there use the same Fraud.

Upon this occasion, I cannot omit to tell my Reader what I learnt from Mr
Hill, a Chyrurgeon, upon his showing me once a piece of Ambergriese, which was
thus. One Mr Benjamin Berker, a Man that I have been long well acquainted with,
and know him to be a very diligent and observing Person, and likewise very
sober and credible, told this Mr Hill, that being in the Bay of Honduras to
procure Logwood, which grows there in great abundance, and passing in a Canoa
over to one of the Islands in that Bay, he found upon the shore, on a sandy Bay
there, a lump of Ambergriese, so large, that when carried to Jamaica, he found
it to weigh one hundred pound and upwards. When he first found it, it lay dry,
above the mark which the Sea then came to at high water; and he observed in it
a great multitude of Beetles: It was of a dusky color, toward black, and
about the hardness of mellow Cheese, and of a very fragrant smell: This that Mr
Hill showed me, being some of it, which Mr Barker gave him. Besides those
already mentioned, all the places where I have heard that Ambergriese has been
found, at Bermudas, and the Bahama Islands in the West Indies; and that part of
the Coast of Africa, with its adjacent Islands, which reaches from Mozambique
to the Red Sea.

We went from this Island of Sall, to St Nicholas, another of the Cape Verd
Islands, lying West South West from Sall, about 22 leagues. We arrived there
the next day after we left the other, and Anchored on the S. E. side of the
Island. This is a pretty large Island; it is one of the biggest of all the Cape
Verd, and lies in a triangular form. The largest side, which lies to the
East, is about 30 leagues long, and the other two above 20 leagues each. It is
a mountainous barren Island, and rocky all round toward the Sea; yet in the
heart of it, there are Valleys, where the Portuguese, which inhabit here, have
Vineyards and Plantations, and Wood for fewed. Here are many Goats, which are
but poor in comparison with those in other places, yet much better than those
at Sall: There are likewise many Asses. The Governor of this Island came aboard
us, with 3 or 4 Gentlemen more in his company, who were all indifferently well
clothed, and accoutred with Swords and Pistols; but the rest that accompanied
him to the Seaside, which were about 20 or 30 Men more, were but in a ragged
garb. The Governor brought aboard some Wine made in the Island, which tasted
much like Madera Wine: It was of a pale color, and looked thick. He told us the
chief Town was in a Valley 14 mile from the Bay where we rode; that he had
there under him above one hundred Families, besides other Inhabitants that
lived scattering in Valleys more remore. They were all very swarthy; the
Governor was the clearest of them, yet of a dark tawny complexion.

At this Island we scrubb'd the bottom of our Ship, and here also we dug Wells
ashore on the Bay, and filled all our Water, and after 5 or 6 days stay, we
went from hence to Mayo, another of the Cape Verd Islands, lying about 40 mile
East and by South from the other; arriving there the next day, and anchoring on
the N. W. side of the Island. We sent our Boat on shore, intending to have
purchased some Provision, as Beef or Goats, with which this Island is better
stocked than the rest of the Islands. But the Inhabitants would not suffer our
Men to land; for about a week before our arrival there came an English Ship,
the Men of which came ashore, pretending friendship, and seized on the
Governor with some others, and carrying them aboard, made them send ashore for
Cattle to ransom their Liberties: and yet after this set sail, and carried them
away, and they had not heard of them since. The English Man that did this (as I
was afterward informed) was one Capt. Bond of Bristol. Whether ever he
brought back those Men again I know not: He himself and most of his Men have
since gone over to the Spaniards: and 'twas he who had like to have burnt our
Ship after this in the Bay of Panama; as I shall have occasion to relate.

This Isle of Mayo is but small, and environed with sholes, yet a place much
frequented by shipping for its great plenty of Salt: and though there is but
bad landing, yet many Ships lade here every year. Here are plenty of Bulls,
Cows and Goats; and at a certain season in the year, May, June, July, and
August, a sort of small Sea Tortoise come hither to lay their Eggs: but these
Turtle are not so sweet as those in the West Indies. The inhabitants plant
Corn, Yams, Potatoes, and some Plantains, and breed, a few Fowls; living very
poor, yet much better than the Inhabitants of any other of these Islands, St
Jago excepted, which lies 4 or 5 leagues to the Westward of Mayo, and is the
chief, the most fruitful, and best inhabited of all the Islands of Cape Verd;
yet mountainous, and much barren Land in it.

On the East Side of the Isle St Jago is a good Port, which in peaceable times
especially is seldom without Ships; for this has long been a place which Ships
have been wont to touch at for Water and Refreshments, as those outward-bound
to the East Indies, English, French and Dutch; many of the Ships bound to the
Coast of Guinea, the Dutch to Surinam, and their own Portuguese Fleet going for
Braziel, which is generally about the latter end of September, but few Ships call
in here in their return for Europe. When any Ships are here the Country People
bring down their Commodities to sell to the Seamen and Passengers, viz.
Bullocks, Hogs, Goats, Fowls, Eggs, Plantains, and Coco Nuts, which they will
give in exchange for Shirts, Drawers, Handkerchiefs, Hats, Wastecoasts,
Britches, or in a manner for any sort of Cloth, especially Linen, for Woollen
is not much esteemed there. They care not willingly to part with their Cattle
of any sort, but in exchange for Money, or Linen, or some other valuable
Commodity. Travelers must have a care of these People, for they are very
thievish; and if they see an opportunity will snatch any thing from you, and
run away with it. We did not touch at this Island in this Voyage; but I was
there before this in the year 1670, when I saw a Fort here lying on the top of
an Hill, and commanding the Harbor.

The Governor of this Island is chief over all the rest of the Islands. I have
been told that there are two large Towns on this Island, some small Villages,
and a great many Inhabitants; and that they make a great deal of Wine, such as
is that of St Nicholas. I have not been on any other of the Cape Verd Islands,
nor near them; but have seen most of them at a distance. They seem to be
mountainous and batren; some of these beforementioned being the most fruitful
and most frequented by Strangers, especilly St Jago and Mayo. As to the rest of
them, Fogo and Brava are two small Islands lying to the Westward of St Jago,
but of little note; only Fogo is remarkable for its being a Vulcano: It is all
of it one large Mountain of a good height, out of the top whereof issue Flames
of Fire, yet only discerned in the night: and then it may be seen a great way
at Sea. Yet this Island is not without inhabitants, who live at the foot of the
Mountain near the Sea. Their substance is much the same as in the other
Islands; they have some Goats, Fowls, Plantains, Coco-Nuts, etc. as I am
informed. Of the Plantains and Coco-Nuts I shall have occasion to speak when I
come into the East Indies; and shall defer the giving an account of them till
then.

The remainder of these Islands of Cape Verd, are St Anthonia, St Lucia, St
Vincente, and Bona-Vista: of which I know nothing considerable.

Our entrance among these Islands was from the North East; for in our passage
from Virginia we ran pretty far toward the Coast of Gualata in Africa, to
preserve the Trade-wind, lest we should be born off too much to the Westward,
and so lose the Islands. We anchored at the South of Sall, and passing by the
South of St Nicholas anchored again at Mayo, as has been said; where we made
the shorter stay, because we could get no Flesh among the Inhabitants, by
reason of the regret they had at their Governor, and his Men's being carried
away by Captain Bond. So leaving the Isles of Cape Verd we stood away to the
Southward with the Wind at E. N. E. intending to have touched no more till we
came to the Streights of Magellan. But when we came into the lat. of 10 degrees.
North, we met the Wind at S. by W. and S. S. W. therefore we altered our
Resolutions, and steered away for the Coast of Guinea, and in few days came to
the Mouth of the River of Sherbor^, which is an English Factory, lying South of
Sierra Liona. We had one of our Men who was well acquainted there; and by his
direction we went in among the shoals, and came to an Anchor.

Sherboro was a good way from us, so I can give no account of the place, or our
Factory there; save that I have been informed, that there is a considerable
Trade driven there for a sort of red Wood for dying, which grows in that
Country very plentifully, (...) called by our people Cam-wood. A little within
the shore where we anchored was a Town of Negroes, Natives of this Coast. It
was skreen'd from our sight by a large Grove of Trees that grew between them
and the shore: but we went thither to them several times, during the 3 or 4
days of our stay here, to refresh our selves; and they as often came aboard us,
bringing with them Plantains, Sugarcanes, Palm-wines, Rice, Fowls and Honey,
which they sold us. They were no way shy of us, being well acquainted with the
English, by reason of our Guinea Factories and Trade. This Town seemed pretty
large; the Houses but low and ordinary; but one great House in the midst of it,
where their chief Men meet and receive Strangers: and here they treated us with
Palm-wine. As to their Persons^ they are like other Negroes. While we lay he^
we scrubb'd the bottom of our Ship, and then fill^ all our Water casks; and
buying up two Puncheo^ of Rice for our Voyage, we departed from hen^ about the
m^le of November, 1683. prosecuti^ our inten^ (...) toward the Streights of
Magelan.

We had but little wind after we got out, and very hot weather, with some
fierce Tornadoes, commonly rising out of the N. E. which brought Thunder,
Lightening and Rain. These did not last long; sometimes not a quarter of an
hour, and then the Wind would shuffle about to the Southward again, and fall
flat calm, for these Tornadoes commonly come against the Wind that is then
blowing, as our Thunder-clouds are often observed to do in England; but the
Tornadoes I shall describe more largely in my Chapter of Winds, in the Appendix
to this Book. At this time many of our Men were taken with Fevers; yet we lost
but one. While we lay in the calms we caught several great Sharks, sometimes 2
or 3 in a day, and eat them all, boiling and squeezing them dry, and then
stewing them with Vinegar, Pepper, etc. for we had but little Flesh aboard. We
took the benefit of every Tornado, which came sometimes 3 or 4 in a day, and
carried what sail we could to get to the Southward, for we had but little Wind
when they were over, and those ^all Winds between the Tornadoes were much
a^inst us, at S. by E. and S. S. E. till we past the ^uinorial Line, which we
crossed about a degree to ^e Eastward of the Meridian of the Isle of St Jago, ^e
of the Cape Verd Islands.

At first we could scarce lie S. W. but being got a degree to the Southward of
the Line, the Wind ^r'd most Easterly, and then we stemmed S. W. ^y S. and as
we got farther to the Southward, so ^e Wind came about to the Eastward and
freshened (...) us. In the Lat. of 3 S. we had the Wind at (...) in the Lat. of
5 we had it at E. S. E. where (...) stood a considerable time, and blew a fresh
Top^nt gale. We then made the best use of it, steer^g on briskly with all the
sail we could make; (...) this wind, by the 18th of Jan. carried us into the
(...) of ^ South. In all this time we met with nothing worthy remark, not so
much as a Fish, except Flying Fish, which have been so often described, that I
think it needless for me to do it.

Here we found the Sea much changed from its natural greenness to a white, or
palish color, which caused us to sound, supposing we might strike ground; for
whenever we find the color of the Sea to change, we know we are not far from
Land, or shoals which stretch out into the Sea, running from some Land. But
here we found no ground with one hundred fathom Line. I was this day at noon by
reckoning, 48 d. 50 m. West from the Lizard, the variation by our morning
amplitude 15 d. 50 m. East, the variation increasing. The 20th day one of our
Chyrurgeons died much lamented, because we had but one more for such a
dangerous Voyage.

January 28. We made the Sibbel de Wards, which are 3 Islands lying in the lat.
of 51 d. 25 m. South and longitude West from the Lizard in England, by my
account, 57 d. 28 m. the variation here we found to be 23 d. 10 m. I had for a
month before we came hither, endeavored to persuade Captain Cook and his
Company to anchor at these Islands^ where I told them we might probably get
water, a^ I then thought, and in case we should miss of i^ here, yet by being
good Husbands of what we had^ we might reach John Fernando's in the South Seas
before our water was spent. This I urged to hinde^ their designs of going
through the Streights of Magellan, which I knew would prove very dangerou^ to
us; the rather because our men being Privateers and so more wilful, and less
under command, would not be so ready to give a watchful attendance in ^ passage
so little known. For although these men we^ more under command than I had ever
seen an^ Privateers, yet I could not expect to find them a^ a minutes call, in
coming to an Anchor, or weigh+ ing Anchor: Beside, if ever we should have
occasion to moor, or cast out two Anchors, we had not a Boat to carry out or
weigh an Anchor. These Islands of Sibbel de Wards were so named by the Dutch.
They are all three rocky barren Islands without any Tree, only some
Dildo-bushes growing on them: And I do believe there is no Water on any one of
them, for there was no appearance of any Water. The two Northernmost we could
not come near but the Southermost we came close by, but could not strike ground
till within 2 Cables length of the shore, and there found it to be foul rocky
Ground.

From the time that we were in 10 degrees. South, till we came to these Islands, we
had the Wind between E. N. E. and the N. N. E. fair weather, and a brisk gale.
The day that we made these Islands we saw great sholes of small Lobsters, which
colored the Sea red in spots, for a mile in compass, and we drew some of them
out of the Sea in our Water-buckets. They were no bigger than the top of a
Man's little Finger, yet all their Claws, both great and small like a Lobster.
I never saw any of this sort of Fish naturally red but here; for ours on the
English Coast, which are black naturally, are not red till they are boiled:
Neither did I ever any where else meet with any Fish of the Lobster-shape so
small as these; unless, it may be, Shrimps or Prawns: Capt. Swan and Capt.
Eaton met also with sholes of this Fish in much the same Latitude and Longitude.

Leaving therefore the Sibbel de Wards Islands, as having neither good
Anchorage nor Water, we sailed on directing our Course for the Streights of
Magellan. But the Winds hanging in the Wester^ board, and blowing hard, often put
us by our Topsails, so that we could not fetch it. The 6th day of February we
fell in with the Streights Le Mair, which is very high Land on both sides, and
the Streights very narrow. We had the Wind at N. N. W. a fresh gale; and seeing
the Opening of the Streights, we ran in with it till within four Mile of the
Mouth, and then it fell calm, and we found a strong Tide setting out of the
Streights to the Northward, and like to founder our Ship; but whether flood or
ebb I know not; only it made such a short cockling Sea, as if it had been in a
Race, or place where two Tides meet; for it ran every way, sometimes breaking
in over our waste, sometimes over our Poop, sometimes over our Bow, and the
Ship tossed like an Egg-shell, so that I never felt such uncertain Jerks in a
Ship. At 8 a clock in the Evening we had a small Breeze at W. N. W. and steered
away to the Eastward, intending to go round the States Island, the East end of
which we reached the next day by Noon, having a fresh Breeze all Night.

The 7th day at Noon being off the East end of States Island, I had a good
observation of the Sun, and found my self in lat. 54 d. 52. m. South.

At the East end of States Island are three small Islands, or rather Rocks,
pretty high, and white with the Dung of Fowls. Wherefore having observed the
Sun, we haled up South, designing to pass round to the Southward of Cape Horn,
which is the Southermost Land of Terra del Fuego. The Winds hung in the Western
quarter betwixt the N. W. and the West, so that we could not get much to the
Westward, and we never saw Terra del Fuego after that Evening that we made the
Straight Le Mair. I have heard that there have been Smokes and Fires on Terra
del Fuego, not on the tops of Hills, but in Plains and Valleys, seen by those
who have sailed through the Streights of Magellan; supposed to be made by the
Natives.

We did not see the Sun at rising or setting, in order to take an amplitude
after we left the Sibbel de Wards, till we got into the South Sea: Therefore I
know not whether the variation increased any more or no. Indeed I had an
observation of the Sun at Noon, in lat. 59 d. 30 m. and we were then standing
to the Southward with the Wind at W. by N. and that Night the Wind came about
more to the Southward of the West, and we tackt. I was then in lat. 60 by
reckoning, which was the farthest South lat. that ever I was in.

The 14th day of Feb. being in lat. 57, and to the West of Cape Horn, we had a
violent Storm, which held us till the 3d day of March, blowing commonly S. W.
and S. W. by W. and W. S. W. thick Weather all the time, with small drizling
Rain, but not hard. We made a shift however to save 23 Barrels of Rainwater,
besides what we dressed our Victuals withal.

March the 3d the Wind shifted at once, and came about at South, blowing a
fierce gale of Wind, soon after it came about to the Eastward, and we stood
into the South Seas.

The 9th day having an observation of the Sun, not having seen it of late, we
found our selves in lat: 47 d. 10 m. and the variation to be but 15 d. 30 m.
East.

The Wind stood at S. E. we had fair Weather, and a moderate Gale, and the 17th
day we were in lat. 36 by Observation, and then found the variation to be but 8
d. East.

The 19th day when we looked out in the Morning we saw a Ship to the Southward
of us, coming with all the Sail she could make after us: We lay ^uzled to let
her come up with us, for we supposed her to be a Spanish Ship come from
Baldivia bound to Lima: we being now to the Northward of Baldivia, and this
being the time of the year when Ships that Trade thence to Baldivia return
Home: They had the same opinion of us, and therefore made sure to take us, but
coming nearer we both found ourmistakes. This proved to be one Capt. Eaton in a
Ship sent purposely from London for the South Seas. We haled each other, and
the Capt. came on Board, and told us of his Actions on the Coast of Brazil, and
in the River of Plate.

He met Captain Swan (one that came from England to Trade here) at the East
Entrance into the Streights of Magellan, and they accompanied each other through
the Streights, and were separated after they were through by the Sto rm
beforementioned. Both we and Capt. Eaton being bound for John Fernando's Isle,
we kept Company, and we spared him Bread and Beef, and he spared us Water,
which he took in as he passed through the Streights.

March the 22d, 1684. we came in sight of the Island, and the next day got in
and anchored in a Bay at the South end of the Island, in 25 fathom Water, not
two Cables lengths from the shore. We presently got out our Canoa, and went
ashore to see for a Moskito Indian, whom we left here when we were chased hence
by 3 Spanish Ships in the year 1681. a little before we went to Arica; Capt.
Watlin being then our Commander, after Capt. Sharp, was turned out.

This Indian lived here alone above 3 years, and although he was several time
sought after by the Spaniards, who knew he was left on the Island, yet they
could never find him. He was in the Woods, hunting for Goats, when Capt. Watlin
drew off his Men, and the Ship was under sail before he came back to shore. He
had with him his Gun and a Knife, with a small Horn of Powder, and a few Shot;
which being spent, he contrived a way by notching his Knife, to saw the Barrel
of his Gun into small Pieces, wherewith he made Harpoons, Lances, Hooks and a
long Knife; heating the pieces first in the fire, which he struck with his
Gunflint, and a piece of the Barrel of his Gun, which he hardened; having learnt
to do that among the English. The hot pieces of Iron he would hammer out and
bend as he pleased with Stones, and saw them with his jagged Knife, or grind
them to an Edge by long labor, and harden them to a good temper as there was
occasion. All this may seem strange to those that are not acquainted with the
sagacity of the Indians; but it is no more than these Moskito Men are
accustomed to in their own Country, where they make their own Fishing and
striking Instruments, without either Forge or Anvil; though they spend a great
deal of time about them.

Other wild Indians who have not the use of Iron, which the Moskito Men have
from the English, make Hatchets of a very hard Stone, with which they will cut
down Trees, (the Cotton-Tree especially, which is a soft tender Wood) to build
their Houses or make Canoas; and though in working their Canoas hollow, they
cannot dig them so neat and thin, yet they will make them fit for their
Service. This their Digging or Hatchet-work they help out by Fire; whether for
the felling of the Trees, or for the making the inside of their Canoa hollow.
These Contrivances are used particularly by the Savage Indians of Blewfield's
River, described in the 3d Chapter, whose Canoas and Stone-Hatchets I have
seen. These Stone-Hatchets are about 10 Inches long, 4 bread, and 3 Inches
thick in the middle. They are grownd away flat and sharp at both ends: Right in
the midst, and clear round it they make a notch, so wide and deep that a Man
might place his Finger along it, and taking a stick or with about 4 foot long,
they bind it round the Hatchet-head, in that notch, and so twisting it hard,
use it as an handle or helve; the head being held by it very fast. Nor are
other wild Indians less ingenious. Those of Patagonia, particularly, head their
Arrows with Flint, cut or ground; which I have seen and admired. But to return
to our Moskito Man on the Isle of J. Fernando. With such Instruments as he made
in that manner, he got such Provision as the Island afforded; either Goats or
Fish. He told us that at first he was forced to eat Seal, which is very
ordinary Meat, before he had made hooks: but afterward he never killed any
Seals but to make Lines, cutting their Skins into Thongs. He had a little House
or Hut half a mile from the Sea, which was lined with Goats Skin; his Couch or
Barbecu of Sticks lying along about 2 foot distant from the Ground, was spread
with the same, and was all his Bedding. He had no Clothes left, having worn out
those he brought from Waltin's Ship, but only a Skin about his Waste. He saw
our Ship the day before we came to an Anchor, and did believe we were English,
and therefore killed 3 Goats in the Morning, before we came to an Anchor, and
dressed them with Cabbage, to treat us when we came ashore. He came then to the
Sea side to cogratulate our safe arrival. And when we landed, a Moskito Indian,
named Robin, first leaped ashore, and running to his Brother Moskito Man, threw
himself flat on his face at his feet, who helping him up, and embracing him,
fell flat with his face on the Ground at Robin's feet, and was by him taken up
also. We stood with pleasure to behold the suprize and tenderness, and
solemnity of this interview, which was exceedingly affectionate on both sides;
and when their Ceremonies of Civility were over, we also that stood gazing at
them drew near, each of us embracing him we had found here, who was overjoyed
to see so many of his old Friends come hither as he thought purposely to fetch
him. He was named Will, as the other was Robin. These were names given them by
the English, for they have no Names among themselves; and they take it as a
great favor to be named by any of us; and will complain for want of it, if we
do not appoint them some name when they are with us: saying of themselves they
are poor Men, and have no Name.

This Island is in lat. 34 d. 15 m. and about 120 leagues from the Main. It is
about 12 leagues round, full of high Hills, and small pleasant Valleys; which
if manured, would probably produce any thing proper for the Climate. The sides
of the Mountains are part Savannahs, part Wood-land. Savannahs are clear pieces
of Land without Woods; not because more barren than the Wood-land, for they are
frequently spots of as good Land as any, and often are intermixed with
Wood-land. In the Bay of Campeachy are very large Savannahs, which I have seen
full of Cattle: But about the River of Plate are the largest that every I heard
of, 50, 60, or 100 Miles in length; and Jamaica, Cuba and Hispaniola, have many
Savannahs intermixed with Woods. Places cleared of Wood by Art and Labor do not
go by this Name, but those only which are found so in the uninhabited parts of
America, such as this Isle of John Fernando's; or which were originally clear
in other parts.

The Grass in these Savannahs at John Fernando's is not a long flaggy Grass,
such as is usually in the Savannahs in the West Indies, but a sort of kindly
Grass, both thick and flourishing the biggest part of the year. The Woods
afford diverse sorts of Trees; some large and good Timber for Building, but none
fit for Masts. The Cabbage Trees of this Isle are but small and low; yet afford
a good head, and the Cabbage very sweet. This Tree I shall describe in the
Appendix in the Bay of Campeachy.

The Savannahs are stocked with Goats in great Herds: but those that live on
the East end of the Island are not so fat as those on the West end; for though
there is much more Grass, and plenty of Water in every Valley, nevertheless
they thrive not so well here as on the West End, where there is less Food; and
yet there are found greater Flocks, and those too fatter and sweeter.

That West end of the Island is all high Champion Ground without any Valley,
and but one place to land; there is neither Wood nor any fresh Water, and the
Grass short and dry.

Goats were first put on the Island by John Fernando, who first discovered it
in his Voyage from Lima to Baldivia; (and discovered also another Island about
the same bigness, 20 leagues to the Westward of this.) From those Goats these
were propagated, and the Island has taken its Name from this its first
Discoverer; who, when he returned to Lima, desired a Patent for it, designing
to settle here; and it was in his second Voyage hither that he set ashore 3 or
4 Goats, which have since, by their increase, so well stocked the whole Island.
But he could never get a Patent for it, therefore it lies still destitute of
Inhabitants, though doubtless capable of maintaining 4 or 500 Families, by what
may be produced off the Land only. I speak much within compass; for the
Savannahs would at present feed 1000 Head of Cattle (...) Goats, and the Land
being cultivated would probably bear Corn, or Wheat, and good Pease, Yams, or
Potatoes; for the Land in their Valleys and sides of the Mountains, is of a
good black fruitful Mould. The Sea about it is likewise very productive of its
Inhabitants. Seals swarmas thick about this Island, as if they had no other
place in the World to live in; for there is not a Bay nor Rock that one can get
ashore on, but is full of them. Sea Lions are here in great Companies, and
Fish, particularly Snappers and Rock-fish, are so plentiful, that two Men in an
hours time will take with Hook and Line, as many as will serve 100 Men.

The Seals are a sort of Creatures pretty well known, yet it may not be amiss
to describe them. They are as big as Calves, the Head of them like a Dog,
therefore called by the Dutch the Sea-hounds. Under each Shoulder grows a long
thick Fin: These serve them to swim with when in the Sea, and are instead of
Legs to them when on the Land for raising their Bodies up on end, by the help
of these Fins or Stumps, and so having their Tail-parts drawn close under them,
they rebound, as it were, and throw their Bodies forward, drawing their hinder
parts after them; and then again rising up, and springing forward with their
fore-parts alternately, they lie tumbling thus up and down, all the while they
are moving on Land. From their Shoulders to their Tails they grow tapering like
Fish, and have two small Fins on each side the Rump: which is commonly covered
with their Fins. These Fins serve instead of a Tail in the Sea; and on Land
they sit on them, when they give suck to their young. Their Hair is of diverse
Colors, as black, gray, dun, spotted, looking very sleek and pleasant when
they come first out of the Sea: For these at John Fernando's have fine thick
short Furr; the like I have not taken notice of any where but in these Seas.
Here are always thousands, I might say possibly millions of them, either
sitting on the Bays, or going and coming in the Sea round the Island, which is
covered with them (as they lie at the top of the Water playing and sunning
themselves) for a mile or two from the shore. When they come out of the Sea
they bleat like Sheep for their young; and though they pass through hundreds of
others young ones before they come to their own, yet they will not suffer any
of them to suck. The young ones are like Puppies, and lie much ashore, but when
beaten by any of us, they, as well as the old ones, will make toward the Sea,
and swim very swift and nimble; though on shore they lie very sluggishly, and
will not go out of our ways unless we beat them, but snap at us. A blow on the
Nose soon kills them. Large Ships might here load themselves with Seals Skins
and Trane-oyl; for thy are extraordinary fat. Seals are found as well in cold
as hot Climates; and in the cold places they love to get on Lumps of Ice, where
they will lie and sun themselves, as here on the Land: They are frequent in the
Northern parts of Europe and America, and in the Southern parts of Africa, as
about the Cape of Good Hope, and at the Streights of Magellan: And though I never
saw any in the West Indies, but in the Bay of Campeachy, at certain Islands
called the Alceranes, and at others called the Deserts; yet they are over all
the American Coast of the South-Seas, from Terra del Fuego, up to the
Equinoctial Line; but to the North of the Equinox again, in these Seas, I never
saw any, till as far as 21 North lat. Nor did I ever see any in the
East Indies. In general they seem to resort where there is plenty of Fish, for
that is their Food; and Fish, such as they feed on, as Cods, Groopers, etc. are
most plentiful on rocky Coasts: and such is mostly this Western Coast of the
South America, as I shall further relate.

The Sea-Lion is a large Creature about 12 or 14 foot long. The biggest part of
his Body is as big as a Bull: It is shaped like a Seal, but 6 times as big. The
Head is like a Lion's Head; it has a broad Face, with many long Hairs growing
about its Lips like a Cat. It has a great goggle Eye, the Teeth 3 Inches long,
about the bigness of a Man's Thumb; In Capt. Sharp's time some of our Men made
Dice with them. They have no Hair on their Bodies like the Seal; they are of a
dun color, and are all extraordinary fat; one of them being cut up and boiled,
will yield a Hogshead of Oil, which is very sweet and wholesome to fry Meat
withal. The lean Flesh is black, and of a course Grain, yet indifferent good
Food. They will lie a week at a time ashore if not disturbed: Where 3 or 4, or
more of them, come ashore together; they huddle one on another like Swine, and
grunt like them, making a hideous noise. They eat Fish, which I believe is
their common Food.

The Snapper is a Fish much like a Roach, but a great deal bigger. It has a
large Head and Mouth, and great Gills. The Back is of a bright red, the Belly
of a Silver Color: The Scales are as broad as a Shilling. The Snapper is
excellent Meat. They are in many places in the West Indies, and the South-Seas:
I have not seen them any where beside.

The Rock-fish is called by Seamen a Grooper; the Spaniards call it a Baccalao,
which is the name for Cod, because it is much like it. It is rounder than the
Snapper, of a dark brown color; and has small Scales no bigger than a
Silver-penny. This Fish is good sweet Meat, and is found in great plenty on all
the Coast of Peru and Chili.

There are only two Bays in the whole Island where Ships may anchor; these are
both at the East End, and in both of them is a Rivolet of good fresh Water.
Either of these Bays may be fortified with little charge, to that degree that
50 Men in each may be able to keep off 1000; and there is no coming into these
Bays from the West End, but with great difficulty, over the Mountains, where if
3 Men are placed, they may keep down as many as come against them on any side.
This was partly experienced by 5 Englishmen that Capt. Davis left here, who
defended themselves against a great Body of Spaniards who landed in the Bays,
and came here to destroy them; and though the second time one of their Consorts
deserted and fled to the Spaniards, yet the other 4 kept their Ground, and were
afterward taken in from hence by Capt. Strong of London.

We remained at John Fernando's 16 days; our sick Men were ashore all the time,
and one of Captain Eaton's Doctors (for he had four in his Ship) tending and
feeding them with Goat and several Herbs, whereof here is plenty growing in the
Brooks; and their Diseases were chiefly Scorbutic.

CHAP. V.
The Author departs from John Fernando's. Of the Pacifick Sea. Of the Andes, or
high Mountains in Peru and Chili. A Prize taken. Isle of Lobos: Penguins, and
other Birds there. Three Prizes more. The Islands Gallapago's: The Dildo-Tree,
Burton-Wood, Mammet-Trees, Guanoes, Land-Tortoise, their several kind, Green
Snakes, Turtle-Doves, Tortoise, or Turtle-grass. Sea-Turtle, their several
kinds. The Air and Weather at the Gallapago's. Some of the Islands described,
their Soil, etc. The Island Cocos described. Cape Blanco, and the Bay of
Caldera; the Savannahs there. Captain Cook dies. Of Nicoya, and a red Wood for
dying, and other Commodities. A narrow Escape of twelve Men. Lancewood. Volcan
Vejo, a burning Mountain on the Coast of Ria Lexa. A Tornado. The Island and
Harbor of Ria Lexa. The Gulf of Amapalla and Point Gasivina. Isles of Mangera
and Amapalla. The Indian Inhabitants. Hog-Plumb-Tree. Other Islands in the
Gulf of Amapalla. Captain Eaton and Captain Davis careen their Ships here, and
afterward part.

April, 1684. we sailed from the Isle of J. Fernando, with the Wind at S. E. We
were now two Ships in Company: Captain Cook's, whose Ship I was in, and who
here took the Sickness of which he died a while after; and Captain Eaton's. Our
passage lay now along the Pacifick Sea, properly so called. For though it be
usual with our Map-makers to give that Name to this whole Ocean, calling it
Mare Australe, Mal del Zur, or Mare Pacificum; yet, in my opinion, the Name of
the Pacifick Sea ought not to be extended from South to North farther than from
30 to about 4 degrees. South Latitude, and from the American shore Westward
indefinitely, with respect to my observation; who have been in these parts 250
Leagues or more from Land, and still had the Sea very quiet from Winds. For in
all this Tract of Water, of which I have spoken, there are no dark rainy
Clouds, though often a thick Horizon, so as to hinder an Observation of the Sun
with the Quadrant; and in the Morning hazy weather frequently, and thick Mists,
but scarce able to wet one. Nor are there in this Sea any Winds but the
Trade-wind, no Tempest, no Tornadoes or Hurricanes (though North of the Equator,
they are met with as well in this Ocean as in the Atlantic) yet the Sea it
self at the new and full of the Moon runs with high, large, long Surges, but
such as never break out at Sea, and so are safe enough; unless that where they
fell in and break upon the Shore, they make it bad landing.

In this Sea we made the best of our way toward the Line, till in the lat. of
24 S. where we fell in with the main Land of the South America. All this course
of the Land, both of Chili and Pern is vastly high; therefore we kept 12 or 14
leagues off from shore, being unwilling to be seen by the Spaniards dwelling
there. The Land (especially beyond this, from 24 degrees. S. Lat. 17. and from 14
to 10) is of a most prodigious height. It lies generally in Ridges parallel to
the shore, and 3 or 4 Ridges, one with another, each surpassing other in
height; and those that are farthest within Land, are much higher than others.
They always appear blue when seen at Sea; sometimes they are obscured with
Clouds, but not so often as the high Lands in other parts of the World; for
here are seldom or never any Rains on these Hills, any more than in the Sea
near it; neither are they subject to Fogs. These are the highest Mountains that
ever I saw, far surpassing the Pike of Tenariffe, or Santa Martha, and, I
believe, any Mountains in the World.

I have seen very high Land in the Lat of 30 South, but not so high as in the
Latitudes before described. In Sir John Narborough's Voyage also to Baldivia (a
City on this Coast) mention is made of very high Land seen near Baldivia: and
the Spaniards, with whom I have discoursed, have told me, that there is a very
high Land all the way between Coquimbo (which lies in about 30 d. South. lat.)
and Baldivia, which is in 40 South; so that by all likelihood these Ridges of
Mountains do run in a continued Chain from one end of Peru and Chili to the
other, all along this South Sea Coast, called usually the Andes, or Sierra
Nuevada des Andes. The excessive height of these Mountains may possibly be the
reason that there are no Rivers of note that fall into these Seas. Some small
Rivers indeed there are, but very few of them, for in some places there is not
one that comes out into the Sea in 150 or 200 Leagues, and where they are
thickest they are 30, 40, or 50 Leagues asunder, and too little and shallow to
be Navigable. Besides, some of these do not constantly run, but are dry at
certain Seasons of the Year; as the River of Ylo, runs flush with a quick
Current at the latter end of January, and so continues till June, and then it
decreaseth by degrees, growing less, and running slow till the latter end of
September, when it fails wholly, and runs no more till January again: This I
have seen at both Seasons, in 2 former Voyages I made hither, and have been
informed by the Spaniards, that other Rivers on this Coast are of the like
Nature, being rather Torrents or Land-floods caused by their Rains at certain
Seasons far within Land, than perennial streams.

We kept still along in sight of this Coast, but at a good distance from it,
encountering with nothing of note, till in the lat of 9 degrees. 40 min. South, on
the 3d of May, we descried a Sail to the Northward of us. She was plying to
Windward, we chased her, and Capt. Eaton being a head soon took her: She came
from Guiaquil about a Month before, laden with Timber, and was bound to Lima.
Three days before we took her, she came from Santa, whither she had gone for
Water, and where they had news of our being in these Seas by an express from
Baldivia; for, as we afterward heard, Capt. Swan had been at Baldivia to seek
a Trade there, and he having met Capt Eaton in the Streights of Magellan, the
Spaniards of Baldivia were doubtless informed of us by him, suspecting him also
to be one of us, though he was not. Upon this News the Viceroy of Lima sent
Expresses to all the Sea Ports, that they might provide themselves against our
Assaults.

We immediately steered away for the Island Lobos, which lies in lat. 6 d. 24
m. South lat. (I took the Elevation of it ashore with an Astrolabe) and it is 5
leagues from the Main. It is called Lobos de la Mar, to distinguish it from
another that is not far from it, and extremely like it, called Lobos de la
Terra, for it lies nearer the Main. Lobos, or Lovos, is the Spanish Name for a
Seal, of which there are great plenty about these, and several other Islands in
these Seas that go by this Name.

The 9th of May we arrived at this Isle of Lobos de la Mar, and came to an
anchor with our Prize. This Lobos consists indeed of two little Islands, each
about a Mile round, of an indifferent height, a small Channel between, fit for
Boats only; and several Rocks lying on the North side of the Islands a little
way from shore. There is a small Cove or Sandy-Bay sheltred from the Winds, at
the West end of the Eastermost Island, where Ships may Carreen: The rest of the
shore, as well round the two Islands as between them, is a Rocky Coast,
consisting of small Cliffs. Within Land, they are both of them partly Rocky,
and partly Sandy, Barren, without any fresh Water, Tree, Shrub, Grass, or
Herbs; or any Land Animals (for the Seals and Sea-Lions come ashore here) but
Fowls: Of which there are great multitudes; as Boobies, but mostly Penguins,
which I have seen plentifully all over the South Seas; on the Coast of
Newfoundland, and of the Cape of Good Hope. They are a Sea-Fowl, about as big
as a Duck, and such Feet; but a sharp Bill, feeding on Fish. They do not fly
but flutter, having rather stumps like a young Goslin's, than Wings: And these
are instead of Fins to them in the Water. Their Feathers are Downy. Their flesh
is but ordinary Food; but their Eggs are good Meat. There is another sort of
small black Fowl, that make holes in the Sand for their Night Habitations,
whose flesh is good sweet meat. I never saw any of them but here, and at John
Fernando's.

There is good Riding between the Eastermost Island and the Rocks, in ten,
twelve, or fourteen Fathom; for the Wind is commonly at S. or S. S. E. and the
Eastermost Island lying East and West, shelters that Road.

Here we scrubb'd our Ships, and being in a readiness to sail, the Prisoners
were examined, to know if any of them could conduct us to some Town where we
might make some attempt; for they had before informed us, that we were descried
by the Spaniards, and by that we knew that they would send no Riches by Sea so
long as we were here. Many Towns were considered on, as Guiaquil, Zana,
Truxillo, and others: At last Truxillo was pitched on, as the most important;
therefore the likeliest to make us a Voyage if we could conquer it: which we
did not much question, though we knew it to be a very populous City. But the
greatest difficulty was in landing; for Guanchaquo, which is the nearest
Seaport to it, but 6 miles off, is an ill place to Land, since sometimes the
very Fishermen, that live there, are not able to go in 3 or 4 days. However the
17th of May, in the Afternoon, our Men were mustered of both Ships Companies,
and their Arms proved. We were in all 108 Men fit for service, besides the
sick: and the next day we intended to sail and take the Wood Prize with us. But
the next day one of our Men being ashore betimes on the Island, descried three
Sail bound to the Northward; two of them without the Island to the Westward,
the other between it and the Continent.

We soon got our Anchors up and chased: and Captain Eaton, who drew the least
draught of Water, put through between the Westermost-Island and the Rocks, and
went after those two that were without the Islands. We in Captain Cook's Ship
went after the other which stood in for the Main-Land, but we soon fetched her
up, and having taken her, stood in again with her to the Island; for we saw
that Captain Eaton wanted no help, having taken both those that he went after.
He came in with one of his Prizes, but the other was so far to Leeward, and so
deep, that he could not then get her in, but he hoped to get her in the next
day: but being deep laden, as designed to go down before the wind to Panama,
she would not bear sail.

The 10th day she turned all day, but got nothing nearer the Island. Our
Moskito-strikers, according to their custom, went and struck six Turtles; for
here are indifferent plenty of them. These Ships that we took the day before we
came from Guanchaquo, all three laden with Flower, bound for Panama. Two of
them were laden as deep as they could swim, the other was not above half laden,
but was ordered by the Viceroy of Lima to sail with the other two, or else she
should not sail till we were gone out of the Seas; for he hoped they might
escape us by setting out early. In the biggest Ship was a Letter to the
President of Panama from the Viceroy of Lima; assuring him, that there were
Enemies come into that Sea: for which reason he had dispatched these three
Ships with Flower, that they might not want; (for Panama is supplied from
Peru;) and desired him to be frugal of it, for he knew not when he should send
more. In this Ship were likewise 7 or 8 Tuns of Marmalade of Quinces, and a
stately Mule sent to the President, and a very large Image of the Virgin Mary
in Wood, carved and painted to adorn a new Church at Panama, and sent from Lima
by the Viceroy; for this great Ship came from thence not long before. She
brought also from Lima 800000 Pieces of Eight, to carry withher to Panama: but
while she lay at Guanchaco, taking in her lading of Flower, the Merchants
hearing of Capt. Swan's being at Baldivia, ordered the Money ashore again.
These Prisoners likewise informed us, that the Gentlemen (Inhabitants of
Truxillo) were building a Fort at Guanchaquo (which is the Seaport for
Truxillo) close by the Sea, purposely to hinder the designs of any that should
attempt to land there. Upon this news we altered our former resolutions, and
resolved to go with our three Prizes to the Gallapagos, which are a great many
large Islands, lying some under the Equator, others on each side of it. I shall
here omit the description of Truxillo, because in my Appendix, at the latter
end of the Book, I intend to give a general Relation of most of the Towns of
note on this Coast, from Baldivia to Panama, and from thence toward California.

The 19th day in the evening we sailed from the Island Lobos, with Captain
Eaton in our Company. We carried the three Flower Prizes with us, but our first
Prize Laden with Timber, we left here at an Anchor; the Wind was at S. by E.
which is the common Trade-Wind here, and we steered away N. W. by N. intending
to run into the latitude of the Isles Gallapagos, and steer off West, because
we did not know the certain distance, and therefore could not shape a direct
Course to them. When we came within 40 minutes of the Equator, we steered West,
having the Wind at South, a very moderate gentle Gale. It was the 31st day of
May when we first had sight of the Islands Gallapagos: Some of them appeared on
our Weather-bow, some on our Lee-bow, others right a head. We at first sight
trimmed our Sails, and steered as nigh the Wind as we could, striving to get to
the Southermost of them, but our Prizes being deep laden, their Sails but small
and thin, and a very small Gale, they could not keep up with us; therefore we
likewise edged away again, a point from the Wind, to keep near them, and in the
evening, the Ship that I was in, and Captain Eaton, Anchored on the East Side
of one of the Eastermost Islands a Mile from the shore, in sixteen fathom
Water, clean, white, hard Sand.

The Gallapagos Islands are a great Number of uninhabited Islands, lying under,
and on both sides of the Equator. The Fastermost of them are about 110 Leagues
from the Main. They are laid down in the Longitude of 181, reaching to the
Westward as far as 176, therefore their Longitude from England Westward is
about 68 degrees. But I believe our Hydrographers do not place them far enough
to the Westward. The Spaniards who first discovered them, and in whose draughts
alone they are laid down, report them to be a great number, stretching
North-West from the Line, as far as 5 degrees N. but we saw not above 14 or 15.
They are some of them 7 or 8 leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad. They are of a good
height, most of them flat and even on the top; 4 or 5 of the Eastermost are
rocky, barren and hilly, producing neither Tree, Herb, nor Grass, but a few
Dildo-trees, except by the Sea side. The Dildo-tree is a green prickly Shrub,
that grows about 10 or 12 foot high, without either Leaf or Fruit. It is as big
as a Man's Leg, from the root to the top, and it is full of sharp prickles,
growing in thick rows from top to bottom; this shrub is fit for no use, not so
much as to burn. Close by the Sea there grows in some places bushes of Burton
Wood, which is very good firing. This sort of Wood grows in many places in the
West Indies, especially in the Bay of Campeachy, and in the Sambaloes. I did
never see any in these Seas but here. There is Water on these barren Islands,
in Ponds and Holes among the Rocks. Some other of these Islands are mostly
plain and low, and the Land more fertile, producing Trees of diverse sorts,
unknown to us. Some of the Westermost of these Islands are nine or ten leagues
long, and six or seven broad; the Mould deep and black. These produce Trees of
great and tall bodies, especially Mammee-trees, which grow here in great
Groves. In these large Islands there are some pretty big Rivers; and on many of
the other lesser Islands there are Brooks of good Water. The Spaniards when
they first discovered these Islands, found multitudes of Guanoes, and
Land-turtle or Tortoise, and named them the Gallapago's Islands. I do believe
there is no place in the World that is so plentifully stored with these
Animals. The Guanoes here are as fat and large as any that ever I saw; they are
so tame, that a Man may knock down twenty in an hours time with a Club. The
Landturtle are here so numerous, that 5 or 600 men might subsist on them alone
for several months, without any other sort of Provision: They are extraordinary
large and fat; and so sweet, that no Pullet eats more pleasantly. One of the
largest of these Creatures will weigh 150 or 200 weight, and some of them are 2
foot, or 2 foot 6 Inches over the Challapee or Belly. I did never see any but
at this place, that will weigh above 30 Pound weight. I have heard that at the
Isle of St. Lawrence or Madagascar, and at the English Forest, an Island near
it, called also Do^ Mascarin, and now possessed by the French, there are very
large ones, but whether so big, fat, and sweet as these, I know not. There are
3 or 4 sorts of these Creatures in the West Indies. One is called by the
Spaniards, Hecatee; these live most in fresh Waterponds, and seldom come on
Land. They weigh about 10 or 15 pound; they have small Legs and flat Feet, and
small long Necks. Another sort is called Tenapen; these are a great deal less
than the Hecatee; the Shell on their Backs is all carved naturally, finely
wrought, and well clouded: the Backs of these are rounder than those
beforementioned; they are otherwise much of the same form: these delight to
live in wet swampy places, or on the Land near such places. Both these sorts
are very good Meat. They are in great plenty on the Isle of Pines near Cuba:
there the Spanish Hunters when they meet them in the Woods bring them home to
their Huts, and mark them by notching their Shells, then let them go; this they
do to have them at hand, for they never ramble far from thence. When these
Hunters return to Cubo, after about a Month or six Weeks stay, they carry with
them 3 or 400, or more of these Creatures to sell; for they are very good Meat,
and every Man knows his own by their Marks. These Tortoise in the Gallapago's
are more like the Hecatee, except that, as I said before, they are much bigger;
and they have very long small necks and little heads. There are some green
Snakes on these Islands, but no other Land-Animal that I did ever see. There
are great plenty of Turtle-Doves so tame, that a Man may kill 5 or 6 dozen in a
forenoon with a stick. They are somewhat less than a Pigeon, and are very good
meat, and commonly fat.

There are good wide Channels between these Islands fit for Ships to pass, and
in some places shole water, where there grows plenty of Turtle-grass; therefore
these Islands are plentifully stored with Sea-Turtle, of that sort which is
called the green Turtle. I have hitherto deferred the description of these
Creatures, therefore I shall give it here. There are 4 sorts of Sea-Turtle,
viz. the Trunk-turtle, the Loggerhead, the Hawks-bill, and the Green-Turtle.
The Trunk-turtle is commonly bigger than the other, their backs are higher and
rounder, and their flesh rank and not wholesome. The Loggerhead is so called
because it has a great head, much bigger than the other sorts; their flesh is
likewise very rank, and seldom eaten but in case of necessity: they feed on
Moss that grows about Rocks. The Hawks-bill Turtle is the leaft kind, they are
so called because their mouths are long and small, somewhat resembling the Bill
of a Hawk: On the backs of these Hawks-bill Turtle grows that shell which is so
much esteemed for making Cabinets, Combs, and other things. The largest of them
may have three pound and an half of shell; I have taken some that have had 3
pound 10 Ounces: but they commonly have a pound and half, or two Pound; some
not so much. These are but ordinary food, but generally sweeter than the
Loggerhead: yet these Hawks-bills, in some places, are unwholesome, causing them
that eat them to purge and vomit excessively, especially those between the
Sambaloes and Portobel. We meet with other Fish in the West Indies, of the same
malignant nature: but I shall describe them in the Appendix. These Hawks-bill
Turtles are better or worse, according to their feeding. In some places they
feed on Grass, as the Green Tortoise also does; in other places they keep among
Rocks, and feed on Moss, or Sea-Weeds; but these are not so sweet as those that
eat Grass, neither is their Shell so clear, for they are commonly overgrown
with Barnacles which spoils the shell; and their Flesh is commonly yellow,
especially the fat.

Hawks-bill Turtle are in many places of the West Indies. They have Islands and
places peculiar to themselves, where they lay their Eggs, and seldom come among
any other Turtle. These, and all other Turtle, lay Eggs in the Sand; their time
of laying is in May, June, July. Some begin sooner, some later. They lay three
times in a Season, and at each time 80 or 90 Eggs. Their Eggs are as big as a
Hens Egg, and very round, covered only with a white tough skin. There are some
Bays on the Northside of Jamaica, where these Hawks-bills resort to lay. In the
Bay of Honduras are Islands which they likewise make their breeding places, and
many places along all the Coast on the Main of the West Indies, from Trinidado
to La Vera Cruz, in the Bay of Nova Hispania. When a Sea-turtle turns out of
the Sea to lay, she is at least an hour before she returns again; for she is to
go above high water-mark, and if it be low water when she comes a shore, she
must rest once or twice, being heavy, before she comes to the place where she
lays. When she has found a place for her purpose, she makes a great hole with
her Fins in the Sand, wherein she lays her Eggs, then covers them two foot deep
with the same Sand which she threw out of the hole, and so returns. Sometimes
they come up the night before they intend to lay, and take a view of the place,
and so having made a Tour, or Semicircular March, they return to the Sea again,
and they never fail to come ashore the next night to lay near that place. All
sorts of Turtle use the same methods in laying. I knew a Man in Jamaica, that
made 8 pound Sterling of the shell of these Hawks-bill Turtle, which he got in
one Season, and in one small Bay, not half a mile long. The manner of taking
them is to watch the Bay, by walking from one part to the other all night;
making no noise, nor keeping any sort of light. When the Turtle come ashore,
the Man that watches for them turns them on their Backs, then hales them above
high water mark, and leave them till the Morning. A large green Turtle, with
her weight and struggling, will puzzle two Men to turn her. The Hawks-bill
Turtle are not only found in the West Indies, but on the Coast of Guinea, and
in the East Indies. I never saw any in the South-Seas.

The Green Turtle are so called, because their Shell is greener than any other.
It is very thin and clear, and better clouded than the Hawks-bill; but it is
used only for inlays, being extraordinary thin. These Turtles are generally
larger than the Hawks-bill; one will weigh 2 or 3 hundred pound. Their Backs
are flatter than the Hawks-bill, their Heads round and small. Green Turtle are
the sweetest of all the kinds: But there are degrees of them, both in respect
to their Flesh and their bigness. I have observed, that at Blanco in the
West Indies, the Green Turtle (which is the only kind there) are larger than
any other in the North-Seas. There they commonly will weigh 280 or 300 pound:
Their Fat is yellow, and the Lean white, and their Flesh extraordinary sweet.
At Boca Toro, West of Portobel, they are not so large, their Flesh not so
white, nor the Fat so yellow. Those in the Bays of Honduras and Campeachy are
somewhat smaller still; their Fat is green, and the Lean of a darker color
than those at Boca-Toro. I heard of a monstrous green Turtle once taken at
Port Royal in the Bay of Campeachy, that was four foot deep from the Back to
the Belly, and the belly 6 foot broad; Captain Roch's Son, of about 9 or 10
years of age, went in it as in a Boat, on board his Father's Ship, about a
quarter of a mile from the shore, The Leaves of Fat afforded 8 Gallons of Oil.
The Turtle that live among the Keys, or small Islands, on the South Side of
Cuba, are a mixed sort, some bigger, some less; and so their Flesh is of a
mixed color, some green, some dark, some yellowish. With these Port Royal in
Jamaica is constantly supplied, by Sloops that come hither with Nets to take
them. They carry them alive to Jamaica, where the Turtles have Wires made with
Stakes in the Sea to preserve them alive; and the Market is every day
plentifully stored with Turtle, it being the common food there, chiefly for the
ordinary sort of People.

Green Turtle live on Grass, which grows in the Sea, in 3, 4, 5, or 6 fathom
Water, at most of the places beforementioned. This Grass is different from
Manatee-grass, for that is a small Blade; but this a quarter of an inch broad,
and six inches long. The Turtle of these Islands Gallapagos, are a sort of a
bastard green Turtle, for their Shell is thicker than other green Turtle in the
West or East Indies, and their Flesh is not so sweet. They are larger than any
other green Turtle; for it is common for these to be two or three foot deep,
and their Callapees, or Bellies, 5 foot wide: but there are other green Turtle
in the South-Seas that are not so big as the smallest Hawks-bill. These are
seen at the Island Plata, and other places thereabouts: They feed on Moss, and
are very rank, but fat.

Both these sorts are different from any others, for both He Is and She Is come
ashore in the day time, and lie in the Sun; but in other places, none but the
She Is go ashore, and that in the night only, to lay their Eggs. The best
feeding for Turtle in the South Seas is among these Gallapago Islands, for here
is plenty of Grass.

There is another sort of green Turtle in the South Seas which are but small,
yet pretty sweet: These lie Westward on the Coast of Mexico. One thing is very
strange and remarkable in these Creatures; that at the breeding time they leave
for 2 or 3 Months their common Haunts, where they feed most of the Year, and
resort to other places, only to lay their Eggs: and it is not thought that they
eat any thing during this Season: So that both He Is and She Is grow very lean;
but the He Is to that degree that none will eat them. The most remarkable places
that I did ever hear of for their breeding, is at an Island in the West Indies
called Caimanes, and the Isle Ascension in the Western Ocean: and when the
breeding time is past, there are none remaining. Doubtless they swim some
hundreds of Leagues to come to those two places: For it has been often
observed, that at Caimanes, at the breeding time, there are found all those
sorts of Turtle before described. The South Keys of Cuba are above 40 leagues
from thence, which is the nearest place that these Creatures can come from; and
it is most certain, that there could not live so many there as come here in one
Season.

Those that go to lay at Ascension, must needs travel much farther, for there
is no Land nearer it than 300 Leagues: And it is certain, that these Creatures
live always near the Shore. In the South Sea likewise, the Gallapagos is the
place where they live the biggest part of the year; yet they go from thence at
their Season over to the Main, to lay their Eggs; which is 100 Leagues, the
nearest place. Although multitudes of these Turtle go from their common places of
feeding and abode, to those laying places, yet they do not all go: And at the
time when the Turtle resort to these places to lay their Eggs, they are
accompanied with abundance of Fish, especially Sharks; the places which the
Turtle then leave being at that time destitute of Fish, which follow the Turtle.

When the She Is go thus to their places to lay, the Male accompany them, and
never leave them till their return; both Male and Female are fat the beginning
of the Season; but before they return, the Male, as I said, are so lean, that
they are not fit to eat, but the Female are good to the very last; yet not so
fat as at the beginning of the Season. It is reported of these Creatures, that
they are nine days engendring, and in the Water; the Male on the Females Back.
It is observable, that the Male, while engendring, do not easily forsake their
Female: for I have gone and taken hold of the Male when engendring: and a very
bad Striker may strike them then, for the Male is not shy at all: but the
Female seeing a Boat, when they rise to blow, would make her escape, but that
the Male grasps her with his two fore Fins, and holds her fast. When they are
thus coupled, it is best to strike the Female first, then you are sure of the
Male also. These Creatures are thought to live to a great Age; and it is
observed by the Jamaica Turtlers, that they are many years before they come to
their full growth.

The Air of these Islands is temperate enough, considering the Clime. Here is
constantly a fresh Seabreeze all day, and cooling refreshing Winds in the
night: Therefore the heat is not so violent here, as in most places near the
Equator. The time of the year for the Rains is in November, December and
January: Then there is oftentimes excessive dark tempestuous Weather, mixed with
much Thunder and Lightning. Sometimes before and after these Months there are
moderate refreshing Showers; but in May, June, July and August, the Weather is
always very fair.

We staid at one of these Islands, which lies under the Equator, but one Night,
because our Prizes could not get in to an Anchor. We refreshed our selves very
well, both with Land and Sea-Turtles; and the next day we sailed from thence.
The next Island of the Gallapagos that we came to, is but two Leagues from
this: it is rocky and barren like this: it is about five or six Leagues long,
and four broad. We anchored in the Afternoon, at the North-side of the Island,
a quarter of a Mile from the Shore, in 16 fathom Water. It is steep all round
this Island, and no Anchoring, only at this place. Here it is but ordinary
riding; for the Ground is so steep, that if an Anchor starts it never holds
again; and the Wind is commonly off from the Land, except in the Night, when
the Land-wind comes more from the West; for there it blows right along the
Shore, though but faintly. Here is no Water but in Ponds and Holes of the
Rocks. That which we first anchored at has Water on the North-end; falling
down in a stream from high steep Rocks, upon the Sandy Bay, where it may be
taken up. As soon as we came to an Anchor, we made a Tent ashore for Capt.
Cook, who was sick. Here we found the Sea-Turtle lying ashore on the Sand; this
is not customary in the West Indies. We turned them on their Backs that they
might not get away. The next day more came up, when we found it to be their
custom to lie in the Sun: so we never took care to turn them afterward; but
sent ashore the Cook every Morning, who killed as many as served for the day.
This custom we observed all the time we lay here, feeding sometimes on
Land-Turtle, sometimes on Sea-Turtle, there being plenty of either sort.
Captain Davis came hither again a second time; and then he went to other
Islands on the West Side of these. There he found such plenty of Land-Turtle,
that he and his Men eat nothing else for 3 Months that he staid there. They
were so fat, that he saved sixty Jars of Oil out of those that he spent: This
Oil served instead of Butter, to eat with Doughboys or Dumplins, in his return
out of these Seas. He found very convenient places to Careen, and good Channels
between the Islands; and very good Anchoring in many places. There he found
also plenty of Brooks of good fresh Water, and Firewood enough, there being
plenty of Trees fit for many uses. Capt. Harris, one that we shall speak of
hereafter, came hither likewise, and found some Islands that had plenty of
Mammee-Trees, and pretty large Rivers. The Sea about these Islands is
plentifully stored with Fish, such as are at John Fernando's. They are both
large and fat, and as plentiful here as at John Fernando's. Here are
particularly abundance of Sharks. The North-part of this second Isle we
anchored at, lies 28 minutes North of the Equator. I took the height of the
Sun with an Astrolabe. These Isles of the Gallapago's have plenty of Salt. We
stayed here but 12 days, in which time we put ashore 5000 packs of Flower, for
a reserve, if we should have occasion of any before we left these Seas. Here
one of our Indian Prisoners informed us that he was born at Ria Lexa, and that
he would engage to carry us thither. He being examined of the Strength and
Riches of it, satisfied the Company so well, that they were resolved to go
thither.

Having thus concluded, the 12th of June we sailed from hence, designing to
touch at the Island Cocos, as well to put ashore some Flower there, as to see
the Island, because it was in our way to Ria Lexa. We steered North, till in
Lat. 4 d. 40 min. intending then to steer W. by N. for we expected to have had
the Wind at S. by E. or S. S. E. as we had on the South Side of the Equator.
Thus I had formerly found the Winds near the Shore in these Latitudes; but when
we first parted from the Gallapago's, we had the Wind at S. and as we sailed
farther North, we had the Winds at S. by W. then at S. S. W. Winds which we did
not expect. We thought at first that the Wind would come about again to the
South; but when we came to sail off West to the Island Cocos, we had the Wind
at S. W. by S. and could lie but W. by N. Yet we stood that Course till we were
in the lat. 5 d. 40 m. N. and then despairing, as the Winds were, to find the
Island Cocos, we steered over to the Main; for had we seen the Island then, we
could not have fetched it, being so far to the North of it.

The Island Cocos is so named by the Spaniards, because there are abundance of
Coco-nut Trees growing on it. They are not only in one or two places, but grow
in great Groves, all round the Island, by the Sea. This is an uninhabited
Island, it is 7 or 8 leagues round, and pretty high in the middle, where it is
destitute of Trees, but looks very green and pleasant, with an Herb called by
the Spaniards Gramadael. It is low Land by the Seaside.

This Island is in 5 d. 15 m. North of the Equator; it is environed with Rocks,
which makes it almost inaccessible: only at the N. E. end there is a small
Harbor where Ships may safely enter and ride secure. In this Harbor there is a
fine Brook of fresh Water running into the Sea. This is the account that the
Spaniards give of it, and I had the same also from Captain Eaton who was there
afterward.

Any who, like us, had not experienced the nature of the Winds in these parts,
might reasonably expect that we could have sailed with a flown Sheet to Ria
Lexa; but we found our selves mistaken, for as we came nearer the shore, we
found the Winds right in our Teeth: But I shall refer my Reader to the Chapter
of Winds in the Appendix, for a further account of this.

We had very fair weather, and small winds, in this Voyage from the Gallapagos,
and at the beginning of July we fell in with Cape Blanco, on the Main of
Mexico. This is so called from two white Rocks lying off it. When wear off at
Sea, right against the Cape, they appear as part of the Cape; but being near
the shore, either to the Eastward or Westward of the Cape, they appear like
two Ships under sail at first view, but coming nearer, they are like two high
Towers; they being small, high, and steep on all sides, and they are about half
a mile from the Cape. This Cape is in lat. 9 d. 56 m. It is about the height
of Beachy-head in England, on the Coast of Sussex. It is a full Point, with
steep Rocks to the Sea. The top of it is flat and even for about a mile: then
it gradually falls away on each side with a gentle descent. It appears very
pleasant, being covered with great lofty Trees. From the Cape on the N. W. side
the Land runs in N. E. for about 4 leagues, making a small Bay called by the
Spaniards Caldera. A league within Cape Blanco, on the N. W. side of it, and at
the entrance of this Bay, there is a small Brook of very good water running
into the Sea. Here the Land is low, making a saddling between 2 small Hills. It
is very rich Land; producing large tall Trees of many sorts; the Mould is black
and deep, which I have always taken notice of to be a fat Soil. About a mile
from this Brook, toward the N. E. the Woodland terminates. Here the Savannah
Land begins, and runs some Leagues into the Country, making many small Hills
and Dales. These Savannahs are not altogether clear of Trees, but are here and
there sprinkled with small Groves, which render them very delightful. The Grass
which grows here is very kindly, thick, and long; I have seen none better in
the West Indies. Toward the bottom of the Bay, the Land by the Sea is low and
full of Mangroves, but farther in the Country the Land is high and mountainous.
The Mountains are part Woodland, part Savannah. The Trees in those Woods are
but small and short; and the Mountain Savannahs are clothed but with
indifferent Grass. From the bottom of this Bay, it is but 14 or 15 leagues, to
the Lake of Nicaragua on the North-Sea Coast: the way between is somewhat
Mountainous, but most Savannah.

Capt. Cook, who was taken sick at John Fernandoe's, continued so till we came
within 2 or 3 leagues of Cape Blanco, and then died of a sudden; though he seemed
that morning to be as likely to live, as he had been some weeks before; but it
is usual with sick Men coming from the Sea, where they have nothing but the
Sea-Air, to die off as soon as ever they come within the view of the Land.
About 4 hours after we all came to an Anchor, (namely the Ship that I was in,
Captain Eaton, and the great Meal Prize,) a league within the Cape, right
against the Brook of Fresh Water, in 14 fathom clean hard Sand. Presently after
we came to an Anchor, Capt. Cook was carried ashore to be buried; 12 Men
carried there Arms to Guard those that were ordered to dig the Grave: for
although we saw no appearance of Inhabitants, yet we did not know but the
Country might be thick inhabited. And before Capt. Cook was interred, 3 Spanish
Indians came to the place where our Men were digging the Grave, and demanded
what they were, and from whence they came? to whom our Men answered, They came
from Lima, and were bound to Ria Lexa, but that the Capt. of one of the Ships
dying at Sea, obliged them to come into this place to give him Christian
burial. The 3 Spanish Indians, who were very shy at first, began to be more
bold, and drawing nearer, asked many silly Questions; and our Men did not stick
to sooth them up with as many Falsehoods, purposely to draw them into their
clutches. Our Men often laughed at their temerity; and asked them if they never
saw any Spaniards before? They told them, that they themselves were Spaniards,
and that they lived among Spaniards, and that although they were born there, yet
they had never seen 3 Ships there before: Our Men told them, that neither now
might they have seen so many, if it had not been on an urgent occasion. At
length they drilled them by discourse so near, that our Men laid hold on all
three at once; but before Captain Cook was buried, one of them made his escape,
the other two were brought off aboard our Ship. Captain Eaton immediately came
aboard and examined them; they confessed that they came purposely to view our
Ship, and if possible to inform themselves what we were; for the President of
Panama not long before, sent a Letter of advice to Nicoya, informing the
Magistrates thereof, that some Enemies were come into these Seas, and that
therefore it behoved them to be careful of themselves. Nicoya is a small
Mulatto Town, about 12 or 14 leagues East from hence, standing on the Banks of
a River of that name. It is a place very fit for building Ships, therefore most
of the Inhabitants are Carpenters; who are commonly employed in building new,
or repairing old Ships. It was here that Capt. Sharp (just after I left him, in
the Year 1681.) got Carpenters to six his Ship, before he returned for England:
and for that reason it behoved the Spaniards to be careful, (according to the
Governor of Panama's advice,) lest any Men at other times wanting such
necessaries as that place afforded, might again be supplied there. These
Spanish Indians told us likewise, that they were sent to the place where they
were taken, in order to view our Ships, as fearing these were those mentioned
by the President of Panama: It being demanded of them to give an account of the
Estate and Riches of the Country, they said that the Inhabitants were most
Husbandmen, who were employed either in Planting and Manuring of Corn, or
chiefly about Cattle; they having large Savannahs, which were well stored with
Bulls, Cows and Horses; that by the Seaside, in some places there grew some
Red-wood, useful in Dying; of this they said there was little profit made,
because they were forced to send it to the Lake of Nicaragua, which runs into
the North Seas: That they sent thither also great quantities of Bull and Cow
Hides, and brought from thence in Exchange Europe Commodities; as Hats, Linen
and Woollen, wherewith they clothed themselves; that the Flesh of the Cattle
turned to no other profit than Sustenance for their Families: As for Butter and
Cheese they make but little in those parts. After they had given this Relation,
they told us, that if we wanted Provision, there was a Beef-Estantion, or Farm
of Bulls or Cows about 3 mile off, where we might kill what we pleased. This
was welcome News, for we had no sort of Flesh since we left the Gallapagos;
therefore 24 of us immediately entered into two Boats, taking one of these
Spanish Indians with us for a Pilot, and went ashore about a league from the
Ship. There we haled up our Boats dry, and marched all away, following our
Guide, who soon brought us to some Houses, and a large Penn for Cattle. This
Penn stood in a large Savannah, about two Mile from our Boats: There were a
great many fat Bulls and Cows feeding in the Savannahs; some of us would have
killed 3 or 4 to carry on board, but others opposed it, and said, It was better
to stay all Night, and in the Morning drive the Cattle into the Penn, and then
kill 20 or 30, or as many as we pleased. I was minded to return aboard, and
endeavored to persuade them all to go with me, but some would not, therefore I
returned with 12, which was half, and left the other 12 behind. At this place I
saw 3 or 4 Tun of the Red-wood; which I take to be that sort of Wood, called in
Jamaica Blood-wood, or Nicaragua-wood. We who returned abroad, met no one to
oppose us, and the next day we expected our Consorts that we left ashore, but
none came; therefore at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, 10 Men went in our Canoa to
see what was become of them: When they came to the Bay where we landed, to go
to the Estantion, they found our Men all on a small Rock, half a mile from the
shore, standing in the Water up to their Wastes. These Men had slept ashore in
the House and turned out betimes in the Morning to pen the Cattle: 2 or 3 went
one way, and as many another way, to get the Cattle to the Pen, and others
stood at the Pen to drive them in. When they were thus scattered, about 40 or
50 armed Spaniards came in among them: Our Men immediately called to each
other, and drew together in a Body before the Spaniards could attack them; and
marched to their Boat, which was haled up dry on the Sand. But when they came
to the sandy Bay, they found their Boat all in Flames. This was a very
unpleasing sight, for they knew not how to get Aboard, unless they marched by
Land to the place where Capt. Cook was buried, which was near a league. The
greatest part of the way was thick Woods, where the Spaniards might easily lay
an Ambush for them, at which they are very expert. On the other side, the
Spaniards now thought them secure; and therefore came to them, and asked them
if they would be pleased to walk to their Plantations, with many other such
flouts; but our Men answered never a word. It was about half ebb, when one of
our Men took notice of a Rock a good distance from the shore, just appearing
above Water; he showed it to his Consorts, and told them it would be a good
Castle for them if they could get thither. They all wished themselves there; for
the Spaniards, who lay as yet at a good distance from them behind the Bushes,
as secure of their Prey, began to whistle now and then a shot among them.
Having therefore well considered the place, together with the danger they were
in, they proposed to send one of the tallest Men to try if the Sea between them
and the Rock were fordable. This Counsel they presently put in execution, and
found it according to their desire. So they all marched over to the Rock, where
they remained till the Canoa came to them; which was about 7 Hours. It was the
latter part of the Ebb when they first went over, and then the Rock was dry;
but when the Tide of Flood returned again, the Rock was covered, and the Water
still flowing; so that if our Canoa had stayed but one hour longer, they might
have been in as great danger of their lives from the Sea, as before from the
Spaniards; for the Tide rises here about 8 foot. The Spaniards remained on the
shore, expecting to see them destroyed, but never came from behind the Bushes,
where they first planted themselves; they having not above 3 or 4 Hand-guns,
the rest of them being armed with Lances. The Spaniards in these parts are very
expert in heaving or darting the Lance; with which, upon occasion, they will do
great Feats, especially in Ambuscades: And by their good Will, they care not
for fighting otherwise, but content themselves with standing a loof, threatening
and calling Names, at which they are as expert as the other; so that if their
Tongues be quiet, we always take it for granted they have said some Ambush.
Before night our Canoa came Aboard, and brought our Men all safe. The next day
two Canoas were sent to the bottom of the Bay to seek sor a large Canoa, which
we were informed was there. The Spaniards have neither Ships nor Barks here,
and but a few Canoas which they seldom use: Neither are there any Fishermen
here, as I judge, because Fish is very scarce; for I never saw any here,
neither could any of our Men ever take any; and yet wherever we come to an
Anchor, we always send out our Strikers, and put our Hooks and Lines overboard,
to try for Fish. The next day our Men returned out of the Bay, and brought the
Canoa with them, which they were sent for, and 3 or 4 days afterward the 2
Canoas were sent out again for another, which they likewise brought aboard.
These Canoas were fitted with Thoats or Benhces, Straps and Oars, fit for
service; and one of these Capt. Eaton had for his share, and we the other,
which we sixth for landing Men when occasion required. While we lay here, we
filled our Water, and cut a great many Looms, or Handles, or Staves for Oars;
for here is plenty of Lance-wood, which is most proper for that use. I never
saw any in the South Seas, but in this place: There is plenty of it in Jamaica,
especially at a place called Blewfields (not Blewfields River which is on the
Main) near the West End of that Island. The Lance-wood grows strait like our
young Ashes; it is very hard, tough and heavy, therefore Privateers esteem it
very much, not only to make Looms for Oars, but Scouring-Rods for their Guns;
for they have seldom less than 3 or 4 spare Rods for fear one should break, and
they are much better than Rods made of Ash.

The Day before we went from hence, Mr. Edward Davis, the Company's
Quartermaster, was made Captain by consent of all the Company; for it was his
place by Succession. The 20th day of July we sailed from this Bay of Caldera,
with Capt. Eaton, and our Prize which we brought from Gallapagos in Company,
directing our Course for Ria Lexa. The Wind was at North, which although but an
ordinary Wind, yet carried us in three days abrest of our intended Port.

Ria Lexa is the most remarkable Land on all this Coast, for there is a high
pecked burning Mountain, called by the Spaniards Volcan-Vejo, or the Old
Volcan. This must be brought to bear N. E. then steer in directly with the
Mountain, and that course will bring you to the Harbor. The Sea winds are here
at S. S. W. therefore Ships that come hither must take the Sea-winds, for there
is no going in with the Land-wind. The Volcan may be easily known, because
there is not any other so high a Mountain near it, neither is there any that
appears in the like form all along the Coast; besides it smoaks all the day,
and in the night it sometimes sends forth flames of Fire. This Mountain may be
seen 20 leagues: being within 3 leagues of the Harbor, the entrance into it may
be seen; there is a small flat low Island which makes the Harbor, it is about a
mile long, and a quarter of a mile broad, and is from the Main about a mile and
a half. There is a Channel at each end of the Island, the west Channel is the
widest and safest, yet at the N. W. point of the Island there is a shole which
Ships must take heed of going in. Being past that shole, you must keep close to
the Island, for there is a whole sandy point strikes over from the Main almost
half way. The East Channel is not so wide, besides there runs a stronger Tide;
therefore Ships seldom or never go in that way. This Harbor is capable of
receiving 200 Sail of Ships; the best riding is near the Main, where there is 7
or 8 fathom water, clean hard Sand.

Ria Lexa Town is 2 leagues from hence, and there are 2 Creeks that run toward
it; the Westermost comes near the backside of the Town, the other runs up to
the Town, but neither Ships nor Barks can go so far. These Creeks are very
narrow, and the Land on each side drowned and full of red Mangrove-trees. About
a mile and half below the Town, on the banks of the East Creek, the Spaniards
had cast up a strong Breast-work; it was likewise reported they had another on
the West Creek, both so advantageously placed, that 10 Men might with ease keep
200 Men from landing. I shall give a description of the Town in my return
hither, and therefore forbear to do it here. Wherefore to resume the thread of
our course, we were now in sight of the Volcan, being by estimation 7 or 8
leagues from the shore, and the Mountain bearing N. E. we took in our Topsails
and haled up our Courses, intending to go with our Canoas into the Harbor in
the night. In the Evening we had a very hard Tornado, out of the N. E. with
much Thunder, Lightning and Rain. The violence of the Wind did not last long,
yet it was a 11 a clock at night before we got out our Canoas, and then it was
quite calm. We rowed in directly for the shore, and thought to have reached it
before day, but it was 9 a Clock in the Morning before we got into the Harbor.
When we came within a league of the Island of Ria Lexa, that makes the Harbor,
we saw a House on it, and coming nearer we saw 2 or 3 Men, who stood and looked
on us till we came within half a mile of the Island, then they went into their
Canoa, which lay on the inside of the Island, and rowed toward the Main; but
we overtook them before they got over, and brought them back again to the
Island. There was a Horseman right against us on the Main when we took the
Canoa, who immediately rode away toward the Town as fast as he could. The rest
of our Canoas rowed heavily, and did not come to the Island till 12 a clock,
therefore we were forced to stay for them. Before they came we examined the
Prisoners, who told us, that they were set there to watch; for the Governor of
Ria Lexa received a Letter about a month before, wherein he was advised of some
Enemies come into the Sea, and therefore admonished to be careful; that,
immediately thereupon the Governor had caused a House to be built on this
Island, and ordered 4 Men to be continually there to watch Night and Day, and
if they saw any Ship coming thither they were to give notice of it. They said
they did not expect to see Boats or Canoas, but looked out for a Ship. At first
they took us in our advanced Canoa to be some Men that had been cast away and
lost our Ship; till seeing 3 or 4 Canoas more, they began to suspect what we
were. They told us likewise, that the Horseman which we saw, did come to them
every Morning, and that in less than an Hours time he could be at the Town.
When Captain Eaton and his Canoas came ashore, we told them what had happened. It
was now three Hours since the Horseman rode away, and we could not expect to
get to the Town in less than two Hours; in which time the Governor having
notice of our coming, might be provided to receive us at his Breast-Works;
therefore we thought it best to defer this Design till another time.

There is a fine Spring of fresh Water on the Island, there are some Trees
also, but the biggest part is Savannah, whereon is good Grass, though there is
no sort of Beast to eat it. This Island is in lat. 12 d. 10 m. North. Here we
stayed till 4 a clock in the Afternoon; then our Ships being come within a
League of the shore, we all went on board, and steered for the Gulf of
Amapalla, intending there to careen our Ships.

The 26th of July Captain Eaton came aboard our Ship, to consult with Captain
Davis, how to get some Indians to assist us in careening: It was concluded,
that when we came near the Gulf, Captain Davis should take two Canoas, well
manned, and go before, and Captain Eaton should stay aboard. According to this
Agreement, Captain Davis went away for the Gulf the next day.

The Gulf of Amapalla is a great Arm of the Sea, running 8 or 10 Leagues into
the Country. It is bounded on the South Side of its Entrance with Point
Casivina, and on the N. W. side with St. Michael's Mount. Both these place are
very remarkable: Point Casivina is in lat. 12 d. 40 m. North: it is a high
round Point, which at Sea appears like an Island; because the Land within it is
very low. St. Michael's Mount is a very high peeked Hill, not very steep: the
Land at the foot of it on the S. E. side, is low and even, for at least a mile.
From this low Land the Gulf of Amapalla enters on that side. Between this low
Land and Point Casivina, there are two considerable high Islands; the
Southermost is called Mangera, the other is called Amapalla, and they are two
miles asunder.

Mangera is a high round Island, about 2 leagues in compass, appearing like a
tall Grove. It is environed with Rocks all round, only a small Cove, or sandy
Bay on the N. E. side. The Mold and Soil of this Island is black, but not deep;
it is mixed with Stones, yet very productive of large tall Timber Trees. In the
middle of the Island there is an Indian Town, and a fair Spanish Church. The
Indians have Plantations of Maiz round the Town and some Plantains: They have a
few Cocks and Hens, but no other sort of tame Fowl; neithe^ have they any sort
of Beast, but Cats and Dogs^ There is a path from the Town to the sandy Bay^
but the way is steep and rocky. At this sandy Bay^ there are always 10 or 12
Canoas lie haled up dry^ except when they are in use.

Amapalla is a larger Island than Mangera; the Soil much the same. There are
two Towns on i^ about two Miles asunder; one on the North-sid^ the other on the
East Side: That on the East-sid^ is not above a mile from the Sea; it stands on
^ Plain on the top of a Hill, the Path to it so stee^ and rocky, that a few Men
might keep down ^ great number, only with Stones. There is a ve^ fair Church
standing in the midst of the Tow^ The other Town is not so big, yet it has a
good handsome Church. One thing I have observed in all the Indians Towns under
the Spanish Government, as well in these parts as in the Bay of Campeachy, and
elsewhere, that the Images of the Virgin Mary and other Saints, (with which all
their Churches were filled) are still painted in an Indian Complexion, and
partly in that Dress; but in those Towns which are inhabited chiefly by
Spaniards, the Saints also conform themselves to the Spanish Garb and
Complexion. The Houses here are but mean; the Indians of both Plains have good
Field Maiz, remote from the Town: they have but few Plantains, but they have
abundance of large Hog-Plumb-trees, growing about their Houses. The Tree that
bears this Fruit is as big as our largest Plumb-tree: The Leaf is of a dark
green color, and as broad as the Leaf of a Plumb-tree; but they are shaped
like the Haw-thorn Leaf. The Trees are very brittle Wood. The Fruit is oval,
and as big as a small Horse Plumb. It is at first very green, but when it is
ripe, one side is yellow, the other red. It has a great stone, and but little
substance about it: The Fruit is pleasant enough; but I do not remember that
ever I saw one thoroughly ripe, that had not a Maggot or two in it. I do not
remember that I did ever see any of this Fruit in the South Seas, but at this
place. In the Bay of Campeachy they are very plentiful, and in Jamaica they
plant them to fence their Ground. These Indians have also some Fowls, as those
at Mangera: No Spaniards dwell among them, but only one Padre or Priest, who
serves for all three Town; these two at Amapalla, and that at Mangera. They are
under the Governor of the Town of St. Michael's at the foot of St. Michael^s
Mount, to whom they pay their Tribute in Maiz; being extremely poor, yet very
contented. They have nothing to make Money of, but their Plantations of Maiz
and their Fowls; the Padre or Friar has his Tenths of it, and knows to a Peck
how much every Man has, and how many Fowls, of which they dare not kill one,
though they are sick, without leave from him. There was (as I said) never another
white Man on these Islands, but the Friar. He could speak the Indian Language,
as all Friars must that live among them. In this vast Country of America there
are diverse Nations of Indians, different in their Language, therefore those
Friars that are minded to live among any Nations of Indians, must learn the
Language of those People they propose to teach. Although these here are but
poor, yet the Indians in many other places have great Riches, which the
Spaniards draw from them for Trifles: In such places the Friars get plentiful
Incoms; as particularly in the Bay of Campeachy, where the Indians have large
Cacaowalks; or in other Places where they plant Cochoneel Trees, or
Silvester-Trees; or where they gather Vinelloes, and in such places where they
gather Gold. In such places as these, the Friars do get a great deal of Wealth.
There was but one of all the Indians on both these Islands that could speak
Spanish; he could write Spanish also, being bred up purposely to keep their
Registers and Books of Account: He was Secretary to both Islands. They had a
Cosica too, (a small sort of Magistrate the Indians have amongst themselves)
but he could neither write nor speak Spanish.

There are a great many more Islands in this Bay, but none inhabited as these.
There is one pretty large Island, belonging to a Nunnery, as the Indians told
us, this was stocked with Bulls and Cows, there were 3 or 4 Indians lived there
to look after the Cattle, for the sake of which we often frequented this
Island, while we lay in the Bay; they are all low Islands, except Amapalla and
Mangera. There are two Channels to come into this Gulf, one between Point
Casivina and Mangera, the other between Mangera and Amapalla: The latter is the
best. The Riding place is on the East Side of Amapalla, right against a spot of
low Ground; for all the Island except this one place is high Land. Running in
farther, Ships may anchor near the Main, on the N. E. side of the Island
Amapalla. This is the place most frequented by Spaniards: It is called the Port
of Martin Lopez. This Gulf or Lake runs in some Leagues beyond all the
Islands; but it is shole Water, and not capable of Ships.

It was into this Gulf that Capt. Davis was gone with the two Canoas, to
endeavor for a Prisoner, to gain intelligence, if possible, before our Ships
came in: He came the first Night to Mangera, but for want of a Pilot, did not
know where to look for the Town. In the Morning he found a great many Canoas
haled up on the Bay; and from that Bay found a Path which led him and his
Company to the Town. The Indians saw our Ships in the Evening coming toward
the Island, and being before informed of Enemies in the Sea, they kept Scouts
out all Night for fear; who seeing Captain Davis coming, run into the Town, and
alarmed all the People. When Captain Davis came thither, they all run into the
Woods. The Friar happened to be there at this time; who being unable to ramble
into the Woods, fell into Capt. Davis's Hands: There were two Indian Boys with
him, who were likewise taken. Captain Davis went only to get a Prisoner,
therefore was well satisfied with the Friar, and immediately came down to the
Seaside. He went from thence to the Island Amapalla, carrying the Friar and
the two Indian Boys with him. These were his Pilots to conduct him to the
Landing place, where they arrived about Noon. They made no stay here, but left
3 or 4 Men to look after the Canoas, and Captain Davis with the rest marched to
the Town, taking the Friar with them. The Town, as is before noted, is about a
Mile from the Landing-place, standing in a Plain on the top of a Hill, having a
very steep ascent to go to it. All the Indians stood on the top of the Hill
waiting Capt. Davis's coming.

The Secretary, mentioned before, had no great kindness for the Spaniards It
was he that persuaded the Indians to wait Captain Davis his coming; for they
were all running into the Woods; but he told them, that if any of the Spaniards
Enemies came thither, it was not to hurt them, but the Spaniards, whose Slaves
they were; and that their Poverty would protect them. This Man with the Casica
stood more forward than the rest, at the Bank of the Hill, when Captain Davis
with his Company appeared beneath. They called out therefore in Spanish,
demanding of our Men, What they were, and from whence they came? To whom Capt.
Davis and his Men replied, They were Biscayers, and that they were sent thither
by the King of Spain to clear those Seas from Enemies; that their Ships were
coming into the Gulf to careen, and that they came thither before the Ships, to
seek a convenient place for it, as also to desire the Indians Assistance. The
Secretary, who, as I said before, was the only Man that could speak Spanish,
told them that they we^ welcome, for he had a great respect for any O^ Spain
Men, especially for the Biscayers, of whom (...) had heard a very honorable
Report; therefore (...) desired them to come up to their Town. Captai^ Davis
and his Men immediately ascended the Hil^ the Friar going before; and they were
receiv^ with a great deal of Affection by the Indians. T^ Casica and Secretary
embraced Captain Davis, a^ the other Indians received his Men with the (...)
Ceremony. These Salutations being ended, they (...) marched toward the Church,
for that is the place (...) all public Meetings, and all Plays and Pastimes
are acted there also, therefore in the Churches belonging to Indian Towns they
have all sorts of Vizards, and strange antic Dresses both for Men and Women,
and abundance of Musical Hautboys and Strumstrums. The Strumstrum is made
somewhat like a Cittern; most of those that the Indians use are made of a large
Goad cut in the midst, and a thin Board laid over the hollow, and which is
fastened to the Sides: this serves for the Belly; over which the Strings are
placed. The Nights before any Holidays, or the Nights ensuing, are the times
when they all meet to make merry. Their Mirth consists in singing, dancing, and
sporting in those antic Habits, and using as many antic Gestures. If the Moon
shine they use but few Torches, if not, the Church is full of Light. They meet
at these times all sorts of both Sexes. All the Indians that I have been
acquainted with who are under the Spaniards, seem to be more melancholy than
other Indians that are free; and at these public Meetings, when they are in
the greatest of their Jollity, their Mirth seems to be rather forced than real.
Their Songs are very melancholy and doleful; so is their Muck: but whether it
be natural to the Indians to be thus melancholy, or the effect of their
Slavery, I am not certain: But I have always been prone to believe, that they
are then only condoling their Misfortunes, the loss of their Country and
Liberties: which although these that are now living do not know, nor remember
what it was to be free, yet there seems to be a deep Impression in their
thoughts of the Slavery which the Spaniards have brought them under, increased
probably by some Traditions of their ancient Freedom.

Capt. Davis intended when they were all in the Church to shut the Doors, and
then make a bargain with them, letting them know what he was, and so draw them
afterward by fair means to our assistance: the Friar being with him, who had
also promised to engage them to it: but before they were all in the Church, one
of Capt. Davis his Men pusht one of the Indians to hasten him into the Church.
The Indian immediately ran away, and all the rest taking the alarm, sprang out
of the Church like Deer; it was hard to say which was first; and Captain Davis,
who knew nothing of what happened, was left in the Church only with the Friar.
When they were all fled, Captain Davis his Men fired and killed the Secretary;
and thus our Hopes perished by the Indiscretion of one foolish Fellow.

In the Afternoon the Ships came into the Gulf between Point Casivina and
Mangera, and anchored near the Island Amapalla, on the East Side, in ten Fathom
Water, clean hard Sand. In the Evening Captain Davis and his Company came
aboard, and brought the Friar with them; who told Captain Davis, that if the
Secretary had not been killed, he could have sent him a Letter by one of the
Indians that was taken at Mangera, and persuaded him to come to us; but now the
only way was to send one of those Indians to seek the Casica, and that himself
would instruct him what to say, and did not question but the Casica would come
in on his word. The next Day we sent ashore one of the Indians, who before
Night returned with the Casica and 6 other Indians, who remained with us all
the time that we staid here. These Indians did us good service; especially in
piloting us to an Island where we killed Beef whenever we wanted; and for this
their Service we satisfied them to their Hearts content. It was at this Island
Amapalla, that a party of English men and French men came afterward, and
stayed a great while, and at last landed on the Main, and marched over Land to
the Cape River, which disembogues into the North Seas near Cape Gratia Dios,
and is therefore called the Cape River: Near the Head of this River they made
Bark-logs (which I shall describe in the next Chapter) and so went into the
North Seas. This was the way that Captain Sharp had proposed to go if he had
been put to it; for this way was partly known to Privateers by the discovery
that was made into the Country about 30 Years since, by a Party of English Men
that went up that River in Canoas, about as far as the place where these French
Men made their Bark-logs: there they landed and marched to a Town called
Segovia in the Country. They were near a Month getting up the River, for there
were many Cataracts, where they were often forced to leave the River, and hale
their Canoas a shore over the Land, till they were past the Cataracts, and then
launched their Canoas again into the River. I have discoursed several Men that
were in that Expedition, and if I mistake not, Captain Sharp was one of them.
But to return to our Voyage in hand; when both our Ships were clean, and our
Water filled, Captain Davis and Captain Eaton broke off Consortships. Captain
Eaton took aboard of his Ships 400 Packs of Flower, and sailed out of the Gulf
the second day of September.

CHAP. VI.
They depart from Amapalla. Tornadoes. Cape S. Francisco. They meeet Captain
Eaton, and part again. Isle of Plata described. Another meeting with Capt.
Eaton, and there final parting. Point Sancta Hellena. Algatrane a sort of Tar.
A Spanish Wreck. Cruisings. Manta, near Cape St. Lorenzo. Monte
Christo-Cruisings. Cape Blanco. Payta. The Buildings in Peru. The Soil of Peru.
Colan. Barklogs described. Piura. The Road of Payta. Lobos de Terra. They come
again to Lobos de la Mar. The Bay of Guiaquil. Isle of Sancta Clara. A Rich
Spanish Wreck there. Cat-fish. Point Arena in the Isle Puna. The Island
described. The Palmeto-tree. Town and Harbor of Puna. River of Guiaquil.
Guiaquil Town. Its Commodities, Cacao, Sarsaparilla, Quito Cloth. Of the City,
and Gold, and Air of Quito. They enter the Bay in order to make an attempt on
the Town of Guiaquil. A great Advantage slipped that might have been made of a
company of Negroes taken in Guiaquil River. They go to Plata again. Isle Plata.

THE third day of September, 1684. we sent the Friar ashore, and left the
Indians in possession of the Prize which we brought in hither, though she was
still half laden with Flower, and we sailed out with the Land Wind, passing
between Amapalla and Mangera. When we were a league out, we saw a Canoa coming
with Sail and Oars after us; therefore we shortened Sail and staid for her. She
was a Canoa sent by the Governor of St. Michael's Town to our Captain, desiring
him not to carry away the Friar. The Messenger being told, that the Friar was
set ashore again at Amapalla, he returned with joy, and we made Sail again,
having the Wind at W. N. W. We steered toward the Coast of Peru; we had
Tornadoes every day till we made Cape St. Francisco, which from June to
November are very common on these Coasts; and we had with the Tornadoes weary
much Thunder, Lightning and Rain. When the Tornadoes were over, the Winds,
which while they lasted, was most from the South East, came about again to the
West, and never failed us till we were in sight of Cape St. Francisco, where we
found the Wind at South with fair Weather. This Cape is in lat. 0 1 d. 00
North, it is a high Bluff, or full point of Land, clothed with tall great
Trees. Passing by this Point, coming from the North, you will see a small low
point, which you might suppose to be the Cape; but you are then past it, and
presently afterward it appears with three points. The Land in the Country,
within this Cape, is very high, and the Mountains commonly appear very black.
When we came in with this Cape, we overtook Captain Eaton, plying under the
shore: he in his passage from Amapalla, while he was on that Coast, met with
such terrible Tornadoes of Thunder and Lightning, that as he and all his Men
related, they had never met with the like in any place. They were very much
affrightned by them, the Air smelling very much of Sulphur, and they
apprehending themselves in great danger of being burnt by the Lightning. He
touched at the Island Cocos, and put ashore 200 Packs of Flower there, and
loaded his Boat with Coco-Nuts, and took in fresh Water. In the evening we
separated again from Captain Eaton; for he stood off to Sea, and we plied up
under the shore, making our best advantage both of Sea and Land Winds. The Sea
Winds are here at South, the Land Winds at S. S. E. but some times when we came
abrest of a River we should have the Wind at S. E.

The 20th day of September we came to the Island Plata, and anchored in 16
fathom. We had very good weather from the time that we fell in with Cape St.
Francisco; and were now fallen in again with the same places from whence I
begin the account of this Voyage in the first Capter, having now compassed in
the whole Continent of the South America.

The Island Plata, as some report, was so named by the Spaniards, after Sir
Francis Drake took the Cacafoga, a Ship chiefly laden with Plate, which they
say he brought hither, and divided it here with his Men. It is about 4 mile
long, and a mile and half broad, and of a good height. It is bounded with high
steep Cliffs clear round, only at one place on the East Side. The top of it is
flat and even, the Soil sandy and dry: The Trees it produces are but small
bodied, low, and grow thin; and there are only 3 or 4 sorts of Trees, all
unknown to us. I observed they were much overgrown with long Moss. There is
good Grass, especially in the beginning of the Year. There is no Water on this
Island but at one place on the East Side, close by the Sea; there it drills
slowly down from the Rocks, where it may be received into Vessels. There was
plenty of Goats, but they are now all destroyed. There is no other sort of Land
Animal that I did ever see: here are plenty of Boobies and Men of War Birds.
The anch^ing place is on the East side, near the middle of the Island, close by
the shore, within two Cables lengths of the sandy Bay: there is about 18 or 20
fathom good fast oazy ground, and smooth water; for the S. E. point of the
Island shelters from the South Winds which constantly blow here. From the S. E.
point there strikes out a small shole a quarter of a Mile into the Sea, where
there is commonly a great riplin or working of short Waves, during all the
Flood. The Tide runs pretty strong, the Flood to the South, and the Ebb to the
North. There is good landing on the Sandy Bay against the Anchoring place, from
whence you may go up into the Island, and at no place besides. There are 2 or 3
high, steep, small Rocks, at the S. E. point, not a Cables length from the
Island: and another much bigger at the N. E. end: it is deep water all round
but at the anchoring place, and at the shole at the S. E. point. This Island
lies in lat. 0 1 d. 10 m. South. It is distant from Cape St. Lorenzo 4 or 5
leagues, bearing from it W. S. W. and half a point westerly. At this Island are
plenty of those small Sea Turtle spoken of in my last Chapter.

The 21st day Captain Eaton came to an Anchor by us: he was very willing to
have consorted with us again; but Captain Davis's Men were so unreasonable,
that they would not allow Captain Eaton's Men an equal share with them in what
they got: therefore Captain Eaton staid here but one night, and the next day
sailed from hence, steering away to the Southward. We staid no longer then the
day ensuing, and then we sailed toward Point St. Hellena, intending there to
land some Men purposely to get Prisoners for Intelligence.

Point Santa Hellena bears South from the Island Plata. It lies in lat. 2 d. 15
m. South. The Point is pretty high, flat, and even at top, overgrown with many
great Thistles, but no sort of Tree; at a distance it appears like an Island,
because the Land within it is very low.

This Point strikes out West into the Sea, making a pretty large Bay on the
North side. A mile within the Point, on the Sandy Bay, close by the Sea, there
is a poor small Indian Village called Sancta Hellena; the Land about it is low,
sandy and barren, there are no Trees nor Grass growing near it; neither do the
Indians produce any Fruit, Grain, or Plant, but Water-Melons only, which are
large and very sweet. There is no fresh Water at this place, nor near it;
therefore the Inhabitants are obliged to fetch all their Water from the River
Colanche, which is in the bottom of the Bay, about 4 leagues from it. Not far
from this Town on the Bay, close by the Sea, about 5 paces from high water
mark, there is a sort of bitumenous matter boils out of a little hole in the
Earth; it is like thin Tar: The Spaniards call it Algatrane. By much boiling it
becomes hard like Pitch. It is frequently used by the Spaniards instead of
Pitch; and the Indians that inhabit here save it in Jars. It boils up most at
high Water; and then the Indians are ready to receive it. These Indians are
Fishermen, and go out to Sea on Bark-logs. Their chief subsistence is Maiz,
most of which they get from Ships that come hither from Algatrane. There is
good Anchoring to leeward of the Point, right a against the Village: but on the
West side of the Point it is deep Water, and no anchoring. The Spaniards do
report, that there was once a very rich Ship driven ashore here in calm, for
want of Wind to work her. As soon as ever she struck she heel'd of to Sea, 7 or
8 fathom Water, where she lies to this day; none having attempted to fish for
her, because she lies deep and there falls in here a great high Sea. When we
were abrest of this Point, we sent away our Canoas in the night to take the
Indian Village. They landed in the Morning betimes close by the Town, and took
some Prisoners. They took likewise a small Bark which the Indians had set on
fire, but our Men quenched it, and took the Indian that did it; who being asked
wherefore he set the Bark on fire, said, that there was an Order from the
Viceroy lately set out, commanding all Seamen to burn their Vessels, if
atttack'd by us, and betake themselves to their Boats. There was another Bark
in a small Cove, a Mile from the Village, thither our Men went, thinking to
take her, but the Seamen that were aboard set her in Flames and fled: In the
Evening our Men came aboard, and brought the small Bark with them, the fire of
which they had quenched; and then we returned again toward Plata; where we
arrived the 26th day of September.

In the Evening we sent out some Men in our Bark lately taken, and Canoas, to
an Indian Village called Manta, 2 or 3 leagues to the Westward of Cape St.
Lorenzo; hoping there to get other Prisoners, for we could not learn from those
we took at Point St. Hellena the reason why the Viceroy should give such
Orders to burn the Ships. They had a fresh Sea-breez till 12 a Clock at Night,
and then it proved calm; wherefore they rowed away with their Canoas as near to
the Town as they thought convenient, and lay still till day.

Manta is a small Indian Village on the Main, distant from the Island Plata 7
or 8 leagues. It stands so advantageously to be seen, being built on a small
Ascent, that it makes a very fair Prospect to the Sea; yet but a few poor
scattering Indian Houses. There is a very fine Church, adorned with a great
deal of carved Work. It was formerly a Habitation of Spaniards, but they are
all removed from hence now. The Land about it is dry and sandy, bearing only a
few shrubby Trees. These Indians plant no manner of Grain or Root, but are
supplied from other places; and commonly keep a stock of Provision to relieve
Ships that want; for this is the first Settlement that Ships can touch at,
which come from Panama, bound to Lima, or any other Port in Pern. The Land
being dry and sandy, is not fit to produce Crops of Maiz; which is the reason
they plant none. There is a Spring of good Water between the Village and the
Seas.

On the back of the Town, a pretty way up in the Country, there is a very high
Mountain, towering up like a Sugar Loaf, called Monte-Christo. It is a very good
Sea-mark, for there is none like it on all the Coast. The Body of this Mountain
bears due South from Manta. About a mile and half from the shore right against
the Village, there is a Rock which is very dangerous, because it never appears
above Water; neither does the Sea break on it, because here is seldom any great
Sea; yet it is now so well known, that all Ships bound to this place do easily
avoid it. A mile within this Rock there is good anchoring, in 6, 8, or 10
fathom Water, good hard Sand and clear Ground: And a Mile from the Road on the
West Side, there is a shoal running out a Mile into the Sea. From Manta to Cape
St Lorenzo the Land is plain and even, of an indifferent height. [See a
further Account of these Coasts in the Appendix.]

As soon as ever the day appeared our Men landed and marched toward the
Village, which was about a Mile and a half from their Land place: Some of the
Indians who were stirring, saw them coming, and alarmed their Neighbors; so
that all that were able got away. They took only two old Women, who both said,
that it was reported that a great many Enemies were come over Land through the
Country of Darien into the South Seas, and that they were at present in Canoas
and Periagoes: and that the Viceroy upon this News had set out the
forementioned order for burning their own Ships. Our Men found no sort of
Provision here; the Viceroy having likewise sent orders to all Seaports to
keep no Provision, but just to supply themselves. These Women also said, that
the Manta Indians were sent over to the Island Plata, to destroy all the Goats
there; which they performed about a Month agone. With this News our Men
returned again, and arrived at Plata the next day.

We lay still at the Island Plata, being not resolved what to do; till the 2d
day of October. and then Capt. Swan in the Cygnet of London arrived there. He was
fitted out by very Eminent Merchants of that City, on a design only to Trade
with the Spaniards or Indians, having a very considerable Cargo well sorted for
these parts of the World; but meeting with diverse Disappointments, and being
out of hopes to obtain a Trade in these Seas, his Men forced him to entertain a
Company of Privateers which he met with near Nicoya, a Town whither he was
going to seek a Trade, and these Privateers were bound thither in Boats to get
a Ship. These were the Men that we had heard of at Manta; they came over Land
under the command of Capt. Peter Harris, Nephew to that Capt. Harris, who was
killed before Panama. Capt. Swan was still commander of his own Ship, and Capt.
Harris commanded a small Bark under Capt. Swan. There was much Joy on all sides
when they arrived; and immediately hereupon Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan
consorted, wishing for Capt. Eaton again. Our little Bark, which was taken at
Santa Hellena, was immediately sent out to cruize, while the Ships were
fitting; for Capt. Swan's Ship being full of Goods, was not fit to entertain
his new Guest, till the Goods were disposed of; therefore he, by the consent of
the Super-cargo's, got up all his Goods on Deck, and sold to any one that would
buy upon Trust^ the rest was thrown over board into the Sea, except fine Goods,
as Silks, Muslins, Stockins, etc. and (...) the Iron, whereof he had a good
Quantity, (...) wrought and in Bars: This was saved for Ballast.

The third day after our Bark was sent to cruize, she brought in a Prize of 400
Tuns, laden with Timber: They took her in the Bay of Guiaquil; she came from a
Town of that Name, and was bound to Lima. The Commander of this Prize said,
that it was generally reported and believed at Guiaquil, that the Viceroy was
fitting out 10 Sail of Frigots to drive us out of the Seas. This news made our
unsettled Crew wish, that they had been persuaded to accept of Captain Eaton's
Company on reasonable Terms. Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan had some discourse
concerning Capt. Eaton; they at last concluded to send our small Bark toward
the Coast of Lima, as far as the Island Lobos, to seek Capt. Eaton. This being
approved by all hands, she was cleaned the next day, and sent away manned with
20 Men, 10 of Capt. Davis's, and 10 of Swan's Men, and Capt. Swan writ a Letter
directed to Capt. Eaton, desiring his Company, and the Isle of Plata was
appointed for the general Rendezvous. When this Bark was gone, we turned
another Bark, which we had into a Fire-ship; having 6 or 7 Carpenters; who soon
fixed her; and while the Carpenters were at work about the Fire-ship, we
scrubbed and cleaned our Men of War, as well as time and place would permit.

The 19th day of Oct. we finished our Business, and the 20th day we sailed
toward the Island Lobos, where our Bark was ordered to stay for us, or meet us
again at Plata. We had but litte Wind, therefore it was the 23d day before we
passed by Point St. Hellena. The 25th day we crossed over the Bay of Guiaquil.
The 30th day we doubled Cape Blanco. This Cape is in lat. 3 d. 45 m. It is
counted the worst Cape in all the South Seas to double, passing to the
Southward; for in all other places Ships may stand off to Sea 20 or 30 Leagues
off, if they find they cannot get any thing under the Shore; but here they dare
not do it: for, by relation of the Spaniards, they find a Current setting N. W.
which will carry a Ship off more in two Hours, than they can run in again in
five. Besides, setting to the Northward they lose ground: therefore they always
beat up in under the Shore, which oft-times they find very difficult, because
the Wind commonly blows very strong at S. S. W. or S. by W. without altering;
for here are never any Land-winds. This Cape is of an indifferent height: it
is fenced with White Rocks to the Sea; for which reason, I believe, it has
this Name. The Land in the Country seems to be full of high, steep, rugged and
barren Rocks.

The 2d day of November we got as high as Payta: We lay about six Leagues off
shore all the day, that the Spaniards might not see us; and in the Evening sent
our Canoas ashore to take it, Manned with 110 Men.

Payta is a small Spanish Seaport Town in the lat, of 5 d. 15 m. It is built
on the Sand, close by the Sea, in a Nook, Elbow, or small Bay, under a pretty
high Hill. There are not above 75 or 80 Houses, and two Churches. The Houses
are but low and ill built. The Building in this Country of Peru is much alike,
on all the Seacoast. The Walls are built of Brick, made with Earth and Straw
kneaded together: They are about three foot long, two foot broad, and a foot
and a half thick: They never burn them, but lay them a long time in the Sun to
dry before they are used in building. In some places they have no Roofs, only
Poles laid across from the side Walls, and covered with Matts; and then those
Walls are carried up to a considerable height. But where they build Roofs upon
their Houses, the Walls are not made so high, as I said before. The Houses in
general all over this Kingdom are but meanly built; one chief Reason, with the
common People especially, is the want of Materials to build withal; for however
it be more within Land, yet here is neither Stone nor Timber to build with, nor
any Materials but such Brick as I have described; and ever the Stone which they
have in some places is so brittle, that you may rub it into Sand with your
fingers. Another reason why they build so meanly is, because it never rains;
therefore they only endeavor to fence themselves from the Sun. Yet their
Walls, which are built but with an ordinary sort of Brick, in comparison with
what is made in other parts of the World, continue a long time as firm as when
first made, having never any Winds nor Rains, to rot, moulder, or shake them.
However, the richer sort have Timber, which they make use of in building; but
it is brought from other places.

This dry Country commences to the Northward, from about Cape Blanco to
Coquimbo, in about 30 d. S. having no Rain that I could ever observe or hear
of; nor any green thing growing in the Mountains; neither yet in the Valleys,
except where here and there watered with a few small Rivers dispersed up and
down. So that the Northermost parts of this Tract of Land are supplied with
Timber from Guiaquil, Galleo, Tornato, and other places that are watered with
Rains; where there are plenty of all sorts of Timber. In the South parts, as
about Guasco and Coquimbo, they fetch their Timber from the Island Chiloe, or
other places thereabouts. The Walls of Churches and rich Men's Houses are
whitened with Lime, both within and without; and the Doors and Posts are very
large, and adorned with carved Work, and the Beams also in the Churches: The
inside of the Houses are hung round with rich embroidered, or painted Cloths.
They have likewise abundance of fine Pictures, which adds no small Ornament to
their House: These, I suppose, they have from Old Spain. But the Houses of
Payta are none of them so richly furnished. The Churches were large and fairly
carved: At one end of the Town there was a small Fort close by the Sea, but no
great Guns in it. This Fort, only with Muskets, will command all the Bay, so
as to hinder any Boats from landing. There is another Fort on the top of the
Hill, just over the Town, which commands both it and the lower Fort. There is
neither Wood nor Water to be had there: they fetch their Water from an Indian.
Town called Colan, about 2 Leagues N. N. E. from Payta: for at Colan, there is
a small River of fresh Water, which runs out into the Sea; from whence Ships
that touch at Payta are supplied with Water and other Refreshments, as Fowls,
Hogs, Plantains, Yams, and Maiz: Payta being destitute of all these things,
only as they fetch them from Colon, as they have occasion.

The Indians of Colan are all Fishermen: they go out to Sea and fish for
Bark-logs. Bark-logs are made of many round Logs of Wood, in manner of a Raft,
and very different according to the use that they are designed for, or the
humor of the people that make them, or the matter that they are made of. If
they are made for fishing, then they are only 3 or 4 Logs of light Wood, of 7
or 8 foot long, placed by the side of each other, pinned fast together with
wooden Pins, and bound hard with Withes. The Logs are so placed, that the
middlemost are longer than those by the sides, especially at the head or
forepart, which grows narrower gradually into an angle or point, the better to
cut through the Water. Others are made to carry Goods: The bottom of these is
made of 20 or 30 great Trees of about 20, 30, or 40 foot long, fastened like
the other, side to side, and so shaped: on the top of these they place another
shorter row of Trees across them, pinned fast to each other, and then pinned to
the undermost row: this double row of Planks makes the bottom of the Float, and
of a considerable breadth^ From this bottom the Raft is raised to about 10 foo^
higher, with rows of Posts sometimes set upright, and supporting a Floor or
two; but those I observed were raised by thick Trees laid across each other,
as in Wood-piles; only not close together, as in the bottom of the Float, but
at the ends and sides only, so as to leave the middle all hollow like a Chamber
except that here and there a Beam goes across it, to keep the Float more
compact. In this Hollow, at about 4 foot height from the Beams at the bottom,
they lay small Poles along, and close together, to make a floor for another
Room, on the top of which also they lay another such floor made of Poles; and
the enterances in both these Rooms is only by creeping between the great
traverse Trees which make the Walls of this Sea-House. The lowest of these
stories serves as a Cellar: there they lay great stones for Ballast, and their
Jars of fresh Water closed up, and whatever may bear being wet; for by the
weight of the Ballast and Cargo, the bottom of this Room, and of the whole
Vessel, is sunk so deep, as to lie 2 or 3 feet within the surface of the Water.
The second story is for the Seamen, and their necessaries. Above this second
story the Goods are stowed to what height they please, usually about 8 or 10
feet, and kept together by poles set upright quite round: only there is a
little space abaft for the Steers-man, (for they have a large Rudder) and before
for the Fire-hearth, to dress their Victuals, especially when they make long
Voyages, as from Lima to Truxillo or Guiaquil, or Panama; which last Voyage is
5 or 600 leagues. In the midst of all, among the Goods, rises a Mast, to which
is fastened a large Sail, as in our West-Country Barges in the Thames. They
always go before the Wind, being unable to Ply against it; and therefore are
fit only for these Seas, where the Wind is always in a manner the same not
varying above a point or two all the way from Lima, till such time as they come
into the Bay of Panama: and even there they meet with no great Sea; but
sometimes Northerly winds: and then they lower their Sails, and drive before
it, waiting a change. All their care then is only to keep off from Shore; for
they are so made that they cannot sink at Sea. These Rafts carry 60 or 70 Tuns
of Goods and upwards; their Cargo is chiefly Wine, Oil, Flower, Sugar, Quito
Cloth, Soap, Goat Skins dressed, etc. The Float is managed usually by 3 or 4 Men,
who being unable to return with it against the Trade-wind, when they come to
Panama dispose of the goods and bottom together; getting a passage back again
for themselves in some Ship or Boat bound to the Port they came from; and there
they make a new Bark-log for their next Cargo.

The smaller sort of Bark-logs, described before, which lie flat on the Water,
and are used for Fishing or carrying Water to Ships, or the like (half a Tun or
a Tun at a time) are more governable than the other, though they have Masts and
Sails too. With these they go out at night by the help of the Land-wind (which
is seldom wanting on this Coast) and return back in the day time with the
Sea-wind.

This sort of Floats are used in many places both in the East and West Indies.
On the Coast of Coromandel in the East Indies they call them Catamarans. These
are but one Log, or two sometimes, of a sort of light Wood, and are made
without Sail or Rudder, and so small, that they carry but one Man, whose legs
and breech are always in the Water, and he manages his Log with a Paddle,
appearing at a distance like a Man sitting on a Fish's back.

The Country about Payta is mountainous and barren, like all the rest of the
Kingdom of Peru. There is no Towns of consequence nearer it than Piura, which
is a large Town in the Country 40 miles distant. It lies, by report of our
Spanish Prisoners, in a Valley which is watered with a small River, that
disembogues it self into the Bay of Chirapee, in about 7 d. of North latitude.
This Bay is nearer to Piura than Payta: yet all Goods imported by Sea for Piura
are landed at Payta, for the Bay of Chirapee is full of dangerous sholes, and
therefore not frequented by shipping. The Road of Payta is one of the best on
the Coast of Peru. It is sheltered from the South-west by a Point of Land,
which makes a large Bay and smooth Water for Ships to ride in. There is room
enough for a good Fleet of Ships, and good anchoring in any depth, from 6
fathom Water to 20 fathom. Right against the Town, the nearer the Town the
Shallower the Water, and the smoother the riding; it is clean Sand all over the
Bay. Most Ships passing either to the North or the South touch at this place
for Water; for though here is none at the Town, yet those Indian Fishermen of
Colan will, and do supply all Ships very reasonably; and good Water is much
prized on all this Coast through the scarcity of it.

November the 3d, at 6 a clock in the morning, our Men landed, about 4 miles to
the South of the Town, and took some Prisoners that were sent thi^her to watch
for fear of us; and these Prisoners said, That the Governor of Piura came with
100 ^rmed Men to Payta the night before purposely to ^ppose our landing there,
if we should attempt it.

Our Men marched directly to the Fort on the ^ill, and took it without the loss
of one Man. Hereupon the Governor of Piura with all his Men, and ^he
Inhabitants of the Town, ran away as fast as ^hey could. Then our Men entered
the Town, and ^ound it emptied both of Money and Goods; there was not so much
as a Meal of Victuals left for them. The Prisoners told us a Ship had been here
a little before and burnt a great Ship in the Road, but did not land their Men;
and that here they put ashore all their Prisoners and Pilots. We knew this must
be Captain Eaton's Ship which had done this, and by these circumstances we
supposed he was gone to the East Indies, it being always designed by him. The
Prisoners told us also, That since Capt. Eaton was here, a small Bark had been
off the Harbor, and taken a pair of Bark-logs a fishing, and made the
Fishermen bring aboard 20 or 30 Jars of fresh Water. This we supposed was our
Bark that was sent to the Lobos to seek Capt. Eaton.

In the Evening we came in with our Ships, and anchored before the Town in 10
fathom Water, near a Mile from the Shore. Here we staid till the sixth day, in
hopes to get a Ransom for the Town. Our Captains demanded 300 Packs of Flower,
3000 pound of Sugar, 25 Jars of Wine, and 1000 Jars of Water to be brought off
to us; but we got nothing of it. Therefore Captain Swan ordered the Town to be
fired, which was presently done. Then all our Men came aboard, and Captain Swan
ordered the Bark which Captain Harris commanded, to be burnt, because she did
not sail well.

At Night, when the Land-wind came off, we sailed from hence toward Lobos. The
10th Day in the Evening we saw a Sail bearing N. W. by N. as far as we could
well discern her on our Deck. We immediately chased, separating our selves, the
better to meet her in the Night; but we mist her. Therefore the next Morning we
again trimmed sharp, and made the best of our way to the Lobos de la Mar.

The 14th day we had sight of the Island Lobos de Terra: It bore East from us;
we stood in toward it, and betwixt 7 and 8 a Clock in the Night came to an
Anchor at the N. E. end of the Island, in 4 fathom Water. This Island at Sea is
of an indifferent height, and appears like Lobos de la Mar. About a quarter of
a Mile from the North-end there is a great hollow Rock, and a good Channel
between, where there is 7 fathom Water. The 15th day we went ashore, and found
abundance of Penguins and Boobies, and Seal in great quantities. We sent aboard
of all these to be dressed, for we had not tasted any Flesh in a great while
before; therefore some of us did eat very heartily. Capt. Swan, to encourage
his Men to eat this course Flesh, would commend it for extraordinary good Food,
comparing the Seal to a roasting Pig, the Boobies to Hens, and the Penguins to
Ducks: This he did to train them to live contentedly on course Meat, not
knowing but we might be forced to make use of such Food before we departed out
of these Seas; for it is generally seen among Privateers, that nothing
emboldens them sooner to mutiny than want, which we could not well suffer in a
place where there are such quantities of these Animals to be had, if Men could
be persuaded to be content with them.

In the Afternoon we sailed from Lobos de Terra, with the Wind at S. by E. and
arrived at Lobos de la Mar on the 19th day. Here we found a Letter, left by our
Bark that was sent to seek Capt. Eaton, by which we understood, that Captain
Eaton had been there, but was gone before they arrived, and had left no Letter
to advise us which way he was gone; and that our Bark was again returned to
Plata, in hopes to find us there, or meet us by the way, else resolving to stay
for us there. We were sorry to hear that Capt. Eaton was gone, for now we did
not expect to meet with him any more in these Seas.

The 21st day we sent out our Moskito Strikers for Turtle, who brought aboard
enough to serve both Ships Companies; and this they did all the time that we
abode here. While we lay at this Island, Capt. Swan made new Yards, squarer
than those he had before, and made his Sails larger, and our Ships Company in
the mean time split Plank for Firewood, and put aboard as many Planks as we
could conveniently stow, for other uses: Here being Plank enough of all sorts,
which we had brought hither in the first Prize that we took, and left here.

The 26th day in the Evening we saw a small Bark about 3 Leagues N. N. W. from
the Island, but we supposing her to be our own Bark, did not go after her. The
next Morning she was two Leagues South of the Island, standing off to Sea; but
we did not now chase her neither, although we knew she was not our Bark; for
being to Windward of us, she could have made her escape, if we had chaced her.
This Bark, as we were afterward informed, was sent out purposely to see if we
were at this Island. Her Orders were, not to come too near, only to appear in
^ight; they supposing that if we were here we should soon be after her; as
indeed it was a wonder we had not chaced her: But our not doing so, and lying
close under the Island undiscerned by them, was a great occasion of our coming
upon Puna afterward unexectedly, they being now without fear of any Enemy so
near them:

The 28th day we scrubbed our Ships bottom, intending to sail the next day
toward Guiaquil; it being concluded upon to attempt that Town before we
returned again to Plata. Accordingly, on the 29th day in the Morning, we loosed
from hence, steering directly for the Bay of Guiaquil. This Bay runs in between
Cape Blanco on the South Side, and Point Chandy on the North. About 25 Leagues
from C. Blanco, near the bottom of the Bay, there is a small Island called
Santa Clara, which lies East and West: It is of an indifferent length, and it
appears like a dead Man stretched out in a Shroud. The East End represents the
Head, and the West End the Feet. Ships that are bound into the River of
Guiaquil pass on the South Side, to avoid the sholes which lie on the
North-side of it; whereon for (...) Ships have heen lost. It is reported by the
Spaniards, that there is a very rich Wreck lies on the North-side of that
Island, not far from it; and that some of the Plate has been taken up by one
who came from Old Spain, with a Patent from the King to fish in those Seas for
Wrecks; but he dying, the Project ceased, and the Wreck still remains as he
left it; only the Indians by stealth do sometimes take up some of it; and they
might have taken up much more, if it were not for the Cat-fish which swarms
hereabouts.

The Cat-fish is much like a Whiting, but the Head is flatter and bigger. It
has a great wide Mouth, and certain small Strings pointing out from each side
of it, like Cats Whiskers, and for that reason it is called a Cat-fish. It has
three Fins, one growing on the top of his Back, and one on either side. Each of
these Fins have a stiff sharp Bone, which is very venomous if it strikes into a
Man's Flesh; therefore it it is dangerous diving where many of these Fish are.
The Indians that adventured to search this Wreck, have to their sorrow
experienced it; some having lost their Lives, others the use of their Limbs by
it: This we were informed by an Indian, who himself had been fishing on it by
stealth. I my self have known some white Men that have lost the use of their
Hands, only by a small prick with the Fin of these Fish: Therefore when we
catch them with a Hook, we tread on them to take the Hook out of their Mouths;
for otherwise, in flurting about (as all Fish will when first taken) they might
accidentally strike their sharp Fins into the Hands of those that caught them.
Some of these Fish are 7 or 8 pound weight: some again, in some particular
places, are none of them bigger than a Man's Thumb, but their Fins are all
alike venomous. They use to be at the Mouths of Rivers, or where there is much
Mud and Oaze, and they are found all over the American Coast, both in the North
and South Sea, at least in the hot Countries, as also in the East Indies: where
sailing with Captain Minchin among certain Islands near the Streights of
Malacca, he pointed to an Island, at which he told me he lost the use of his
hand by one of these, only in going to take the Hook out of its mouth. The
wound was scarce visible, yet his Hand was much swollen, and the Pain lasted
about 9 weeks; during most part of which the raging heat of it was almost ready
to distract him. However though the Bony Fins of these Fish are so venomous,
yet the Bones in their Bodies are not so; at least we never perceived any such
effect in eating the Fish; and their Flesh is very sweet, delicious and
wholesome Meat.

From the Island Santa Clara to Punta Arena is 7 leagues E. N. E. This Punta
Arena, or Sandy Point, is the Westermost Point of the Island Puna. Here all
Ships bound into the River of Guiaquil anchor, and must wait for a Pilot, the
entrance being very dangerous for Strangers.

The Island Puna is a pretty large flat low Island, stretching East and West
about 12 or 14 leagues long, and about 4 or 5 leagues wide. The Tide runs very
strong all about this Island, but so many different ways, by reason of the
Branches, Creeks and Rivers that run into the Sea near it, that it casts up
many dangerous sholes on all sides of it. There is in the Island only one
Indian Town on the Southside of it, close by the Sea, and 7 leagues from Point
Arena, which Town is also called Puna. The Indians of this Town are all Seamen,
and are the only Pilots in these Seas, especially for this River. Their
chiefest employment, when they are not at Sea, is fishing. These Men are
obliged by the Spaniards to keep good watch for Ships that anchor at Point
Arena; which, as I said before, is 7 leagues from the Town Puna. The place
where they keep this watch is at a Point of Land on the Island Puna, that
starts out into the Sea; from whence they can see all Ships that anchor at
Point Arena. The Indians come thither in the morning, and return at night on
Horseback. From this watching Point, to Point Arena, it is 4 leagues, all
drowned Mangrove-Land: And in the midway between these two Points is another
small Point, where these Indians are obliged to keep another Watch, when they
fear an Enemy. The Sentinel goes thither in a Canoa in the morning, and returns
at night; for there is no coming thither by Land, through that Mangrove marshy
ground. The middle of the Island Puna is Savannah or Pasture. There are some
ridges of good Woodland, which is of a light Yellow or sandy Mould, producing
large tall Trees most unknown even to Travelers: But there are plenty of
Palmeto-Trees, which because I am acquainted with, I shall descibe. The
Palmeto-Tree is about the bigness of an ordinary Ash: It is about 30 foot high;
the body straight, without any limb, or branch, or leaf, except at the head
only, where it spreads forth into many small Branches, not half so big as a
Man's Arm, some no bigger than ones Finger: These Branches, are about 3 or 4
foot long, clear from any knot: At the end of the Branch there grows one
broad leaf, about the bigness of a large Fan. This, when it first shoots forth,
grows in folds, like a Fan when it is closed; and still as it grows bigger so
it opens, till it becomes like a Fan spread abroad. It is strengthened toward
the stalk with many small ribs springing from thence, and growing into the
leaf; which as they grow near the end of the leaf, grow thinner and smaller.
The leaves that make the brush part of the Flag-brooms which are brought into
England, grow just in this manner; and are indeed a small kind of Palmeto; for
there are of them of several dimensions. In Bermudas, and elsewhere, they make
Hats, Baskets, Brooms, Fans to blow the fire instead of Bellows, with many
other Houseimplements, of Palmeto-leaves. On the Ridges where these Trees grow,
the Indians have here and there Plantations of Maiz, Yams, and Potatoes.

There are in the Town of Puna about 20 Houses, and a small Church. The Houses
stand all on Posts, 10 or 12 foot high, with Ladders on the outside to go up
into them. I did never see the like Building any where but among the Malayans
in the East Indies. They are thatched with Palmeto-leaves, and their Chambers
well boarded, in which last they exceed the Malayans. The best place for Ships
to lie at an Anchor is against the middle of the Town. There is 5 fathom Water
within a Cables length of the shore, and good soft deep Oaze where Ships may
careen, or hale ashore; it stows 15 or 16 foot Water up and down.

From Puna to Guiaquil is reckoned 7 leagues. It is 1 league before you come to
the River of Guiaquil's mouth, where it is above two mile wide; from thence
upwards the River lies pretty straight, without any considerable turnings. Both
sides of the River are low swampy Land, overgrown with Red Mangroves, so that
there is no landing. Four mile before you come to the Town of Guiaquil, there is
a low Island standing in the River. This Island divides the River into two
parts, making 2 very fair Channels for Ships to pass up and down. The S. W.
Channel is the widest, the other is as deep, but narrower and narower yet, by
reason of many Trees and Bushes, which spread over the River, both from the
Main and from the Island; and there are also several great stumps of Trees
standing upright in the Water on either side. The Island is above a mile long.
From the upper part of the Island to the Town of Guiaquil, is almost a league,
and near as much from one side of the River to the other. In that spacious
place Ships of the greatest burden may ride afloat; but the best place for
Ships is nearest to that part of the Land where the Town stands; and this place
is seldom without Ships. Guiaquil stands facing the Island, close by the River,
partly on the side, and partly at the foot of a gentle Hill declining toward
the River, by which the lower part of it is often overflown. There are two
Forts, one standing on the low Ground, the other on the Hill. This Town makes a
very fine prospect, it being beautified with several Churches and other good
Buildings. Here lives a Governor, who, as I have been informed, has his Patent
from the King of Spain. Guiaquil may be reckoned one of the chiefest Seaports
in the South Seas: The Commodities which are exported from hence are Cacao,
Hides, Tallow, Sarsaparilla, and other Drugs, and Woollen-Cloth, commonly
called Cloth of Quito.

The Cacao grows on both sides of the River above the Town. It is a small Nut,
like the Campeachy Nut: I think the smallest of the two; they produce as much
Cacoa here as serves all the Kingdom of Peru; and much of it is sent to
Acapulco, and from thence to the Phillipine Islands.

Sarsaparilla grows in the Water by the sides of the River, as I have been
informed.

The Quito Cloth comes from a rich Town in the Country within Land called
Quito. There is a great deal made, both Serges and Broad-Cloth. This Cloth is
not very fine, but is worn by the common sort of People throughout the whole
Kingdom of Peru. This and all other Commodities, which come from Quito, are
shipped off at Guiaquil for other Parts; and all imported Goods for the City of
Quito pass by Guiaquil: By which it may appear that Guiaquil is a Place of no
mean Trade.

Quito, as I have been informed, is a very populous City, seated in the heart
of the Country. It is inhabited partly by Spaniards; but the major part of its
Inhabitants are Indians, under the Spanish Government.

It is environed with Mountains of a vast height, from whose bowels many great
Rivers have their rise. These Mountains abound in Gold, which by violent Rains
is washed with the Sand into the adjacent Brooks, where the Indians resort in
Troops, washing away the Sand, and putting up the Gold-dust in their Calabashes
or Gourd Shells: But for the manner of the gathering the Gold I refer you too
Mr. Wafer's Book: only I shall remark here, that Quito is the place in all the
Kingdom of Peru, that abounds most with this Rich Metal, as I have been often
informed.

The Country is subject to great Rains, and very thick Fogs, especially the
Valleys. For that reason it is very unwholesome and sickly. The chiefest
Distempers are Fevers, violent Headache, Pains in the Bowels, and Fluxes. I
know no place where Gold is found but what is very unhealthy: As I shall more
particularly relate when I come to speak of Acbin in the Isle of Sumatra in the
East Indies. Guiaquil is not so sickly as Quito and other Towns farther within
Land; yet in comparison with the Towns that are on the Coast of Mare Pacifico,
South of Cape Blanco, it is very sickly.

It was to this Town of Guiaquil that we were bound, therefore we left our
Ships off Cape Blanco, and ran into the Bay of Guiaquil with our Bark and
Canoas, steering in for the Island Santa Clara, where we arrived the next day
after we left our Ships, and from thence we sent away two Canoas the next
evening to Point Arena. At this Point there are abundance of Oysters, and other
Shellfish, as Cockles and Muscles; therefore the Indians of Puna often come
hither to get these Fish. Our Canoas got over before day, and absconded in a
Creek, to wait for the coming of the Puna Indians. The next morning some of
them, according to their custom, came thither on Bark-logs, at the latter part
of the Ebb, and were all taken by our Men. The next day, by their advice, the
two Watchmen of the Indian Town Puna were taken by our Men, and all its
Inhabitants, not one escaping. The next Ebb they took a small Bark laden with
Quito-cloth. She came from Guiaquil that Tide, and was bound to Lima, they
having advice that we were gone off the Coast, by the Bark which I said we saw
while we lay at the Island Lobos. The Master of this Cloth-Bark informed our
Men, that there were 3 Barks coming from Guiaquil, laden with Negroes: he said
they would come from thence the next Tide. The same Tide of Ebb that they took
the Cloth-bark, they sent a Canoa to our Bark, where the biggest part of the
Men were to hasten them away with speed to the Indian Town The Bark was now
riding at Point Arena; and the next Flood she came with all the Men, and the
rest of the Canoas to Puna. The Tide of Flood being now far spent, we lay at
this Town till the last of the Ebb, and then rowed away, leaving 5 Men aboard
our Bark, who were ordered to lie still till 8 a clock the next morning, and
not to fire at any Boat or Bark, but after that time they might fire at any
object: for it was supposed, that before that time we should be masters of
Guiaquil. We had not rowed above 2 mile, before we met and took one of the
three Barks laden with Negroes; the Master of her said, that the other two
would come from Guiaquil the next Tide of Ebb. We cut her Mainmast down, and
left her at an Anchor. It was now strong Flood, and therefore we rowed with all
speed toward the Town, in hopes to get thither before the Flood was down, but
we found it farther than we did expect it to be, or else our Canoas being very
full of men, did not row so fast as we would have them. The day broke when we
were two leagues from the Town, and then we had not above an hours Flood more;
therefore our Captains desired the Indian Pilot to direct us to some Creek
where we might abscond all day, which was immediately done, and one Canoa was
sent toward Puna to our Bark, to order them not to move nor fire till the next
day. But she came too late to countermand the first orders; for the two Barks
before mentioned laden with Negroes, came from the Town the last quarter of the
evening Tide, and lay in the River, close by the shore on one side, and we
rowed upon the other side and mist them; neither did they see nor hear us.
As Soon as the Flood was spent, the two Barks weighed and went down with the
Ebb, toward Puna. Our Bark seeing them coming directly toward them, and both
full of men, supposed that we by some Accident had been destroyed, and that the
two Barks were Manned with Spanish Soldiers, and sent to take our Ships, and
therefore they fired 3 Guns at them a league before they came near. The two
Spanish Barks immediately came to an Anchor, and the Masters got into their
Boats, and rowed for the shore; but our Canoa that was sent from us took them
both. The firing of these 3 Guns made a great disorder among our advanced Men,
for most of them did believe they were heard at Guiaquil, and that therefore it
could be no profit to lie still in the Creek; but either row away to the Town,
or back again to our Ships. It was now quarter ebb, therefore we could not move
upwards, if we had been disposed so to do. At length Captain Davis said, he
would immediately land in the Creek where they lay, and march directly to the
Town, if but 40 Men would accompany him: and without saying more words, he
landed among the Mangroves in the Marshes. Those that were so minded followed
him, to the number of 40 or 50. Captain Swan lay still with the rest of the
Party in the Creek, for they thought it impossible to do any good that way.
Captain Davis and his Men were absent about 4 hours, and then returned all wet,
and quite tired, and could not find any passage out into the firm Land. He had
been so far, that he almost despaired of getting back again: for a Man cannot
pass through those red Mangroves but with very much labor. When Capt. Davis was
returned, we concluded to be going toward the Town the beginning of the next
flood; and if we found that the Town was alarmed we purposed to return again
without attempting any thing there. As soon as it was flood we rowed away, and
passed by the Island through the N. E. Channel, which is the narrowest. There are
so many Stumps in the River, that it is very dangerous passing in the night
(and that is the time we always take for such Attempts) for the River runs very
swift, and one of our Canoas stuck on a stump, and had certainly over-set, if
she had not been immediately rescued by others. When we were come almost to the
end of the Island, there was a Musket fired at us out of the Bushes on the
Main. We then had the Town open before us, and presently saw lighted Torches,
or Candles, all the Town over; whereas before the Gun was fired there was but
one Light: therefore we now concluded we were discovered: Yet many of our Men
said, that it was a Holy Day the next day, as it was indeed, and that therefore
the Spaniards were making Fireworks, which they often do in the night against
such times. We rowed there-fore a little farther, and found firm Land, and
Captain Davis pitched his Canoa ashore and landed with his Men. Captain Swan,
and most of his Men, did not think it convenient to attempt any thing, seeing
the Town was alarmed; but at last, being upbraided with Cowardice, Captain Swan
and his Men landed also. The place where we landed was about 2 mile from the
Town: it was all overgrown with Woods so thick, that we could not march
through in the Night; and therefore we sat down, waiting for the light of the
Day. We had two Indian Pilots with us; one that had been with us a Month, who
having received some Abuses from a Gentleman of Guiaquil, to be revenged
offered his Service to us; and we found him very faithful: The other was taken
by us not above 2 or 3 days before, and he seemed to be as willing as the other
to assist us. This latter was led by one of Captain Davis's Men, who showed
himself very forward to go to the Town, and upbraided others with
faint-heartedness: Yet this Man (as he afterward confessed) notwithstanding
his Courage privately cut the String that the Guide was made fast with, and let
him go to the Town by himself, not caring to follow him; but when he thought
the Guide was got far enough from us, he cried out that the Pilot was gone, and
that some Body had cut the Cord that tied him. This put every Man in a moving
Posture to seek the Indian, but all in vain; and our Consternation was great
being in the dark and among Woods; so the design was wholly dashed, for not a
Man after that had the heart to speak of going farther. Here we staid till day,
and then rowed out into the middle of the River, where we had a fair view of
the Town; which, as I said before, makes a very pleasant prospect. We lay still
about half an hour, being a mile, or something better, from the Town. They did
not fire one Gun at us, nor we at them. Thus our design on Guiaquil failed: yet
Captain Townely, and Capt. Francois Gronet took it a little while after this.
When we had taken a full view of the Town, we rowed over the River, where we
went ashore to a Beef Estantion or Farm, and killed a Cow, which we dressed and
eat. We staid there till the Evening Tide of Ebb, and then rowed down the
River, and the 9th day in the Morning arrived at Pima. In our way thither we
went aboard the 3 Barks laden with Negroes, that lay at their Anchor in the
River, and carried the Barks away with us. There were 1000 Negroes in 3 Barks,
all lusty young Men and Women. When we came to Puna, we sent a Canoa to Point
Arena, to see if the Ships were come thither. The 12th day she returned again,
with tidings that they were both there at Anchor. Therefore in the Afternoon we
all went aboard of our Ships, and carried the Cloth-Bark with us, and about 40
of the stoutest Negro-Men, leaving their 3 Barks with the rest; and out of
these also Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan chose about 14 or 15 a-piece, and turned
the rest ashore.

There was never a greater opportunity put into the Hands of Men to enrich
themselves than we had; to have gone with these Negroes and settled our selves
at Santa Maria, on the Isthmus of Darien, and employed them in getting Gold out
of the Mines there. Which might have been done with ease: For about 6 Months
before this, Capt. Harris (who was now with us) coming over Land from the North
Seas, with his Body of Privateers, had routed the Spaniards away from the Town
and Gold-Mines of Santa Maria, so that they had never attempted to settle there
again since: Add to this, that the Indian Neighborhood, who were mortal
Enemies to the Spaniards, and had been flusht by their Successes against them,
through the assistance of the Privateers, for several years, were our fast
Friends, and ready to receive and assist us. We had, as I have said, 1000
Negroes to work for us, we had 200 Tun of Flower that lay at the Gallapagos,
there was the River of Santa Maria, where we could careen and fit our Ships;
and might fortify the mouth so, that if all the strength the Spaniards have in
P^ had come against us, we could have kept them out. If they lay with
Guard-ships of Strength to keep us in, yet we had a great Country to live in,
and a great Nation of Indians that were our Friends: Beside, which was the
principal thing, we had the North Seas to befriend us; from whence we could
export our selves, or Effects, or import Goods or Men to our assistance; for in
a short time we should have had assistance from all parts of the West Indies;
many thousands of Privateers from Jamaica and the French Islands especially
would have flockt over to us; and long before this time we might have been
Masters not only of those Mines, (the richest Gold-Mines ever yet found in
America) but of all the Coast as high as Quito: And much more than I say might
then probably have been done.

But these may seem to the Reader but Golden Dreams: To leave them therefore;
The 13th day we sailed from Point Arena toward Plata, to seek our Bark that
was sent to the Island Lobos, in search of Captain Eaton. We were 2 Ships in
Company, and 2 Barks; and the 16th day we arrived at Plata, but found no Bark
there, nor any Letter. The next day we went over to the Main to fill Water, and
in our Passage met our Bark: She had been a second time at the Island Lobos,
and not finding us, was coming to Plata again. They had been in some want of
Provision since they left us, and therefore they had been at Santa Hellena, and
taken it; where they got as much Maize as served them 3 or 4 days; and that,
with some Fish and Turtle which they struck, lasted them till they came to the
Island Lobos de Terra. They got Boobies and Penguins Eggs; of which they laid
in a store; and went from thence to Lobos de la Mar, where they replenished
their stock of Eggs, and salted up a few young Seal, for fear they should want:
And being thus victualled, they returned again toward Plata. When our Water
was filled, we went over again to the Island Plata. There we parted the Cloths
that were taken in the Cloth-Bark into two Lots or Shares; Captain Davis and
his Men had one part, and Captain Swan and his Men had the other part. The Bark
which the Cloth was in, Captain Swan kept for a Tender. At this time here were
at Plata a great many large Turtles, which I judge came from the Gallapago's,
for I had never seen any here before, though I had been here several times: This
was their Coupling-time, which is much sooner in the Year here than in the
West Indies, properly so called. Our Strikers brought aboard every day more
than we could eat. Captain Swan had no Striker, and therefore had no Turtle but
what was sent him from Captain Davis; and all his Flower too he had from
Captain Davis: But since our Disappointment at Guiaquil, Capt. Davis's Men
murmured against Captain Swan, and did not willingly give him any Provision,
because he was not so forward to go thither as Capt. Davis. However, at last,
these differences were made up, and we concluded to go into the Bay of Panama,
to a Town called La Velia; but because we had not Canoas enough to land our
Men, we were resolved to search some Rivers where the Spaniards have no
Commerce, there to get Indian Canoas.

CHAP. VII.
They leave the Isle of Plata. Cape Passao. The Coast between that and Cape St.
Francisco: and from thence on to Panama. The River of St. Jago. The Red and the
White Cotton-tree. The Cabbage-Tree. The Indians of St. Jago River, and its
Neigbourhood. The Isle of Gallo. The River and Village of Tomaco. Isle of
Gorgona. The Pearl-Oysters there and in other parts. The Land on the Main. Cape
Corientes. Point Garachina. Island Gallera. The Kings, or Pearl Islands.
Pacheque. St. Paul's Island. Lavelia. Nata. The Calmfish. Oysters. The pleasant
Prospects in the Bay of Panama. Old Panama. The New City. The great Concourse
there from Lima and Portabel, etc. upon the Arrival of the Spanish Armada in
the West Indies. The Course the Armada takes; with an incidental Account of the
first inducements that made the Privateers undertake the passage over the
Isthmus of Darien into the South Seas, and of the particular beginning of their
correspondence with the Indians that inhabit that Isthmus. Of the Air and
Weather at Panama. The Isles Perico. Tabago a pleasant Island. The Mammee-tree.
The Village Tabago. A Spanish Stratagem or two, of Capt. Bond their Engineer.
The Ignorance of the Spaniards of these Parts in Sea Affairs: A party of French
Privateers arrive from over Land. Of the Commissions that are given out by the
French Governor of Petit Guavres. Of the Gulf of St. Michael, and the Rivers
of Congos, Sambo, and Sta. Maria; and an Error of the common Maps, in the
placing Point Garachina and Cape St. Lorenzo, corrected. Of the Town and Gold
Mines of Sta. Maria; and the Town of Scuchadero. Capt. Townley's Arrival with
some more English Privateers over Land. Jars of Pisco-Wine. A Bark of Capt.
Knight's joins them. Point Garachina again. Porto de Pinas. Isle of Otoque. The
Packet from Lima taken. Other English and French Privateers arrive. Chepelio,
one of the sweetest Islands in the World. The Sapadillo Avogato Pear, Mammee
Sappota. Wild Mammee and Star-Apple, Cheapo River and Town. Some Traversings in
the Bay of Panama; and an account of tbe Strength of the Spanish Fleet, and of
the Privateers, and the Engagement between them.

THE 23d day of December. 1684. we sailed from the Island Plata, toward the Bay
of Panama: The Wind at S. S. E. a fine brisk gale, and fine Weather. The next
morning we past by Cape Passao. This Cape is in lat. 00 d. 08 m. South of the
Equator. It runs out into the Sea with a high round Point, which seems to be
divided in the midst. It is bald against the Sea, but within Land, and on both
sides, it is full of short Trees. The Land in the Country is very high and
Mountainous, and it appears to be very woody. Between Cape Passao and Cape St
Francisco, the Land by the Sea is full of small Points, making as many little
sandy Bays between them; and is of an indifferent height, covered with Trees
of diverse sorts; so that sailing by this Coast you see nothing but a vast Grove
or Wood, which is so much the more pleasant, because the Trees are of several
Forms, both in respect to their Growth and Color.

Our design was, as I said in my first Chapter, to search for Canoas in some
River where the Spaniards have neither Settlement nor Trade with the native
Indians. We had Spanish Pilots, and Indians bred under the Spaniards, who were
able to carry us into any Harbor or River belonging to the Spaniards, but were
wholly unacquainted with those Rivers which were not frequented by the
Spaniards. There are many such unsrequented Rivers between Plata and Panama:
Indeed all the way from the Line to the Gulf of St. Michaels, or even to
Panama it self, the Coast is not inhabited by any Spaniards, nor are the
Indians that inhabit there any way under their subjection: except only near the
Isle Gallo, where, on the Banks of a Gold River or two, there are some
Spaniards who work there to find Gold.

Now our Pilots being at a loss on these less frequented Coasts, we supplied
that defect out of the Spanish Pilot-books, which we took in their Ships: These
we found by experience to be very good Guides. Yet nevertheless the Country in
many Places by the Sea being low, and full of openings, Creeks and Rivers, it
is somewhat difficult to find any particular River that a Man designs to go to,
where he is not well acquainted.

This however could be no discouragement to us; for one River might probably be
as well furnished with Indian Canoas as another; and if we found them, it was
to us indifferent where, yet we pitched on the River St. Jago, not because the ^
were not other Rivers as large, and as likely to be inhabited with Indians as
it; but because that River was not far from Gallo, an Island where our Ships
could anchor safely and ride securely. We past by Cape St. Francisco, meeting
with great and continued Rains. The Land by the Sea to the North of the Cape,
is low and extraordinary woody; the Trees are very thick, and seem to be of a
prodigious height and bigness. From Cape St. Francisco the Land runs more
Easterly into the Bay of Panama. I take this Cape to be its Bounds on the South
side, and the Isles of Cobaya or Quibo to bound it on the N. side. Between this
Cape and the Isle Gallo, there are many large and navigable Rivers. We passed
by them all till we came to the River St Jago.

This River is near 2 d. North of the Equator. It is large and navigable some
leagues up, and 7 leagues from the Sea it divides it self into two parts,
making an Island that is 4 leagues wide against the Sea. The widest branch is
that on the S. W. side of the Island. Both Branches are very deep, but the
Mouth of the narrower is so choakt with sholes, that at low water, even Canoas
cannot enter. Above the Island it is a league wide and the Stream runs pretty
straight, and very swift. The Tide flows about 3 leagues up the River, but to
what height I know not. Probably the River has its Original from some of the
Rich Mountains near the City Quito, and it runs through a Country, as rich in
Soil, as perhaps any in the World, especially when it draws within 10 or 12
leagues of the Sea. The Land there both on the Island, and on the both sides of
the River, is of a black deep Mold, producing extraordinary great tall Trees of
many sorts, such as usually grow in these hot Climates. I shall only give an
account of the Cotton and Cabbage-trees, whereof there is great plenty; and
they are as large of their kinds as ever I saw.

There are two sorts of Cotton-trees, one is called the Red, the other the
White Cotton-tree. The white Cotton-tree grows like an Oak, but generally much
bigger and taller than our Oaks: The body is straight and clear from knots or
boughs to the very head: there it spreads forth many great Limbs just like an
Oak. The Bark is smooth and of a gray color: the Leaves are as big as a large
Plumb Leaf, jagged at the edge; they are oval, smooth, and of a dark green
color. Some of these Trees have their bodies much bigger, 18 or 20 foot high,
than nearer the ground, being big bellied like Nine-pins. They bear a very fine
sort of Cotton, called Silk Cotton. When this Cotton is ripe the Trees appear
like our Apple Trees in England, when full of Blossoms. If I do not mistake,
the Cotton falls down in November or December: then the Ground is covered white
with it. This is not substantial and continuous, like that which grows upon the
Cotton-shrubs, in Plantations, but like the Down of Thistles; so that I did
never know any use made of it in the West Indies, because it is not worth the
Labor of gathering it: but in the East Indies the Natives gather and use it
for Pillows. It has a small black Seed among it. The Leaves of this Tree fall
off the beginning of April; while the old Leaves are falling off the young ones
spring out, and in a weeks time the Tree casts off her old Robes, and is
clothed in a new pleasant Garb. The red Cotton-tree is like the other, but
hardly so big: it bears no Cotton, but its Wood is somewhat harder of the two,
yet both sorts are soft spungy Wood, fit for no use that I know, but only for
Canoas, which being straight and tall they are very good for; but they will not
last long, especially if not drawn ashore often and tarred; otherwise the Worm
and the Water soon rot them. They are the biggest Trees, or perhaps Weeds
rather, in the West Indies. They are common in the East and West Indies in good
fat Land.

As the Cotton is the biggest Tree in the Woods, so the Cabbage-tree is the
tallest: The Body is not very big, but very high and straight. I have measured
one in the Bay of Campeachy 120 feet long as it lay on the Ground, and there
are some much higher. It has no Limbs nor Boughs, but at the head there are
many Branches bigger than a Man's Arm. These Branches are not covered, but
flat, with Sharp edges; they are 12 or 14 foot long. About two foot from the
Trunk, the Branches shoot forth small long Leaves, about aninch broad, which
grow so regularly on both sides of the Branch, that the whole Branch seems to
be but one Leaf, made up of many small ones. The Cabbage fruit shoots out in
the midst of these Branches, from the top of the Tree: it is invested with many
young Leaves or Branches which are ready to spread abroad, as the old Branches
drop and fall down. The Cabbage it self, when it is taken out of the Leaves
which it seems to be folded in, is as big as the small of a Man's Leg, and a
foot long; it is as white as Milk, and as sweet as a Nut, if eaten raw, and it
is very sweet and wholesome if boiled. Besides, the Cabbage it self, there grow
out between the Cabbage and the large Bran^hes, small twigs, as of a Shrub,
about two foot long from their Stump. At the end of those twigs (which grows
very thick together) there hang Berries, hard and round, and as big as a
Cherry. These the Trees shed every year, and they are very good for Hogs: for
this reason the Spaniards fine any who shall cut down any of these in their
Woods. The Body of the Tree is full of rings round it, half a foot asunder from
the bottom to the top. The Bark is thin and brittle; the Wood is black and very
hard, the heart or middle of the Tree is white Pith. They do not climb to get
the Cabbage, but cut them down; for should they gather it off the Tree as it
stands, yet its head being gone it soon dies. These Trees are much used by
Planters in Jamaica, to board the sides of the Houses for it is but splitting
the Trunk into 4 parts with an Axe, and there are so many Planks. Those Trees
appear very pleasant, and they beautify the whole Wood, spreading their green
Branches above all other Trees.

All this Country is subject to very great Rains, so that this part of Peru
pays for the dry weather which they have about Lima and all that Coast. I
believe that is one reason why the Spaniards have made such small discoveries,
in this and other Rivers on this Coast. Another reason may be, because it lies
not so directly in their way; for they do not Coast it along in going from
Panama to Lima, but first go Westward as far as to the Keys or Isles of Cobaya,
for a Westerly wind, and from thence stand over toward Cape St. Francisco, not
touching any where usually till they come to Manta near Cape St. Lorenzo. In
their return indeed from Lima to Panama, they may keep along the Coast
hereabouts; but then their Ships are always laden, whereas the light Ships that
go from Panama, are most at leisure to make discoveries. A third reason may be
the wildness and enmity of all the Natives on this Coast, who are naturally
fortified by their Rivers and vast Woods, from whence with their Arrows they
can easily annoy any that shall land there to assault them. At this River
particularly there are no Indians live within 6 leagues of the Sea, and all the
Country so far is full of impassable Woods, so that to get at the Indians, or
the Mines and Mountains, there is no way but by rowing up the River; and if any
who are Enemies to the Natives attempt this, (as the Spaniards are always hated
by them) they must all the way be exposed to the Arrows of those who would lie
purposely in Ambush in the Woods for them. These wild Indians have small
Plantations of Maiz, and good Plantain-Gardens; for Plantains are their
chiefest food. They have also a few Fowls and Hogs.

It was to this River that we were bound to seek, for Canoas, therefore the
26th supposing our selves to be abrest of it, we went from our Ships with 4
Canoas. The 27th day in the Morning we entered at half Flood into the smaller
branch of that River, and rowed up 6 leagues before we met any Inhabitants.
There we found two small Huts thatched with Palmeto Leaves. The Indians seeing
us rowing toward their Houses, got their Wives and little ones, with their
Household Stuff, into their Canoas, and paddled away faster than we could row;
for we were forced to keep in the middle of the River because of our Oars, but
they with their Paddles kept close under the Banks, and so had not the strength
of the stream against them, as we had. These Huts were close by the River on
the East side of it, just against the end of the Island. We saw a great many
other Houses a league from us on the other side of the River; but the main
stream into which we were now come, seemed to be so swift, that we were afraid
to put over, for fear we should not be abe to get back again. We found only a
Hog, some Fowls and Plantains, in the Huts: We killed the Hog and the Fowls,
which were dressed presently. Their Hogs they got (as I suppose) from the
Spaniards by some accident, or from some Neighboring Indians who converse with
the Spaniards; for this that we took was of their European kind, which the
Spaniards have introduced into America very plentifully, especially into the
Islands Jamaica, Hispaniola, and Cuba above all, being very largely stored with
them where they feed in the Woods in the day time, and at night come in at the
sounding of a Conch-shell, and are put up in their Crauls or Pens, and yet some
turn wild, which nevertheless are often decoyed in by the other, which being
all marked, whenever they see an unmarked Hog in the Pen they know it is a wild
one, and shoot him presently. These Crauls I have not seen on the Continent;
where the Spaniards keep them tame at home. Among the wild Indians, or in their
Woods, are no Hogs, but Pecary and Warree, a sort I have mentioned before.

After we had refreshed our selves, we returned toward the Mouth of the River.
It was the evening when we came from thence, and we got to the Rivers Mouth the
next Morning before Day: Our Ships when we left them were ordered to go to
Gallo, where they were to stay for us. Gallo is a small uninhabited Island,
lying in between two and 3 Degrees North Lat. It lies in a wide Bay about 3
Leagues from the Mouth of the River Tomaco, and 4 Leagues and half from a small
Indian Village called Tomaco. The Island Gallo is of an indifferent height; it
is clothed with very good Timber Trees, and is therefore often visited with
Barks from Guiaquil and other places; for most of the Timber carried from
Guiaquil to Lima, is first fetched from Gallo. There is a Spring of good Water
at the N. E. end; at that place there is a small fine sandy Bay, where there is
good landing. The Road for Ships is against this Bay, where there is good
secure riding in 6 or 7 fathom Water; and here Ships may careen. It is but
shoal Water all about this Island; yet there is a Channel to come in at, where
there is no less than 4 fathom Water: You must go in with the Tide of Flood,
and come out with Ebb, sounding all the way.

Tomaco is a large River that takes its Name from an Indian Village so called:
It is reported to spring from the rich Mountains about Quito. It is thick
inhabited with Indians; and there are some Spaniards that live there, who
traffic with the Indians for Gold. It is shoal at the Mouth of the River, yet
Barks may enter.

This Village Tomaco is but small, and is seated not far from the Mouth of the
River. It is a place to entertain the Spanish Merchants that come to Gallo to
load Timber, or to traffic with the Indians for Gold. At this place one
Doleman, with 7 or 8 Men more, once of Captain Sharp's Crew, were killed in the
year 1680. From the branch of the River St. Jago, where we now lay, to Tomaco,
is about 5 leagues; the land low, and full of Creeks, so that Canoas may pass
within Land through those Creeks, and from thence into Tomaco River.

The 28th day we left the River of St. Jago. crossing some Creeks in our way
with our Canoas; and came to an Indian House, where we took the (...) and all
his Family. We staid here till the Aftern^, and then rowed toward Tomaco, with
the M^ this House for our Guide. We arrived at Tomaco about 12 a clock at
Night. Here we took all the I^habitants of the Village, and a Spanish Knight,
called Don Diego de Pinus. This Knight came in a Ship from Lima to lade Timber.
The Ship was riding in a Creek about a mile off, and there were only one
Spaniard and 8 Indians aboard. We went in a Canoa with 7 Men and took her; she
had no Goods, but 12 or 13 Jars of good Wine, which we took out, and the next
day let the Ship go. Here an Indian Canoa came aboard with three Men in her.
These Men could not speak Spanish, neither could they distinguish us from
Spaniards; the wild Indians usually thinking all white Men to be Spaniards. We
gave them 3 or four Callabashes of Wine, which they freely drank. They were
straight bodies, and well limbed Men, of a mean height; their Hair black, long
visag'd, small Noses and Eyes; and were thin faced, ill looked Men, of a very
dark copper color. A little before Night Captain Swan and all of us returned
to Tomaco, and left the Vessel to the Seamen. The 31st day two of our Canoas,
who had been up the River of Tomaco, returned back again to the Village. They
had rowed 7 or 8 leagues up, and found but one Spanish House, which they were
told did belong to a Lady who lived at Lima; she had Servants here that traded
with the Indians for Gold; but they seeing our Men coming, ran away; yet our
Men found there several Ounces of Gold in Callabashes.

January 1685. we went from Tomaco toward Gallo. We carried the Knight with
us, and too small Canoas which we took there, and while we were rowing over,
one of our Canoas took a Pacquet-Boat that was sent from Panama to Lima. The
Spaniards threw the Packet of Letters overboard with a Line and a Buoy to it,
but our Men seeing it took it up, and brought the Letters, and all the
Prisoners aboard our Ships, that were then at an anchor at Gallo. Here we staid
till the 6th day, reading the Letters, by which we understood that the Armada
from Old Spain was come to Portabel; and that the President of Panama had sent
this Packet on purpose to hasten the Plate Fleet thither from Lima.

We were very joyful of this News, and therefore sent away the Pacquet-Boat
with all her Letters; and we altered our former Resolutions of going to
Lavelia. We now concluded to careen our Ships as speedily as we could, that we
might be ready to intercept this Fleet. The properest place that we could think
on for doing it, was among the Kings Islands or Pearl Keys, because they are
near Panama, and all Ships bound to Panama from the Coast of Lima pass by them;
so that being there we could not possibly miss the Fleet. According to these
Resolutions we sailed the next Morning, in order to execute what we designed.
We were 2 Ships and 3 Barks in Company, viz. Captain Davis, Captain Swan, a
Fireship, and 2 small Barks, as Tenders; one on Captain Davis's Ship, the other
on Captai^ Swan's. We weighed before day, and got out all bu^ Captain Swan's
Tender, which never budged; for the Men were all asleep when we went out, and
the Tide of Flood coming on before they waked, w^ were forced to stay for them
till the next day.

The 8th day in the Morning we descried a Sai^ to the West of us; the Wind was
at South, and w^ chased her, and before noon took her. She was a Ship of about
90 Tun laden with Flower, she cam^ from Truxillo, and was bound to Panama. Thi^
Ship came very opportunely to us, for Flower began to grow scarce, and Captain
Davis his Me^ grudged at what was given to Captain Swan; who^ as I said before,
had none but what he had from Captain Davis.

We jogged on after this with a gentle Gale toward Gorgonia, an Island lying
about 25 Leagues from the Island Gallo. The 9th day we anchored at Gorgonia, on
the West Side of the Island, in 38 fathom, clean Ground, not 2 Cables length
from the Shore. Gorgonia is an uninhabited Island, in lat. about 3 degrees
North; It is a pretty high Island, and very remarkable, by reason of 2 Saddles,
or risings and fallings on the top. It is about 2 Leagues long, and a League
broad; and it is 4 Leagues from the Main: At the West End is another small
Island The Land against the Anchoring-place is low; there is a small sandy Bay
and good landing. The Soil or Mould of it is black and deep in the low Ground,
but on the side of the high Land it is a kind of a red Clay. This Island is
very well clothed with large Trees of several sorts, that are flourishing and
green all the Year. It is very well watered with small Brooks that Issue from
the high Land. Here are a great many little black Monkeys, some Indian Conies,
and a few Snakes, which are all the Land Animals that I know there. It is
reported of this Island that it rains on every day in the Year more or less;
but that I can disprove: However, it is a very wet Coast, and it rains
abundantly here all the Year long. There are but few fair days; for there is
little difference in the Seasons of the Year between the wet and dry; only in
that Season which should be the dry time, the Rains are less frequent and more
moderate than in the wet Season, for then it pours as out of a Sieve. It is
deep Water, and no anchoring any where about this Island, only at the
West Side: The Tide rises and falls 7 or 8 foot up and down. Here are a
great many Perewincles and Muscles to be had at low Water. Then the Monkeys
come down by the Seaside and catch them; digging them out of their Shells with
their Claws.

Here are Pearl-Oysters in great plenty: They grow to the loose Rocks, in 4, 5,
or 6 fathom Water by Beards, or little small Roots, as a Muscle: These Oysters
are commonly flatter and thinner than other Oysters; otherwise much alike in
shape. The Fish is not sweet nor very wholesome; it is as slimy as a Shell-Snail:
they taste very copperish, if eaten raw, and are best boiled. The Indians who
gather them for the Spaniards, hang the Meat of them on Strings like Jews-ears,
and dry them before they eat them. The Pearl is found at the head of the
Oyster, lying between the Meat and the Shell. Some will have 20 or 30 small
Seed-Pearl, some none at all, and some will have 1 or 2 pretty large ones. The
inside of the Shell is more glorious than the Pearl it self. I did never see
any in the South Seas but here. It is reported there are some at the South-end
of Callifornia. In the West Indies, the Rancho Reys, or Rancheria, spoken of in
Chap. 3. is the place where they are found most plentifully. It Is said there
are some at the Island Margarita, (...) St. Augustine, a Town in the Gulf of
Florida, (...) the East Indies, the Island Ainam, near the South-end of China,
is said to have plenty of these Oysters, more productive of large round Pearl
than those in other places. They are found also in other parts of the
East Indies, and on the Persian Coast.

At this Island Gorgona, we rummaged our Prize, and found a few Boxes of
Marmalade, and 3 or 4 Jars of Brandy, which were equally shared between Capt.
Davis, Capt. Swan, and their Men. Here we filled all our Water, and Capt. Swan
furnished himself with Flower: Afterward we turned ashore a great many
Prisoners, but kept the chiefest to put them ashore in a better place.

The 13th day we sailed from hence toward the Kings Islands. We were now 6
Sail, 2 Men of War, 2 Tenders, a Fire-ship and the Prize. We had but little
Wind, but what we had was the common Trade at South. The Land we sailed by on
the Main, is very low toward the Seaside, but in the Country there are very
high Mountains.

The 16th day we passed by Cape Corrientes. This Cape is in lat. 5 d. 10 m. it
is high bluff Land, with 3 or 4 small Hillocks on the top. It appears at a
distance like an Island. Here we found a strong Current running to the N. but
whether it be always so, I know not. The day after we passed by the Cape, we
saw a small white Island, which we chaced, supposing it had been a Sail, till
coming near we found our Error.

The 21st day we saw Point Garachina. This Point is in lat. 7 d. 20 m. North;
it is pretty high Land, rocky, and destitute of Trees; yet within Land it is
woody. It is fenced with Rocks against the Sea. Within the Point, by the Sea,
at low Water, you may find store of Oysters and Muscles.

The Kings Islands, or Pearl Keys, are about 12 leagues distant from this
Point. Between Point Garachina and them, there is a small low flat barren
Island called Gallera, at which Captain Harris was sharing with his Men the
Gold he took in his pillaging Sancta Maria, which I spoke of a little before,
when on a sudden 5 Spanish Barks, fitted out on purpose at Panama, came upon
him; but he fought them so stoutly with one small Bark he had, and some few
Canoas, boarding their Admiral particularly, that they were all glad to leave
him. By this Island we anchored and sent our Boats to the Kings Island for a
good careening place.

The Kings Islands are a great many low Woody Islands, lying N. W. by N. and S.
E. by S. They are about 7 leagues from the Main, and 14 leagues in length, and
from Panama about 12 leagues. Why they are called the Kings Islands, I know
not; they are sometimes and mostly in Maps, called the Pearl Islands. I cannot
imagine wherefore they are called so, for I did never see one Pearl Oyster
about them, nor any Pearl Oyster-shells; but on the other Oysters I have made
many a Meal there: The Norther-most Island of all this range is called Pachea,
or Pacheque. This is but a small Island, distant from Panama 11 or 12 leagues.
The Southermost of them is called St. Paul's. Besides these two I know no more
that are called by any particular Name, though there are many that far exceed
either of the two in bigness. Some of these Islands are planted with Plantains
and Bonanas; and there are Fields of Rice on others of them. The Gentlemen of
Panama, to whom they belong, keep Negroes there to plant, Weed, and Husband the
Plantations. Many of them, especially the largest, are wholly untilled, yet
very good fat land, full of large Trees. These unplanted Islands shelter many
Runaway-Negroes, who abscond in the Woods all day, and in the night boldly
pillage the Plantain Walks. Betwixt these Islands and the Main is a Channel of
7 or 8 leagues wide; there is good depth of Water, and good Anchoring all the
way. The Islands border thick on each other; yet they make many small narrow
deep Channels, fit only for Boats to pass between most of them. At the S. E.
end, about a league from St. Paul's Island, there is a good place for Ships to
careen, or hale ashore It is surrounded with the Land, and has a good deep
Channel on the North side to go in at. The Tide rises here about 10 foot
perpendicular.

We brought our Ships into this place the 25th day, but were forced to tarry
for a Spring Tide before we could have Water enough to clean them; therefore we
first cleaned our Barks, that they might cruise before Panama, while we lay
here. The 27th day our Barks being clean we sent them out with 20 Men in each.
The 4th day after, they returned with a Prize laden with Maiz, or Indian Corn,
Salt-Beef and Fowls. She came from Lavelia, and was bound to Panama. Lavelia is
a Town we once designed to attempt. It is pretty large, and stands on the Bank
of a River on the North side of the Bay of Panama 6 or 7 leagues from the Sea.

Nata is another such Town standing in a Plain near another Branch of the same
River. In these Towns, and some others on the same Coast, they breed Hogs,
Fowls, Bulls and Cows, and plant Maiz purposely for the support of Panama,
which is supplied with Provision mostly from other Towns and the Neigbouring
Islands.

The Beef and Fowl our Men took, came to us in a good time, for we had eaten
but little Flesh since we left the Island Plata. The Harbor where we careen'd
was encompassed by three Islands, and our Ships rode in the middle. That on
which we haled our Ships ashore, was a little Island on the North side of the
Harbor. There was a fine small sandy Bay, but all the rest of the Island was
environed with Rocks, on which at low Water we did use to gather Oysters,
Clams, Muscles and Limpits. The Clam is a sort of Oyster which grows so fast to
the Rock, that there is no separating it from thence, therefore we did open it
where it grows, and take out the Meat, which is very large, fat and sweet. Here
are a few common Oysters, such as we have in England, of which sort I have met
with none in these Seas, but here, at Point Garachina, at Puna, and on the
Mexican Coast, in the lat. of 23 d. North. I have a Manuscript of Mr. Teat,
Capt. Swan's chief Mate, which gives an account of Oysters plentifully found in
Port St. Julian, on the East Side and somewhat to the North of the Streights of
Magellan; but there is no mention made of what Oysters they are. Here are some
Guanoes but we found no other sort of Land-Animal. Here are also some Pigeons
and Turtle-Doves. The rest of the Islands that incompass this Harbor had of
all these sorts of Creatures. Our Men therefore did every day go over in Canoas
to them to Fish, Fowl or Hunt for Guanoes; but having one Man surprised once by
some Spaniards lying there in ambush, and carried off by them to Panama, we
were after that more cautious of straggling.

The 14th day of Feb. 1685. we made an end of cleaning our Ship, filled all our
Water, and stocked our selves with Firewood. The 15th day we went out from
among the Islands, and anchored in the Channel between them and the Main, in 25
fathom Water, soft Oazy Ground. The Plate-Fleet was not yet arrived; therefore
we intended to cruise before the City of Panama, which is from this place about
25 leagues. The next day we sailed toward Panama, passing in the Channel
between the Kings Islands and the Main. It is very pleasant sailing here,
having the Main on one side, which appears in diverse forms. It is beautified
with many small Hills, clothed with woods of diverse sorts of Trees, which are
always green and flourishing. There are some few small high Islands within a
league of the Main, scattering here and there one: These are partly Woody,
partly bare; and they, as well as the Main, appear very pleasant. The Kings
Islands are on the other side of this Channel, and make also a lovely prospect
as you sail by them. These, as I have already noted, are low and flat,
appearing in several Shapes, according as they are naturally formed by many
small Creeks and Branches of the Sea. The 16th day we anchored at Pacheque, in
17 fathom Water, about a leagne from the Island, and sailed from thence the
next day, with the Wind at N. N. E. directing our course toward Panama.

When we came abrest of Old Panama we anchored, and sent our Canoa ashore with
our Prisoner Don Diego de Pinas, with a Letter to the Governor, to treat about
an Exchange for our Man they had spirited away, as I said; and another Captain
Harris left in the River of St. Maria the year before, coming over Land. Don
Diego was desirous to go on this Errand in the Name, and with the Consent of
the rest of our Spanish Prisoners; but by some accident he was killed before he
got ashore, as we heard afterward.

Old Panama was formerly a famous place, but it was taken by Sir Henry Morgan
about the year 1673. and at that time great part of it was burned to Ashes, and
it was never re-edified since.

New Panama is a very fair City, standing close by the Sea, about 4 Mile from
the Ruins of the Old Town. It gives Name to a large Bay which is famous for a
great many navigable Rivers, some whereof are very rich in Gold; it is also
very pleasantly sprinkled with Islands, that are not only profitable to their
Owners, but very delightful to the Passengers and Seamen that sail by them;
some of which I have already described. It is encompassed on the backside with
a pleasant Country, which is full of small Hills and Valleys, beautified with
many Groves and Spots of Trees, that appear in the Savannahs like so many
little Islands. This City is all compassed with a high Stone Wall; the Houses
are said to be of Brick. Their Roofs appear higher than the top of the City
Wall. It is beautified with a great many fair Churches and Religious Houses,
besides the Presidents House, and other eminent Buildings; which altogether
make one of the finest objects that I did ever see, in America especially.
There are a great many Guns on her Walls, most of which look toward the Land.
They had none at all against the Sea, when I first entered those Seas with
Captain Sawkins, Captain Coxon, Captain Sharp, and others; for till then they
did not fear any Enemy by Sea: but since then they have planted Guns clear
round. This is a flourishing City by reason it is a thoroughfair for all
imported or exported Goods and Treasure, to and from all Parts of Peru and
Chili; whereof their Storehouses are never empty. The Road also is seldom or
never without Ships. Besides once in 3 years, when the Spanish Armada comes to
Portobel, then the Plate-Fleet also from Lima comes hither with the King's
Treasure, and abundance of Merchant Ships full of Goods and Plate; at that time
the City is full of Merchants and Gentlemen; the Seamen are busy in landing
the Treasure and Goods, and the Carriers, or Caravan Masters, employed in
carrying it over land on Mules (in vast droves every day) to Portobel, and
bringing back European Goods from thence: Though the City be then so full, yet
during this heat of Business there is no hiring of an ordinary Slave under a
Piece of Eight a day; Houses, also Chambers, Beds and Victuals are then
extraordinary dear.

Now I am on this Subject, I think it will not be amiss to give the Reader an
account of the Progress of the Armada from Old Spain, which comes thus every
three Years into the Indies. Its first arrival is at Carthagena, from whence,
as I have been told, an Express is immediately sent over Land to Lima, through
the Southern Continent, and another by Sea to Portobel, with two Pacquets of
Letters, one for the Viceroy of Lima, the other for the Viceroy of Mexico. I
know not which wa^ that of Mexico goes after its arrival at Portobel, whether
by land or Sea: But I believe (...) S^a to La Vera Cruz. That for Lima is sent
by Land to Panama, and from thence by Sea to Lima.

Upon mention of these Pacquets I shall digress yet a little further, and
acquaint my Reader, that before my first going over into the South Seas with
Captain Sharp (and indeed before any Privateers (at least since Drake and
Oxengham) had gone that way which we afterward went, except La Sound, a French
Captain, who by Captain Wright's Instructions had ventured as far as Cheapo
Town with a Body of Men, but was driven back again) I being then on board Capt.
Coxen, in company with 3 or 4 more Privateers, about 4 leagues to the East of
Portobel, we took the Pacquets bound thither from Carthagena. We opened a great
quantity of the Merchants Letters, and found the Contents of many of them to be
very surprising, the Merchants of several parts of Old Spain thereby informing
there Correspondents of Panama, and elsewhere, of a certain Prophecy that went
about Spain that year, the Tenor of which was, That there would be English
Privateers that Year in the West Indies, who would make such great Discoveries,
as to open a Door into the South Seas; which they supposed was fastest shut:
And the Letters were accordingly full of Cautions to their Friends to be very
watchful and careful of their Coasts.

This Door they spoke of we all concluded must b^ the Passage over Land through
the Country of the Indians of D^ who were a little before this becom^ our
Friends, and ^ad lately fallen out with the Spaniards, breaking off the
Intercourse which for some time they had with them: and upon calling also to
mind the frequent Invitations we had from those Indians a little before this
time, to pass through their Country, and fall upon the Spaniards in the South
Seas, we from hence forward began to entertain such thoughts in earnest, and
soon came to a Resolution to make those Attempts which we afterward did, with
Capt. Sharp, Coxen, etc. So that the taking these Letters gave the first life
to those bold Undertakings: and we took the advantage of the fears the
Spaniards were in from that Prophecy, or probable Conjecture, or whatever it
were; for we sealed up most of the Letters again, and sent them ashore to
Portobel.

The occasion of this our late Friendship with those Indians was thus. About 15
years before this time, Capt. Wright being cruising near that Coast, and going
in among the Samballoes Isles to strike Fish and Turtle, took there a young
Indian Lad as he was paddling about in a Canoa. He brought him aboard his Ship,
and gave him the name of John Great, clothing him, and intending to breed him
among the English. But his Moskito Strikers, taking a fancy to the Boy, begged
him of Capt. Wright, and took him with them at their return into their own
Country, where they taught him their Art, and he married a Wife among them, and
learnt their Language, as he had done some broken English while he was with
Capt Wright, which he improved among the Moskitoes, who corresponding so much
with us, do all of them smatter English after a sort; but his own Language he
had almost forgot. Thus he lived among them for many years; till about 6 or 8
months before our taking these Letters, Capt. Wright being again among the
Samballoes, took thence another Indian Boy about 10 or 12 years old, the Son of
a Man of some account among those Indians; and wanting a Striker, he went away
to the Moskito's Country, where he took John Great, who was now very expert at
it. John Great was much pleased to see a Lad there of his own Country, and it
came into his mind to persuade Capt. Wright upon this occasion, to endeavor a
Friendship with those Indians; a thing our Privateers had long coveted, but
never durst attempt, having such dreadful Apprehensions of their numbers and
fierceness: But John Great offered the Captain that he would go ashore and
negotiate the matter; who accordingly sent him in his Canoa till he was near
the shore, which of a sudden was covered with Indians, standing ready with
their Bows and Arrows. John Great, who had only a Clout about his middle, as the
fashion of the Indians is, leapt then out of the Boat and swam, the Boat
retiring a little way back; and the Indians ashore seeing him in that habit,
and hearing him call to them in their own Tongue, (which he had recovered by
conversing with the Boy lately taken) suffered him quietly to land, and
gathered all about to hear how it was with him. He told them particularly, that
he was one of their Countrymen, and how he had been taken many years ago by the
English, who had used him very kindly; that they were mistaken in being so much
afraid of that Nation, who were not Enemies to them, but to the Spaniards: to
confirm this, he told them how well the English treated another young Lad of
theirs, they had lately taken, such a ones Son; for this he had learnt of the
Youth, and his Father was one of the Company that was got together on the
shore. He persuaded them therefore to make a League with these friendly People,
by whose help they might be able to quell the Spaniards; assuring also the
Father of the Boy, that if he would but go with him to the Ship, which they saw
at anchor at an Island there (it was Golden Island, the Eastermost of the
Samballoes, a place where there is good striking for Turtle) he should have his
Son restored to him, and they might all expect a very kind reception. Upon
these Assurances 20 or 30 of them went off presently, in 2 or 3 Canoas laden
with Plantains, Bonanoes, Fowls, etc. And Capt. Wright having treated them on
board, went ashore with them, and was entertained by them, and presents were
made on each side. Captain Wright gave the Boy to his Father in a very handsome
English Dress, which he had caused to be made purposely for him; and an
Agreement was immediately struck up between the English and these Indians, who
invited the English through their Country into the South Seas.

Pursuant to this Agreement, the English, when they came upon any such Design,
or for Traffic with them, were to give a certain Signal which they pitched
upon, whereby they might be known. But it happened that Mr. la Sound, the
French Captain spoken of a little before, being then one of Captain Wright's
Men, learnt this Signal, and staying ashore at Petit-Guavres, upon Captain
Wright's going thither soon after, who had his Commission from thence, he gave
the other French there such an account of the Agreement beforementioned, and
the easiness of entering the South Seas thereupon, that he got at the head of
about 120 of them, who made that unsuccessful attempt upon Cheapo, as I said,
making use of the Signal they had learnt for passing the Indians Country, who
at that time could not distinguish so well between the several Nations of the
Europeans, as they can since.

From such small beginnings arose those great stirs that have been since made
over the South Seas, viz. from the Letters we took, and from the Friendship
contracted with these Indians by means of John Great. Yet this Friendship had
like to have been stifled in its Infancy; for within few Months after an
English trading Sloop came on this Coast from Jamaica, and John Great, who by
this time had advanced himself a^ a Grandee among these Indians, together with
5 or 6 more of that Quality, went off to the Sloop in their long Gowns, as the
custom is for such to wear among them. Being received aboard, they expected to
find every thing friendly, and John Great talked to them in English; but these
English Men, having no knowledge at all of what had happened, endeavored to
make them Slaves (as is commonly done) for upon carrying them to Jamaica, they
could have sold them for 10 or 12 Pound a piece. But John Great, and the rest,
perceiving this, leapt all overboard, and were by the others killed every one
of them in the Water. The Indians on shore never came to the knowledge of it;
if they had it would have endangered our Correspondence. Several times after
upon our conversing with 'em, they enquired of us what was become of their
Countrymen: but we told them we knew not, as indeed it was a great while after
that we heard this Story; so they concluded the Spaniards had met with them,
and killed, or taken them.

But to return to the account of the progress of the Armada which we left at
Cartagena: After an appointed stay there of about 60 days, as I take it, it
goes thence to Portobel, where it lies 30 days, and no longer. Therefore the
Viceroy of Lima, on notice of the Armada's arrival at Cartagena, immediately
sends away the Kings Treasure to Panama, where it is landed, and lies ready to
be sent to Portobel upon the first news of the Armada's arrival there. This is
the reason partly of their sending Expresses so early to Lima, that upon the
Armada's first coming to Portobel, the Treasure and Goods may lie ready at
Panama, to be sent away upon the Mules, and it requires some time for the Lima
Fleet to unlade, because the Ships ride not at Panama, but at Perica, which are
3 small Islands 2 leagues from thence. The King's Treasure is said to amount
commonly to about 24000000 of Pieces of Eight: besides abundance of Merchants
Money. All this Treasure is carried on Mules, and there are large Stables at
both places to lodge them. Sometimes the Merchants to steal the Custom pack up
Money among Goods, and send it to Venta de Cruzes on the River Chagre; from
thence down the River, and afterward by Sea to Portobel: in which passage I
have known a whole Fleet of Periago's and Canoas taken. The Merchants who are
not ready to sail by the 30th day after the Armada's arrival, are in danger to
be left behind, for the Ships all weigh the 30th day precisely, and go to the
Harbors Mouth: yet sometimes, on great importunity, the Admiral may stay a week
longer; for it is impossible that all the Merchants should get ready, for want
of Men. When the Armada departs from Portobel, it returns again to Cartagena,
by which time all the King's Revenue which comes out of the Country is got
ready there. Here also meets them again a great Ship called the Pattache, one
of the Spanish Galeons, which before their first arrival at Cartagena goes from
the rest of the Armada on purpose to gather the Tribute of the Coast, touching
at the Magarita's, and other places in her way thence to Cartagena, as Punta de
Guaira Moracaybo, Riode la Hacha, and Sancta Martha; and at all these places
takes in Treasure for the King. After the set stay at Cartagena, the Armada
goes away to the Havana in the Isle of Cuba, to meet there the Flota, which is
a small number of Ships that go to la Vera Cruz, and there takes in the effects
of the City and Country of Mexico, and what is brought thither in the Ship
which comes thither every year from the Philippine Islands; and having joined
the rest at the Havana, the whole Armada sets sail for Spain through the Gulf
of Florida. The Ships in the South Seas lie a great deal longer at Panama
before they return to Lima. The Merchants and Gentlemen which come from Lima,
stay as little time as they can at Portobel, which is at the best but a sickly
place, and at this time is very full of Men from all parts. But Panama, as it
is not overcharged with Men so unreasonably as the other, though very full, so it
enjoys a good Air, lying open to the Sea-wind; which rises commonly about 10
or 11 a Clock in the Morning, and continues till 8 or 9 a Clock at night: then
the Land-wind comes, and blows till 8 or 9 in the morning.

There are no Woods nor Marshes near Panama, but a brave dry Champion Land, not
subject to Fogs nor Mists. The wet season begins in the latter end of May, and
continues till November. At that time the Sea-breezes are at S. S. W. and the
Land-winds at N. At the dry Season the Winds are most betwixt the E. N. E. and
the N. Yet off in the Bay they are commonly at South, but of this I shall be
more particular in my Chapter of Winds in the Appendix, The Rains are not so
excessive about Panama it self, as on either side of the Bay; yet in the Months
of June, July and August, they are severe enough. Gentlemen that come from Peru
to Panama, especially in these Months, cut their Hair close to preserve them
from Fevers; for the place is sickly to them, because they come out of a
Country which never has any Rains or Fogs, but enjoys a constant Serenity; but
I am apt to believe this City is healthy enough to any other People. Thus much
for Panama.

The 20th day we went and anchored within a league of the Islands Perico (which
are only 3 little barren rocky Islands) in expectation of the President of
Panama's Answer to the Letter, I said, we sent him by Don Diego, treating about
exchange of Prisoners; this being the day on which he had given us his Parole
to return with an answer. The 21st day we took another Bark laden with Hogs,
Fowl, Salt Beef, and Molossoes: she came from Lavelia and was going to Panama.
In the afternoon we sent another Letter ashore by a young Mastiso (a mixtbreed
of Indians and Europeans) directed to the President, and 3 or 4 Copies of it to
be dispersed abroad among the common People. This Letter, which was full of
Threats, together with the young Man's managing the business, wrought so
powerfully among the common People, that the City was in an uproar. The
President immediately sent a Gentleman aboard, who demanded the Flower-Prize
that we took off of Gallo, and all the Prisoners, for the Ransom of our two
Men: but our Captains told him they would exchange Man for Man. The Gentleman
said he had not Orders for that, but if he would stay till the next day he
would bring the Governors Answer. The next day he brought aboard our two Men,
and had about 40 Prisoners in exchange.

The 24th day, we run over to the Island Tabago. Tabago is in the Bay, and
about 6 Leagues South of Panama. It is about 3 mile long, and 2 broad, a high
mountainous Island. On the North-side it declines with a gentle descent to the
Sea. The Land by the Sea is of a black Mold and deep; but toward the top of
the Mountain it is strong and dry. The Northside of this Island makes a very
pleasant show; it seems to be a Garden of Fruit enclosed with many high Trees;
the chiefest Fruits are Plantains and Bonana's. They thrive very well from the
foot to the middle of it; but those near the top are but small, as wanting
moisture. Close by the Sea there are many Coco-Nut-Trees, which make a very
pleasant sight. Within the Coco-Nut-Trees there grow many Mammet Trees. The
Mammet is a large, tall, and strait-bodied Tree, clean, without Knots or Limbs,
for 6 or 70 foot, or more. The Head spreads abroad into many small Limbs, which
grow pretty thick, and close together. The Bark is of a dark gray colom, thick
and rough, full of large Chops. The Fruit is bigger than Quince; it is round,
and covered with a thick Rind, of a gray color: When the Fruit is ripe the
Rind is yellow and though; and it will then peel off like Leather; but before
it is ripe it is brittle: the juice is then white and clammy; but when ripe,
not so. The ripe Fruit under the Rind is yellow as a Carrot, and in the middle
are two large rough stones, flat, and each of them much bigger than an Almond.
The Fruit smells very well, and the taste is answerable to the smell. The S. W.
end of the Island has never been cleared, but is full of Firewood, and Trees
of diverse sorts. There is a very fine small Brook of fresh Water, that springs
out of the side of the Mountain, and gliding through the Grove of Fruit Trees,
falls into the Sea on the North-side. There was a small Town standing by the
Sea, with a Church at one end, but now the biggest part of it is destroyed by
the Privateers. There is good anchoring right against the Town, about a mile
from the shore, where you may have 16 or 18 fathom Water, soft oazy ground.
There is a small Island close by the N. W. end of this called Tabogilla, with a
small Channel to pass between. There is another woody Island about a mile on
the N. E. side of Tabago, and a good Channel between them: this Island has no
Name that ever I heard.

While we lay at Tabago, we had like to have had a scurvy trick played us by a
pretended Merchant from Panama, who came, as by stealth, to traffic with us
privately; a thing common enough with the Spanish Merchants, both in the North
and South Seas, notwithstanding the severe Prohibitions of the Governors; who
yet sometimes connive at it, and will even trade with the Privateers
themselves. Our Merchant was by agreement to bring out his Bark laden with
Goods in the night, and we to go and anchor at the South of Perico. Out he
came, with a Fireship instead of a Bark, and approached very near, haling us
with the Watchword we had agreed upon. We suspecting the worst, called to them
to come to an anchor, and upon their not doing so fired at them: when
immediately their Men going out into the Canoas, set fire to their Ship, which
blew up, and burnt close by us; so that we were forced to cut our Cables in all
haste, and scamper away as well as we could.

The Spaniard was not altogether so politic in appointing to meet us at
Perico, for there we had Searoom; whereas had he come thus upon us at Tabago,
the Land-wind bearing hard upon us as it did, we must either have been burnt by
the Fireship, or upon loosing our Cables have been driven ashore: But I suppose
they chose Perico rather for the Scene of their Enterprise, partly because they
might there best sculk among the Islands, and partly because, if their Exploit
failed, they could thence escape best from our Canoas to Panama, but 2 leagues
off.

During this Exploit, Capt. Swan (whose Ship was less than ours, and so not so
much aimed at by the Spaniards) lay about a mile off, with a Canoa at the Buoy
of his Anchor, as fearing some Treachery from our pretended Merchant; and a
little before the Bark blew up, he saw a small Float on the Water, and, as it
appeared, a Man on it, making toward his Ship; but the Man dived, and
disappeared of a sudden, as thinking probably that he was discovered.

This was supposed to be one coming with some combustible Matter to have stuck
about the Rudder. For such a Trick Captain Sharp was served at Coquimbo, and
his Ship had like to have been burnt by it, if, by mere accident, it had not
been discovered: I was then aboard Captain Sharp's Ship. Captain Swan seeing
the Blaze by us, cut his Cables as we did, his Bark did the like; so we kept
under Sail all the Night, being more scared than hurt. The Bark that was on
Fire drove burning toward Tabago; but after the first blast she did not burn
clear, only made a smother, for she was not well made, though Capt. Bond had
the framing and management of it.

This Capt. Bond was he of whom I made mention in my 4th Chapter. He, after his
being at the Isles of Cape Verd, stood away for the South Seas, at the
instigation of one Richard Morton, who had been with Capt. Sharp in the South
Seas. In his way he met with Capt. Eaton, and they two consorted a day or two:
At last Morton went aboard Capt. Eaton, and persuaded him to lose Capt. Bond in
the Night, which Capt. Eaton did, Morton continuing aboard of Capt. Eaton, as
finding his the better Ship. Capt. Bond thus losing both his Consort Eaton, and
Morton his Pilot, and his Ship being but an ordinary Sailer, he despaired of
getting into the South Seas; and had played such tricks among the Caribbee
Isles, as I have been told, that he did not dare to appear at any of the
English Islands. Therefore he persuaded his Men to go to the Spaniards, and
they consented to do any thing that he should propose: So he presently steered
away into the West Indies, and the first place where he came to an Anchor was
at Portabel. He presently declared to the Governor, that there were English
Ships coming into the South Seas, and that if they questioned it, he offered to
be kept a Prisoner, till time should discover the truth of what he said; but
they believed him, and sent him away to Panama, where he was in great esteem.
This several Prisoners told us.

The Spaniards of Panama could not have fitted out their Fire-ship without this
Capt. Bond's assistance; for it is strange to say how grossly ignorant the
Spaniards in the West Indies, but especially in the South Seas, are of
Sea-affairs. They build indeed good Ships, but this is a small matter: for any
Ship of a good bottom will serve for these Seas on the South Coast. They rig
their Ships but untowardly, have no Guns, but in 3 or 4 of the King's Ships,
and are meanly furnished with Warlike Provisions, and much at a loss for the
making any Fireships or other less usual Machines. Nay, they have not the sense
to have their Guns run within the sides upon their discharge, but have
Platforms without for the Men to stand on to charge them; so that when we come
near we can fetch them down with small shot out of our Boats. A main reason of
this is, that the Native Spaniards are too proud to be Seamen, but use the
Indians for all those Offices: One Spaniard, it may be, going in the Ship to
command it, and himself of little more knowledge than those poor ignorant
Creatures: nor can they gain much Experience, seldom going far off to Sea, but
coasting along the Shores.

But to proceed: In the Morning when it was light we came again to an anchor
close by our Buoys, and strove to get our Anchors again; but our Buoy-Ropes
being rotten, broke. While we were puzling about our Anchors, we saw a great
many Canoas full of Men pass between Tabago and the other Island. This put us
into a new Consternation: We lay still some time, till we saw that they came
directly toward us, then we weighed and stood toward them: And when we came
within hale, we found that they were English and French Privateers come out of
the North Seas through the Isthmus of Darien. They were 280 Men in 28 Canoas;
200 of them French; the rest English. They were commanded by Capt. Gronet, and
Capt. Lequie. We presently came to an Anchor again, and all the Canoas came
aboard. These Men told us, that there were 180 English Men more, under the
command of Capt. Towneley, in the Country of Darien, making Canoas (as these
men had been) to bring them into these Seas. All the English men that came over
in this Party were immediately entertained by Capt. Davis and Capt Swan in
their own Ships; and the French men were ordered to have our Flower-Prize to
carry them, and Capt. Gronet, being the eldest Commander, was to command them
there; and thus they were all disposed of to their Hearts content. Capt.
Gronet, to retalliate this kindness, offered Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan, each
of them a new Commission from the Governor of Petit Guavres. It has been
usual for many years past, for the Governor of P. Cuavres to send blank
Commissions to Sea by many of his Captains, with orders to dispose of them to
whom they saw convenient. Those of Petit Guavres by this means making
themselves the Sanctuary and Asylum of all People of desperate Fortunes, and
increasing their own Wealth, and the Strength and Reputation of their Party
thereby. Capt. Davis accepted of one, having before only an old Commission,
which fell to him by Inheritance at the decease of Capt. Cook; who took it from
Capt. Tristian, together with his Bark, as is before mentioned. But Capt. Swan
refused it, saying, He had an Order from the Duke of York, neither to give
offense to the Spaniards, nor to receive any affront from them; and that he had
been injured by them at Baldivia, where they had killed some of his Men, and
wounded several more; so that he thought he had a lawful Commission of his own
to right himself. I never read any of these French Commissions while I was in
these Seas, nor did I then know the import of them; but I have learnt since,
that the Tenor of them is, to give a Liberty to Fish, Fowl, and Hunt. The
occasion of this is, that the Island Hispaniola, where the Garrison of
Petit-Guavres is, belongs partly to the French, and partly to the Spaniards;
and in time of Peace these Commissions are given as a Warrant to those of each
side to protect them from the adverse Party: But in effect the French do not
restrain them to Hispaniola, but make them a pretense for a general ravage in
any part of America by Sea or Land.

Having thus disposed of our Associates, we intended to sail toward the Gulf
of St. Michael, to seek Capt. Townley; who by this time we thought might be
entering into these Seas. Accordingly the second day of March, 1685, we sailed
from hence toward the Gulf of St. Michael. This Gulf lies near 30 leagues
from Panama, toward the S. E. The way thither from Panama is, to pass between
the Kings Islands and the Main. It is a place where many great Rivers having
finished their courses are swallowed up in the Sea. It is bounded on the S.
with Point Garachina, which lies in North lat. 6 d. 40 m. and on the North
side with Cape St. Lorenzo. Where by the way I must correct a gross error in
our common Maps; which giving no name at all to the South Cape, which yet is
the most considerable, and is the true Point Garachina; do give that name to
the North Cape, which is of small remark, only for those whose business is into
the Gulf: and the name St. Lorenzo, which is the true name of this Northern
Point, is by them wholly omitted; the name of the other Point being substituted
into its place. The chief Rivers which run into this Gulf of St. Michael, are
Santa Maria, Sambo, and Congos. The River Congos (which is the River I would
have persuaded our Men to have gone up, as their nearest way in our Journey
over Land, mentioned Chap. 1.) comes directly out of the Country, and swallows
up many small Streams that fall into it from both sides; and at last loses it
self on the North side of the Gulf, a league within Cape St. Lorenzo. It is not
very wide, but deep, and navigable some leagues within Land. There are Sands
without it; but a Channel for Ships. It Is not made use of by the Spaniards,
because of the neighborhood of Santa Maria River; where they have most
business on account of the Mines.

The River of Sambo seems to be a great River, for there is a grear tide at its
mouth; but I can say nothing more of it, having never been in it. This River
falls into the Sea on the South Side of the Gulf, near Point Garachina. Between
the Mouths of these 2 Rivers on either side, the Gulf runs in toward the Land
somewhat narrower, and makes 5 or 6 small Islands, which are clothed with
great Trees, green and flourishing all the year and good Channels between the
Islands. Beyond which, further in still, the shore on each side closes so near,
with 2 Points of low Mangrove Land, as to make a narrow or straight, scarce
half a mile wide. This serves as a mouth or entrance to the Inner-part of the
Gulf, which is a deep Bay 2 or 3 leagues over every way, and about the East End
thereof are the mouths of several Rivers, the chief of which is that of Santa
Maria. There are many Outlets or Creeks besides this narrow place I have
described, but none navigable beside that. For this reason the Spanish
Guard-Ship, mentioned in Chap 1. chose to lie between these two Points, as the
only Passage they could imagine we should attempt; since this is the way that
the Privateers have generally taken, as the nearest, between the North and
South Seas. The River of Santa Maria is the largest of all the Rivers of this
Gulf: It is navigable 8 or 9 leagues up, for so high the tide flows. Beyond
that place the River is divided into many Branches, which are only fit for
Canoas. The tide rises and falls in this River about 18 foot.

About 6 leagues from the Rivers mouth, on the South Side of it, the Spaniards
about 20 years ago, upon their first discovery of the Gold Mines here, built
the Town Santa Maria, of the same name with the River. This Town was taken by
Captain Coxen Captain Harris, and Captain Sharp, at their entrance into these
Seas; it being then but newly built. Since that time it is grown considerable;
for when Captain Harris, the Nephew of the former, took it (as is said in Chap.
6.) he found in it all sorts of Tradesmen, with a great deal of Flower, and
Wine, and abundance of Iron Crows and Pickaxes. These were Instruments for the
Slaves to work in the Gold Mines; for besides what Gold and Sand they take up
together, they often find greatlumps, wedged between the Rocks, as if it
naturally grew there. I have seen a lump as big as a Hens Egg, brought by
Captain Harris from thence, (who took 120 pound there) and he told me that
there were lumps a great deal bigger: but these they were forced to beat in
pieces that they might divide them. These lumps are not so solid, but that they
have crevises and pores full of Earth and Dust. This Town is not far from the
Mines, where the Spaniards keep a great many Slaves to work in the dry time of
the year; but in the rainy Season, when the Rivers do overflow, they cannot
work so well. Yet the Mines are so nigh the Mountains, that as the Rivers soon
rise, so they are soon down again; and presently after the rain is the best
searching for Gold in the Sands; for the violent rains do wash down the Gold
into the Rivers, where much of it settles to the bottom and remains. Then the
Native Indians who live hereabouts get most; and of them the Spaniards buy more
Gold than their Slaves get by working. I have been told that they get the value
of 5 Shillings a day, one with another. The Spaniards withdraw most of them
with their Slaves during the wet Season, to Panama. At this Town of St. Maria,
Captain Townley was lying with his Party, making Canoas, when Captain Gronet
came into the Seas; for it was then abandoned by the Spaniards.

There is another small new Town at the mouth of the River, called the
Scuchaderoes: It stands on the North side of the open place, at the mouth of
the River of St. Maria, where there is more air than at the Mines, or at Santa
Maria Town, where they are in a manner stifled with heat for want of air.

All about these Rivers, especially near the Sea, the Land is low, it is deep
black Earth, and the Trees it produces are extraordinary large and high. Thus
much concerning the Gulf of St. Michael, whither we were bound.

The second day of March, as is said before, we weighed from Perico, and the
same night we anchored again at Pacheque. The third day we sailed from thence,
steering toward the Gulf. Captain Swan undertook to fetch off Capt. Townley
and his Men: therefore he kept near the Main; but the rest of the Ships stood
nearer the Kings Islands. Captain Swan desired this Office, because he intended
to send Letters over-land by the Indians to Jamaica, which he did; ordering the
Indians to deliver his Letters to any English Vessel in the other Seas. At 2 a
clock we were again near the place where we cleaned our Ships. There we saw 2
Ships coming out, who proved to be Captain Townley and his Men. They were
coming out of the River in the night, and took 2 Barks bound for Panama: the
one was laden with Flower, the other with Wine, Brandy, Sugar, and Oil. The
Prisoners that he took declared, that the Lima Fleet was ready to sail. We went
and anchored among the Kings Islands, and the next day Captain Swan returned
out of the River of Santa Maria, being informed by the Indians, that Captain
Townley was come over to the Kings Islands. At this place Captain Townley put
out a great deal of his Goods to make room for his Men. He distributed his Wine
and Brandy, some to every Ship, that it might be drunk out, because he wanted
the Jars to carry Water in. The Spaniards in these Seas carry all their Wine,
Brandy and Oil, in Jars that hold 7 or 8 Gallons. When they lade at Pisco (a
place about 40 leagues to the Southward of Lima, and famous for Wine) they
bring nothing else but Jars of Wine, and they stow one tier on the top of
another so artificially, that we could hardly do the like without breaking
them: yet they often carry in this manner 1500 or 2000, or more, in a Ship, and
seldom break one. The 10th day we took a small Bark that came from Guiaquil:
she had nothing in her but Ballast. The 12th day there came an Indian Canoa out
of the River of Santa Maria, and told us, that there were 300 English and
French men more coming over-land from the North-Seas. The 15th day we met a
Bark, with 5 or 6 English men in her, that belonged to Captain Knight, who had
been in the South Seas 5 or 6 Months, and was now on the Mexican Coast. There
he had spied this Bark; but not being able to come up with her in his Ship, he
detached these 5 or 6 Men in a Canoa, who took her, but when they had done
could not recover their own Ship again, losing company with her in the night;
and therefore they came into the Bay of Panama, intending to go over-land back
into the North Seas, but that they luckily met with us: for the Isthmus of
Darien was now become a common Road for Privateers to pass between the North
and South Seas at their pleasure. This Bark of Captain Knight's had in her 40
or 50 Jars of Brandy: she was now commanded by Mr. Henry More; but Captain Swan
intending to promote Captain Harris, caused Mr. More to be turned out,
alleging, that it was very likely these Men were run away from their
Commander. Mr. More willingly resigned her, and went aboard of Captain Swan,
and became one of his Men.

It was now the latter end of the dry Season here; and the Water at the Kings
or Pearl Islands, of which there was plenty when we first came hither, was now
dried away. Therefore we were forced to go to Point Garachina, thinking to
Water our Ships there. Captain Harris being now Commander of the new Bark, was
sent into the River of Santa Maria, to see for those Men that the Indians told
us of, whilst the rest of the Ships sailed toward Point Garachina; where we
arrived the 21st day, and anchored 2 mile from the Point, and found a strong
Tide running out of the River Sambo. The next day we run within the Point, and
anchored in 4 fathom at low Water. The Tide rises here 8 or 9 foot: the Flood
sets N. N. E. the Ebb S. S. W. The Indians that inhabit in the River Sambo came
to us in Canoas, and brought Plantains and Bonanoes. They could not speak nor
understand Spanish; therefore I believe they have no Commerce with the
Spaniards. We found no fresh Water here neither; so we went from hence to
Porto-Pinas, which is 7 leagues S. by W. from hence.

Porto-Pinas lies in lat. 7 d. North. It is so called, because there are many
Pine-trees growing there. The Land is pretty high, rising gently as it runs
into the Country. This Country near the Sea is all covered with pretty high
Woods: the Land that bounds the Harbor is low in the middle, but high and rocky
on both sides. At the mouth of the Harbor there are 2 small high Islands, or
rather barren Rocks. The Spaniards in their Pilot Books commend this for a good
Harbor; but it lies all open to the S. W. Winds, which frequently blow here in
the wet Season: beside, the Harbor within the Islands is a place of but small
extent, and has a very narrow going in; what depth of Water there is in the
Harbor I know not.

The 25th day we arrived at this Harbor of Pines, but did not go in with our
Ship, finding it but an ordinary place to lie at. We sent in our Boats to
search it, and they found a stream of good Water running into the Sea; but
there were such great swelling Surges came into the Harbor, that we could not
conveniently fill our Water there. The 26th day we returned to Point Garachina
again. In our way we took a small Vessel laden with Cacao: she came from
Guiaquil. The 29th day we arrived at Point Garachina: There we found Captain
Harris, who had been in the River of Santa Maria; but he did not meet the Men
that he went for. Yet we was informed again by the Indians, that they were
making Canoas in one of the branches of the River of Santa Maria Here we shared
our Cacao lately taken.

Because we could not fill our water here, we designed to go to Tabago again,
where we were sure to be supplied. Accordingly, on the 30th day we set sail,
being now 9 Ships in company; and had a small wind at S. S. E. The first day of
April, being in the Channel between the Kings Islands and the Main, we had much
Thunder, Lightning, and some Rain: This Evening we anchored at the Island
Pacheque, and immediately sent 4 Canoas before us to the Island Tabago to take
some Prisoners for information, and we followed the next day. The 3d day in the
evening we anchored by Perica, and the next morning went to Tabago: where we
found our 4 Canoas. They arrived there in the night, and took a Canoa that came
(as is usual) from Panama for Plantains. There were in the Canoa 4 Indians and
a Mulata. The Mulata, because he said he was in the Fireship that came to burn
us in the night, was immediately hanged. These Prisoners confirmed, that one
Capt. Bond, an English Man, did command her.

Here we filled our Water, and cut Firewood; and from hence we sent 4 Canoas
over to the Main, with one of the Indians lately taken to guide them to a
Sugar-work: for, now we had Cacao, we wanted Sugar to make Chocolate. But the
chiefest of their business was to get Coppers, for each Ship having now so many
Men, our Pots would not boil Victuals fast enough, though we kept them boiling
all the day. About 2 or 3 days after they returned aboard with 3 Coppers.

While we lay here Captain Davis his Bark went to the Island Otoque. This is
another inhabited Island in the Bay of Panama; not so big as Tabago, yet there
are good Plantain-walks on it, and some Negroes to look after them. These
Negroes rear Fowls and Hogs for their Masters, who live at Panama, as at the
Kings Islands. It was for some Fowls or Hogs that our Men went thither; but by
accident they met also with an Express, that was sent to Panama with an
account, that the Lima Fleet was at Sea. Most of the Letters were thrown
overboard and lost; yet we found some that said positively, that the Fleet was
coming with all the strength that they could make in the Kingdom of Peru; yet
were ordered not to fight us, except they were forced to it: (though afterward
they chose to fight us, having first landed their Treasure at Lavelia) and that
the Pilots of Lima had been in consultation what course to steer to miss us.

For the satisfaction of those who may be curious to know, I have here inserted
the Resolutions taken by the Committee of Pilots, as one of our company
translated them out of the Spanish of two of the Letters we took. The first
Letter as follows. SIR,
HAving been with his Excellency, and heard the Letter of Captain. Michael
Sanches de Tena read; wherein he says, there should be a meeting of the Pilots
of Panama in the said City, they say it is not time, putting for objection the
Gallapagoes; to which I answered, That it was fear of the Enemy, and that they
might well go that way. I told this to his Excellency, who was pleased to
command me to write the Course, which is as follows.

The day for sailing being come, go forth to the West South West; from that to
the West till you are forty leagues off at Sea, then keep at the same distance
to the N. W. till you come under the Line: from whence the Pilot must shape his
Course for Moro de Porco, and for the Coast of Lavelia and Natta: where you may
speak with the People, and according to the Information they give, you may keep
the same Course for Otoque, from thence to Tabago, and so to Panama; This is
what offers as to the Course.




The Letter is obscure: But the Reader must make what he can of it. The
Directions in the other Letter were to this effect. THE surest Course to be
observed going forth from Malabrigo, is thus: You must sail W. by S. that you
may avoid the sight of the Islands of Lobos; and if you should chance to see
them, by reason of the Breezes, and should fall to Leward of the Lat. of
Malabrigo, keep on a Wind as near as you can, and if necessary, go about and
stand in for the shore: then tack and stand off, and be sure keep your
Latitude; and when you are 40 leagues to the Westward of the Island Lobos, keep
that distance till you come under the Line; and then, if the general Wind
follows you farther, you must sail N. N. E. till you come into 3 degrees North.
And if in this Lat. you should find the breezes, make it your business to keep
the Coast, and so sail for Panama. If in your course you should come in sight
of the Land before you are abrest of Cape St. Francisco, be sure to stretch off
again out of sight of Land that you may not be discovered by the Enemy.




The last Letter supposes the Fleet's setting out from Malabrigo, in about 8
degrees. South Lat. (as the other does its going immediately from Lima, 4 degrees.
further South) and from hence is that Caution given of avoiding Lobos, as near
Malabrigo, in their usual way to Panama, ahd hardly to be kept out of sight, as
the Winds are thereabouts: yet to be avoided by the Spanish Fleet at this time,
because as they had twice before heard of the Privateers lying at Lobos de la
Mar, they knew not but at that time we might be there in expectation of them.

The 10th day we sailed from Tabago toward the Kings Island again, because our
Pilots told us, that the King's Ships did always come this way. The 11th day we
anchored at the place where we careen'd. Here we found Captain Harris, who had
gone a second time into the River of Santa Maria, and fetched the body of Men
that last came over Land, as the Indians had informed us: but they fell short
of the number they told us of. The 29th day we sent 250 Men in 15 Canoas to the
River Cheapo, to take the Town of Cheapo. The 21st day all our Ships, but
Captain Harris, who staid to clean his Ships, followed after. The 22d day we
arrived at the Island Chepelio.

Chepelio is the pleasantest Island in the Bay of Panama: It is but 7 Leagues
from the City of Panama, and a League from the Main. This Island is about 2
mile long, and almost so broad; it is low on the North-side, and rises by a
small ascent toward the South Side. The Soil is yellow, a kind of Clay. The
high side is stony; the low Land is planted with all sorts of delicate Fruits,
viz. Sapadilloes, Avogato-pears, Mammees, Mammee-Sappota's, Star-apples, etc.
The middle of the Island is planted with Plantain-Trees, which are not very
large, but the Fruit extraordinary sweet.

The Sapadillo-tree is as big as a large Pear Tree, the Fruit much like to a
Bergoma-pear, both in color, shape and size; but on some Trees the Fruit is a
little longer. When it is green or first gathered, the Juice is white and
clammy, and it will stick like glue; then the Fruit is hard; but after it has
been gathered 2 or 3 days, it grows soft and juicy, and then the Juice is clear
as Spring Water, and very sweet; in the midst of the Fruit are 2 or 3 black
Stones or Seeds, about the bigness of a Pumkinseed: This is an excellent Fruit.

The Avogato Pear Tree is as big as most Pear Trees, and is commonly pretty
high; the Skin or Bark black, and pretty smooth; the Leaves large, of an oval
shape, and the Fruit as big as a large Limon. It is of a green color till it
is ripe, and then it is a little yellowish. They are seldom fit to eat till
they have been gathered 2 or 3 days; then they become soft, and the Skin or
Rind will peel off. The substance in the inside is green, or a little
yellowish, and as soft as Butter. Within the substance there is a Stone as big
as a Horse-Plumb. This Fruit has no taste of it self, and therefore it is
usually mixed with Sugar and Lime-juice, and beaten together in a Plate; and
this is an excellent Dish. The ordinary way is to eat it with a little Salt and
a roasted Plantain; and thus a Man that is hungry, may make a good Meal of it.
It is very wholesome eaten any way. It is reported that this Fruit provokes to
Lust, and therefore is said to be much esteemed by the Spaniards: and I do
believe they are much esteemed by them, for I have met with plenty of them in
many places in the North-Seas, where the Spaniards are settled, as in the Bay
of Campeachy, on the Coast of Cartagena; and the Coast of Caraccos; and there
are some in Jamaica, which were planted by the Spaniards when they possessed
that Island.

The Mammee-Sappota-Tree is different from the Mammee described at the Island
Tabago in this Chapter. It is not so big or so tall, neither is the Fruit so
big or so round. The Rind of the Fruit is thin and brittle; the inside is a
deep red, and it has a rough flat long Stone. This is accounted the principal
Fruit of the West Indies. It is very pleasant and wholesome. I have not seen
any of these on Jamaica; but in many places in the West Indies among the
Spaniards. There is another sort of Mammee-tree, which is called the wild
Mammee: This bears a Fruit which is of no value, but the Tree is straight,
tall, and very tough, and therefore principally used for making Masts.

The Star-Apple-tree grows much like the Quince-Tree, but much bigger. It is
full of Leaves, and the Leaf is broad, of an oval shape, and of a very dark
green color. The Fruit is as big as a large Apple, which is commonly so
covered with Leaves, that a Man can hardly see it. They say this is a good
Fruit; I did never taste any, but have seen both of the Trees and Fruit in many
place on the Main, on the North-side of the Continent, and in Jamaica. When the
Spaniards possessed that Island, they planted this and other sorts of Fruit, as
the Sapadillo, Avogato-Pear, and the like; and of these Fruits there is still
in Jamaica in those Plantations that were first settled by the Spaniards, as at
the Angels, at 7 Mile Walk, and 16 Mile Walk. There I have seen these Trees
which were planted by the Spaniards, but I did never see any Improvement made
by the English, who seem in that little curious. The Road for Ships is on the
North-side, where there is good anchoring half a mile from the shore. There is
a Well close by the Sea on the North side, and formerly there were 3 or 4
Houses close by it, but now they are destroyed. This Island stands right
against the mouth of the River Cheapo.

The River Cheapo springs out of the Mountains near the North side of the
Country, and it being penned up on the South side by other Mountains, bends its
course to the Westward between both, till finding a passage on the S. W. it
makes a kind of a half circle; and being swelled to a considerable bigness, it
runs with a slow motion into the Sea, 7 leagues from Panama. This River is very
deep and about a quarter of a mile broad; but the mouth of it is choked up
with Sands, so that no Ships can enter, but Barks may. There is a small Spanish
Town of the same name within 6 Leagues of the Sea: it stands on the left hand
going from the Sea. This is it which I said Captain La Sound attempted. The
Land about it is champion, with many small Hills clothed with Woods; but the
biggest part of the Country is Savannah. On the South Side of the River it is
all Woodland for many leagues together. It was to this Town that our 250 Men
were sent. The 24th day they returned out of the River, having taken the Town
without any opposition: but they found nothing in it. By the way going thither
they took a Canoa, but most of the Men escaped ashore upon one of the Kings
Islands: She was sent out well appointed with armed Men to watch our motion.
The 25th day Captain Harris came to us, having cleaned his Ship. The 26th day
we went again toward Tabago; our Fleet now, upon Captain Harris joining us
again, consisted of 10 Sail. We arrived at Tabago the 28th day: there our
Prisoners were examined concerning the strength of Panama; for now we thought
our selves strong enough for such an Enterprise, being near 1000 Men. Out of
these on occasion, we could have landed 900: but our Prisoners gave us small
Enconragement to it, for they assured us, that all the strength of the Country
was there, and that many Men were come from Portobel, besides its own
Inhabitants, who of themselves were more in number than we. These reasons,
together with the strength of the place (which has a high Wall) deterred us
from attempting it. While we lay here at Tabago, some of our Men burnt the Town
on the Island.

The 4th of May we sailed hence again bound for the Kings Islands, and there we
continued cruising from one end of these Islands to the other: till on the 22d
day, Capt. Davis and Capt. Gronet, went to Pacheque, leaving the rest of the
Fleet at anchor at St. Paul's Island. From Pacheque we sent 2 Canoas to the
Island Chepelio, in hopes to get a Prisoner there. The 25th day our Canoas
returned from Chepelio, with three Prisoners which they took there: They were
Seamen belonging to Panama, who said that Provision was so scarce and dear
there, that the poor were almost starved; being hindered by us from those common
and daily supplies of Plantains, which they did formerly enjoy from the
Islands; especially from those two of Chepelia and Tabago. That the President
of Panama had strictly ordered, that none should adventure to any of the
Islands for Plantains; but necessity had obliged them to trespass against the
President's Order. They farther reported, that the Fleet from Lima was expected
every day; for it was generally talked that they were come from Lima: and that
the report at Panama was, that King Charles II. of England was dead, and that
the Duke of York was crowned King. The 27th day Capt. Swan and Capt. Townley,
also came to Pacheque, where we lay, but Captain Swan's Bark was gone in among
the Kings Islands for Plantains. The Island Pacheque, as I have before related,
is the Northermost of the Kings Islands. It is a small low Island about a
League round. On the South Side of it there are 2 or 3 small Islands, neither
of them half a mile round. Between Pacheque and these Islands is a small
Channel not above 6 or 7 paces wide, and about a Mile long. Through this
Captain Townley made a bold run, being pressed hard by the Spaniards in the fight
I am going to speak of, though he was ignorant whether there was a sufficient
depth of Water or not. On the East Side of this Channel all our Fleet lay
waiting for the Lima Fleet, which we were in hopes would come this way.

The 28th day we had a very wet morning, for the Rains were come in, as they do
usually in May, or June, sooner or later; so that May is here a very uncertain
month. Hitherto, till within a few days we had good fair weather, and the Wind
at N. N. E. but now the weather was altered, and the Wind at S. S. W.

However about eleven a Clock it cleared up, and we saw the Spanish Fleet about
3 leagues W. N. W. from the Island Pacheque, standing close on a Wind to the
Eastward; but they could not fetch the Island by a league. We were riding a
league S. E. from the Island, between it and the Main; only Captain Gronet was
about a mile to the Northward of us near the Island; he weighed so soon as they
came in sight, and stood over for the Main; and we lay still expecting when he
would tack and come to us: but he took care to keep himself out of harms way.

Captain Swan and Townley came aboard of Captain Davis to order how to engage
the Enemy, who we saw came purposely to fight us, they being in all 14 Sail,
besides Periagoes, rowing with 12 and 14 Oars apiece. Six Sail of them were
Ships of good force: first the Admiral 48 Guns, 450 Men; the Vice Admiral 40
Guns, 400 Men; the Rear-Admiral 36 Guns, 360 Men; a Ship of 24 Guns, 300 Men;
one of 18 Guns, 250 Men; and one of eight Guns, 200 Men; 2 great Fireships, 6
Ships only with small Arms, having 800 Men on board them all; besides 2 or 3
hundred Men in Periagoes. This Account of their Strength we had afterward from
Captain Knight, who being to the Windward on the Coast of Pern, took Prisoners,
of whom he had this Information, being what they brought from Lima. Besides
these Men, they had also some hundreds of Old Spain Men that came from Portobe^
and met them at Lavelia, from whence they now came: and their Strength of Men
from Lima wa^ 3000 Men, being all the strength they could mak^ in that Kingdom;
and for greater Security, they had first landed their Treasure at Lavelia.

Our Fleet consisted of 10 Sail: first Captain Davis 36 Guns, 156 Men, most
English; Captain Swan 16 Guns, 140 Men all English: These were the only Ships
of force that we had; the rest having none but small Arms. Captain Townley had
110 Men, all English. Captain Gronet 308 Men, all French. Captain Harris 100
Men, most English. Captain Branly 36 Men, some English some French. Davis his
Tender 8 Men; Swan's Tender 8 Men; Townley's Bark 80 Men; and a small Bark of
thirty Tuns made a Fireship, with a Canoas Crew in her. We had in all 960 Men.
But Captain Gronet came not to us till all was over, yet we were not
discouraged at it, but resolved to fight them; for being to Windward of the
Enemy, we had it at our choice, whether we would fight or not. It was 3 a Clock
in the afternoon when we weighed, and being all under sail, we bore down right
before the wind on our Enemies, who kept close on a Wind to come to us; but
night came on without any thing, beside the exchanging of a few shot on each
side. When it grew dark the Spanish Admiral put out a light, as a signal for
his Fleet to come to an Anchor. We saw the light in the Admirals top, which
continued about half an hour, and then it was taken down. In a short time after
we saw the light again, and being to Windward we kept under sail, supposing the
light had been in the Admirals top; but as it proved, this was only a stratagem
of theirs; for this light was put out the second time at one of their Barks
Topmast-head, and then she was sent to Leeward; which deceived us: for we
thought still the Light was in the Admiral's Top, and by that means thought our
selves to windward of them.

In the Morning therefore, contrary to our expectation, we found they had got
the Weather-gage of us, and were coming upon us with full Sail; so we ran for
it, and after a running Fight all day, and having taken a turn almost round the
Bay of Panama, we came to an Anchor again at the Isle of Pacheque, in the very
same place from whence we set out in the Morning.

Thus ended this days Work, and with it all that we had been projecting for 5
or 6 Months; when instead of making our selves Masters of the Spanish Fleet and
Treasure, we were glad to escape them; and owed that too, in a great measure to
their want of Courage to pursue their Advantage.

The 30th day in the Morning when we looked out we saw the Spanish Fleet all
together 3 leagues to Leeward of us at an Anchor. It was but little Wind till
10 a Clock, and then sprung up a small Breeze at South, and the Spanish Fleet
went away to Panama. What loss they had I know not; we lost but one Man: And
having held a Consult, we resolved to go to the Keys of Quibo or Cohaya, to
seek Capt. Harris, who was forced away from us in the Fight; that being the
place appointed for our Rendezvous upon any such Accident. As for Gronet, he
said his Men would not suffer him to join us in the Fight: But we were not
satisfied with that excuse; so we suffered him to go with us to the Isles of
Quiboa, and there cashiered our cowardly Companion. Some were for taking from
him the Ship which we had given him: But at length he was suffered to keep it
with his Men, and we sent them away in it to some other place.

CHAP. VIII.
They set out from Tabago. Isle of Church. The Mountain called Moro de Porcos.
The Coast to the Westward of the Bay of Panama. Isles of Quibo, Quicaro,
Rancheria. The Palma-Maria-tree. The Isles Canales and Cantarras. They build
Canoas for a new Expedition; and take Puebla Nova. Captain Knight joins them.
Canoas how made. The Coast and Winds between Quibo and Nicoya. Volcan Vejo
again. Tornadoes, and the Sea rough. Ria Lexa Harbor. The City of Leon taken
and burnt. Ria Lexa Creek; the Town and Commodities; the Guava-Fruit, and
Prickle-Pear: A Ransom paid honorably upon Parole: The Town burnt. Captain
Davis and others go off for the South Coast. A contagious Sickness at Ria Lexa.
Terrible Tornadoes. The Volcan of Guatimala; the rich Commodities of that
Country, Indico, Otta or Anatta. Cochineel, Silvester. Drift Wood, and
Pumice-Stones. The Coast further on the North-west. Capt. Townley's fruitless
Expedition toward Tecoantepeque. The Island Tangola, and Neighboring
Continent. Guatulco Port. The Buffadore, or Waterspout. Ruins of Guatulco
Village. The Coast adjoining. Capt. Townley marches to the River Capalita.
Turtle at Guatulco. An Indian Settlement. The Vinello Plant and Fruit.

ACcording to the Resolutions we had taken, we set out June the first, 1685,
passing between Point Garachina and the Kings Islands. The Wind was ot S. S. W.
rainy Weather, with Tornadoes of Thunder and Lightning. The 3d day we passed by
the Island Chuche, the last remainder of the Isles in the Bay of Panama. This
is a small, low, round, woody Island, uninhabited; lying 4 leagues S. S. W.
from Pacheca.

In our passage to Quibo. Captain Branly lost his Mainmast; therefore he and
all his Men left his Bark, and came aboard Captain Davis his Ship. Captain Swan
also sprung his Main-top-Mast, and got up another; but while he was doing it,
and we were making the best of our way, we lost sight of him, and were now on
the North side of the Bay; for this way all Ships must pass from Panama,
whether bound toward the Coast of Mexico or Peru. The 10th day we passed by
Moro de Porcos, or the Mountain of Hogs. Why so called, I know not: It is a
high round Hill on the Coast of Lavelia.

This side of the Bay of Panama runs out Westerly to the Islands of Quibo;
there are on this Coast many Rivers and Creeks, but none so large as those on
the South side of the Bay. It is a Coast that is partly mountainous, partly low
Land, and very thick of Woods bordering on the Sea; but a few leagues within
Land it consists mostly of Savannahs, which are stocked with Bulls and Cows The
Rivers on this side are not wholly destitute of Gold, though not so rich as the
Rivers on the other side of the Bay. The Coast is but thinly inhabited, for
except the Rivers that lead up to the Towns of Nata and Lavelia, I know of no
other Settlement between Panama and Puebla Nova. The Spaniards may travel by
Land from Panama through all the Kingdom of Mexico, as being full of Savannahs;
but toward the Coast of Peru they cannot pass further than the River Cheapo:
the Land there being so full of thick Woods, and watered with so many great
Rivers, besides less Rivers and Creeks, that the Indians themselves, who
inhabit there, cannot travel far without much trouble.

We met with very wet weather in our Voyage to Quibo; and with S. S. W. and
sometimes S. W. Winds, which retarded our Course. It was the 15th day of June
when we arrived at Quibo, and found there Captain Harris, whom we sought. The
Island Quibo, or Cobaya, is in lat. 7 d. 14 m. North of the Equator. It is
about 6 or 7 leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad. The land is low, except only near
the N. E. end. It is all over plentifully stored with great tall flourishing
Trees of many sorts; and there is good Water on the East and North-East sides
of the Island. Here are some Deer, and plenty of pretty large black Monkies,
whose Flesh is sweet, and wholesome: besides a few Guanoes, and some Snakes. I
know no other sort of Land Animal on the Island. There is a shole runs out from
the S E. point of the Island, half a mile into the Sea; and a league to the
North of this shole point, on the East side, there is a rock about a mile from
the shore, which at the last quarter ebb appears above Water. Besides these two
places, there is no danger on this side, but Ships may run within a quarter of
a mile of the shore, and Anchor in 6, 8, 10, or 12 fathom, good clean Sand and
Oaze.

There are many other Islands, lying some on the S. W. side, others on the N.
and N. E. sides of this Island; as the Island Quicaro, which is a pretty large
Island S. W. of Quibo, and on the North of it is a small Island called the
Rancheria; on which Island are plenty of Palma-Maria Trees. The Palma-Maria is
a tall straight bodied Tree, with a small Head, but very unlike the Palm Tree,
notwithstanding the Name. It is greatly esteemed for making Masts, being very
tongh, as well as of a good length; for the grain of the Wood runs not straight
along it, but twisting gardually about it. These Trees grow in many places of
the West Indies, and are frequently used both by the English and Spaniards
there for that use. The Islands Canales and Cantarras, are small Islands lying
on the N. E. of Rancheria. These have all Channels to pass between, and good
Anchoring about them; and they are as well stored with Trees and Water as
Quibo. Sailing without them all, they appear to be part of the Main. The Island
Quibo is the largest and most noted; for although the rest have Names, yet they
are seldom used only for distinction sake: these, and the rest of this knot,
passing all under the common name of the Keys of Quibo. Captain Swan gave to
several of these Islands, the Names of those English Merchants and Gentlemen
who were Owners of his Ship.

June 16th. Captain Swan came to an Anchor by us: and then our Captains
consulted about new methods to advance their Fortunes: and because they were
now out of hopes to get any thing at Sea, they resolved to try what the Land
would afford. They demanded of our Pilots, what Towns on the Coast of Mexico
they could carry us to. The City of Leon being the chiefest in the Country (any
thing near us) though a pretty way within Land, was pitched on. But now we
wanted Canoas to Land our Men, and we had no other way but to cut down Trees,
and make as many as we had occasion for, these Islands affording plenty of
large Trees fit for our purpose. While this was doing, we sent 150 Men to take
Puebla Nova (a Town upon the Main near the innermost of these Islands) to get
Provision: It was in going to take this Town that Captain Sawkins was killed,
in the year 1680. who was succeeded by Sharp. Our Men took the Town with much
ease, although there was more strength of Men than when Captain Sawkins was
killed. They returned again the 24th day, but got no Provision there. They took
an empty Bark in their way, and brought her to us.

The 5th day of July Captain Knight, mentioned in my last Chapter, came to us.
He had been cruising a great way to the Westward, but got nothing beside a good
Ship. At last, he went to the Southward, as high as the Bay of Guiaquil, where
he took a Bark-log, or pair of Bark-logs as we call it, laden chiefly with
Flower. She had other goods, as Wine, Oil, Brandy, Sugar, Soap, and Leather of
Goat Skins; and he took out as much of each as he had occasion for, and then
turned her away again. The Master of the Float told him, that the Kings Ships
were gone from Lima toward Panama: that they carried but half the Kings
Treasure with them, for fear of us, although they had all the strength that the
Kingdom could afford: that all the Merchants Ships which should have gone with
them were laden and lying at Payta, where they were to wait for further Orders.
Captain Knight having but few Men, did not dare to go to Payta, where, if he
had been better provided, he might have taken them all; but he made the best of
his way into the Bay of Panama, in hopes to find us there enriched with the
Spoils of the Lima Fleet; but coming to the Kings Islands, he had advice by a
Prisoner, that we had engaged with their Fleet, but were worsted, and since
that made our way to the Westward; and therefore he came hither to seek us. He
presently consorted with us, and set his Men to work to make Canoas. Every
Ships company made for themselves, but we all helped each other to launch them;
for some were made a mile from the Sea.

The manner of making a Canoa is, after cutting down a large long Tree, and
squaring the uppermost side, and then turning it upon the flat side, to shape
the opposite side for the bottom. Then again they turn her, and dig the inside;
boring also three holes in the bottom, one before, one in the middle, and one
abast, thereby to gage the thickest of the bottom; for otherwise we might cut
the bottom thinner than is convenient. We left the bottoms commonly about 3
Inches thick, and the sides 2 Inches thick below, and one and an half at the
top. One or both of the ends we sharpen to a point.

Capt. Davis made two very large Canoas, one was 36 foot long, and 5 or 6 feet
wide; the other 32 foot long, and near as wide as the other. In a Months time
we finished our Business and were ready to sail. Here Capt. Harris went to lay
his Ship a-ground to clean her, but she being old and rotten fell in pieces:
And therefore he and all his Men went aboard of Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan.
While we lay here we struck Turtle every day, for they were now very plentiful:
But from August to March here are not many. The 18th day of July, John Rose, a
Frenchman, and 14 Men more belonging to Capt. Gronet, having made a new Canoa,
came in her to Capt. Davis, and desired to serve under him; and Capt. Davis
accepted of them, because they had a Canoa of their own.

The 20th day of July we sailed from Quibo, bending our course for Ria Lexa,
which is the Port for Leon, the City that we now designed to attempt. We were
now 640 Men in 8 Sail of Ships, commanded by Capt. Davis, Capt. Swan, Capt.
Townley and Capt. Knight, with a Fireship and three Tenders, which last had not
a constant Crew. We past out between the River Quibo and the Rancheria, leaving
Quibo and Quicaro on our Larboard side, and the Rancheria, with the rest of the
Islands, and the Main on our Starboard side. The Wind at first was at South
South West: We coasted along shore, passing by the Gulf of Nicoya, the Gulf of
Dulce, and by the Island Caneo. All this Coast is low Land overgrown with thick
Woods, and there are but few inhabitants near the shore. As we sailed to the
Westward we had variable Winds, sometimes S. W. and at W. S. W. and sometimes
at E. N. E. but we had them most commonly at S. W. we had a Tornado or two
every day, and in the Evening or in the Night, we had Land-winds at N. N. E.

The 8th day of August, being in the lat. of 11 d. 20 m. by my observation, we
saw a high Hill in the Country, towering up like a Sugar Loaf, which bore N. E.
by N. We supposed it to be Volcan Vejo, by the smoke which ascended from its
top; therefore we steered in North and made it plainer, and then knew it to be
that Volcan, which is the Sea-mark for the Harbor for Ria Lexa; for, as I said
before in Chapter the 5th, it is a very remarkable Mountain. When we had
brought this Mountain to bear N. E. we got out all our Canoas, and provided to
embark into them the next day.

The 9th day in the Morning, being about 8 leagues from the shore, we left our
Ships under the charge of a few Men, and 520 of us went away in 31 Canoas,
towing toward the Harbor of Ria Lexa. We had fair Weather and little Wind
till 2 a Clock in the Afternoon, then we had a Tornado from the shore, with
much Thunder, Lightning and Rain, and such a gust of Wind, that we were all
like to be foundred. In this extremity we put right before the Wind, every
Canoas crew making what shift they could to avoid the Threatening Danger. The
small Canoas being most light and buoyant, mounted nimbly over the Surges, but
the great heavy Canoas lay like Logs in the Sea, ready to be swallowed by every
foaming Billow. Some of our Canoas were half full of Water, yet kept two Men
constantly heaving it out. The fierceness of the Wind continued about half an
hour, and abated by degrees; and as the Wind died away, so the fury of the Sea
abated: For in all hot Countries as I have observed, the Sea is soon raised by
the Wind, and as soon down again when the Wind is gone, and therefore it is a
Proverb among the Seamen, Up Wind, up Sea, Down Wind, down Sea. At 7 a clock in
the Evening it was quiet calm, and the Sea as smooth as a Mill-pond. Then we
tugged to get into the Shore, but finding we could not do it before Day, we
rowed off again to keep our selves out of sight. By that time it was day, we
were 5 Leagues from the Land, which we thought was far enough off Shore. Here
we intended to lie till the Evening, but at 3 a clock in the Afternoon we had
another Tornado, more fierce than that which we had the day before. This put us
in greater peril of our Lives, but did not last so long. As soon as the
violence of the Tornado was over, we rowed in for the shore, and entered the
Harbor in the Night: The Creek which leads toward Leon, lies on the S. E.
side of the Harbor. Our Pilot being very well acquainted here, carried us into
the Mouth of it, but could carry us no farther till day, because it is but a
small Creek, and there are other Creeks like it. The next Morning, as soon as it
was light, we rowed into the Creek, which is very narrow; the Land on both
sides lying so low, that every Tide it is overflown with the Sea. This sort of
Land produces red Mangrove-Trees, which are here so plentiful and thick, that
there is no passing through them. Beyond these Mangroves, on the firm Land, close
by the side of the River, the Spaniards have built a Brestwork, purposely to
hinder an Enemy from the landing. When we came in sight of the Brestwork, we
rowed as fast as we could to get ashore: The noise of our Oars allarmed the
Indians who were set to watch, and presently they ran away toward the City of
Leon, to give notice of our approach. We landed as soon as we could, and
marched after them: 470 Men were drawn out to march to the Town, and I was left
with 59 Men more to stay and guard the Canoas till their return.

The City of Leon is 20 Mile up in the Country: The way to it plain and even,
through a Champion Country of long grassy Savannahs, and spots of high Woods.
About 5 Mile from the Landing-place there is a Sugar-work, 3 Mile farther there
is another, and 2 Mile beyond that, there is a fine River to ford, which is not
very deep, besides which, there is no Water in all the way, till you come to an
Indian Town, which is 2 Mile before you come to the City, and from thence it is
a pleasant straight sandy way to Leon. This City stands in a Plain not far from
a high pecked Mountain, which oftentimes casts forth fire and smoke from its
top. It may be seen at Sea, and it is called the Volcan of Leon. The Houses of
Leon are not high built, but strong and large, with Gardens about them. The
Walls are Stone, and the Covering of Pan-tile: There are 3 Churches and a
Cathedral, which is the head Church in these parts. Our Countryman Mr. Gage,
who traveled in these Parts, recommends it to the World as the pleasantest
place in all America, and calls it the Paradise of the Indies. Indeed if we
consider the Advantage of its Situation, we may find it surpassing most places
for Health and Pleasure in America; for the Country about it is of a sandy
Soil, which soon drinks up all the Rain that falls, to which these parts are
much subject. It is encompassed with Savannahs; so that they have the benefit
of the Breezes coming from any Quarter; all which makes it a very healthy
place. It is a place of no great trade, and therefore not rich in Money. Their
Wealth lies in their Pastures, and Cattle, and Plantations of Sugar. It is said
that they make Cordage here of Hemp; but if they have any such Manufactory, it
is at some distance from the Town, for here is no sign of any such thing.

Thither our Men were now marching; they went from the Canoas about 8 a clock.
Captain Townley, with 80 of the briskest Men, marched before, Captain Swan with
100 Men marched next, and Captain Davis with 170 Men marched next, and Captain
Knight brought up the Rear. Captain Townley, who was near 2 mile a head of the
rest, met about 70 Horsemen 4 mile before he came to the City, but they never
stood him. About 3 a clock Captain Townley, only with his 80 Men, entered the
Town, and was briskly charged in a broad Street, with 170 or 200 Spanish
Horsemen, but 2 or 3 of their Leaders being knocked down, the rest fled. Their
Foot consisted of about 500 Men, which were drawn up in the Parade; for the
Spaniards in these parts make a large Square in every Town, though the Town it
self be small. The Square is called the Parade: commonly the Church makes one
side of it, and the Gentlemen's Houses with their Galleries about them, the
other. But the Foot also seeing their Horse retire, left an empty City to
Captain Townley, beginning to save themselves by flight. Captain Swan came in
about 4 a clock. Captain Davis with his Men about 5, and Captain Knight, with
as many Men as he could encourage to march, came in about 6, but he left many
Men tired on the Road; these, as is usual, came dropping in one or two at a
time, as they were able. The next morning the Spaniards killed one of our tired
Men: he was a stout old Grey-headed Man, aged about 84, who had served under
Oliver in the time of the Irish Rebellion; after which he was at Jamaica, and
had followed Privateering ever since. He would not accept of the offer our Men
made him to tarry ashore, but said he would venture as far as the best of them:
and when surrounded by the Spaniards, he refused to take Quarter, but
discharged his Gun amongst them, keeping a Pistol still charged, so they shot
him dead at a distance. His name was Swan; he was a very merry hearty old Man,
and always used to declare he would never take Quarter: But they took Mr.
Smith, who was tired also; he was a Merchant belonging to Captain Swan, and
being carried before the Governor of Leon, was known by a Mulatta Woman that
waited on him. Mr. Smith had lived many years in the Canaries, and could speak
and write very good Spanish, and it was there this Mulatta Woman remembered him.
He being examined how many Men we were, said 1000 at the City, and 500 at the
Canoas, which made well for us at the Canoas, who straggling about every day,
might easily have been destroyed. But this so daunted the Governor, that he
did never offer to molest our Men, although he had with him above 1000 Men, as
Mr. Smith guessed. He sent in a Flag of Truce about Noon, pretending to ransom
the Town, rather than let it be burnt; but our Captains demanded 300000 Pieces
of Eight for its Ransom, and as much Provision as would victual 1000 Men 4
Months, and Mr. Smith to be ransomed for some of their Prisoners; but the
Spaniards did not intend to ransom the Town, but only capitulated day after day
to prolong time, till they had got more Men. Our Captains therefore,
considering the distance that they were from the Canoas, resolved to be
marching down. The 14th day in the morning they ordered the City to be set on
fire, which was presently done, and then they came away: But they took more
time in coming down than in going up. The 15th day in the morning, the
Spaniards sent in Mr. Smith, and had a Gentlewoman in exchange. Then our
Captains sent a Letter to the Governor, to acquaint him, that they intended
next to visit Ria Lexa, and desired to meet him there: they also released a
Gentleman, on his promise of paying 150 Beefs for his Ransom, and to deliver
them to us at Ria Lexa; and the same day our Men came to their Canoas; where
having staid all night, the next Morning we all entered our Canoas, and came to
the Harbor of Ria Lexa, and in the afternoon our Ships came thither to an
Anchor.

The Creek that leads to Ria Lexa, lies from the N. W. part of the Harbor,
and it runs in Northerly. It is about 2 Leagues from the Island in the Harbors
Mouth to the Town; two thirds of the way it is broad, then you enter a narrow
deep Creek, bordered on both sides with Red Mangrove Trees, whose Limbs reach
almost from one side to the other. A mile from the Mouth of the Creek it turns
away West. There the Spaniards have made a very strong Brestwork, fronting
toward the mouth of the Creek, in which were placed 100 Soldiers to hinder us
from landing; and 20 Yards below that Brestwork there was a Chain of great
Trees placed cross the Creek, so that 10 Men could have kept off 500 or 1000.

When we came in sight of the Brestwork we fired but two Guns, and they all run
away: And we were afterward near half an hour cutting the Boom or Chain. Here
we landed, and marched to the Town of Ria Lexa, or Rea Lejo, which is about a
mile from hence. This Town stands on a Plain by a small River. It is a pretty
large Town with 3 Churches, and an Hospital that has a fine Garden belonging
to it: besides many large fair Houses, they all stand at a good distance one
from another, with Yards about them. This is a very sickly place, and I believe
has need enough of an Hospital; for it is seated so nigh the Creeks and
Swamps, that it is never free from a noisome smell The Land about it is a strong
yellow Clay: yet where the Town stands it seems to be Sand. Here are several
sort of Fruits, as Guavo's, Pine-apples, Melons, and Prickle-Pears. The
Pineapple and Melon are well known.

The Guava-Fruit grows on a hard scrubbed Shrub, whose Bark is smooth and
whitish, the Branches pretty long and small, the Leaf somewhat like the Leaf of
Hazel, the Fruit much like a Pear, with a thin rind; it is full of small hard
Seeds, and it may be eaten while it is green, which is a thing very rare in the
Indies: For most Fruit, both in the East or West Indies, is full of clammy,
white, unsavory Juice, before it is ripe, though pleasant enough afterward.
When this Fruit is ripe it is yellow, soft, and very pleasant. It bakes as well
as a Pear, and it may be coddled, and it makes good Pies. There are of diverse
sorts, different in shape, taste, and Color. The inside of some is yellow, of
others red. When this Fruit is eaten green, it is binding, when ripe, it is
loosening.

The Prickle-Pear, Bush, or Shrub, of about 4 or 5 foot high, grows in many
places of the West Indies, as at Jamaica, and most other Islands there; and on
the Main in several places. This prickly Shrub delights most in barren sandy
Grounds; and they thrive best in places that are near the Sea; especially where
the Sand is saltish. The Tree, or Shrub, is 3 or 4 foot high, spreading forth
several branches, and on each branch 2 or 3 leaves. These leaves (if I may call
them so) are round, as broad every way as the Palm of a Man's hand, and as
thick; their substance like Houseleek: these leaves are fenced round with
strong prickles above an inch long. The Fruit grows at the farther edge of the
leaf: it is as big as a large Plumb, growing small near the leaf, and big
toward the top, where it opens like a Medlar. This Fruit at first is green
like the leaf, from whence it springs with small Prickles about it; but when
ripe it is of a deep red color. The inside is full of small black Seeds, mixed
with a certain red Pulp, like thick Syrup: It is very pleasant in taste,
cooling, and refreshing; but if a Man eats 15 or 20 of them they will color
his Water, making it look like Blood. This I have often experienced, yet found
no harm by it.

There are many Sugar-works in the Country, and Estantions or Beef Farms: There
is also a great deal of Pitch, Tar and Cordage, made in the Country, which is
the chief of their Trade. This Town we approached without any opposition, and
found nothing but empty Houses; besides such things as they could not, or would
not carry away, which were chiefly about 500 Packs of Flower, brought hither in
the great Ship that we left at Amapalla, and some Pitch, Tar and Cordage. These
things we wanted, and therefore we sent them all aboard. Here we received 150
Beefs, promised by the Gentleman that was released coming from Leon; besides,
we visited the Beef-Farms every day, and the Sugar-Works, going in small
Companies of 20 or 30 Men, and brought away every Man his Load; for we found no
Horses, which if we had, yet they ways were so wet and dirty, that they would
not have been serviceable to us. We stayed here from the 17th till the 24th
day, and then some of our destructive Crew set fire to the Houses: I know not
by whose order, but we marched away and left them burning; at the Brest-work we
embarked into our Canoas and returned aboard our Ships.

The 25th day Capt. Davis and Capt. Swan broke off Consortship; for Capt. Davis
was minded to return again on the Coast of Peru, but Capt. Swan desired to go
farther to the Westward. I had till this time been with Capt. Davis, but now
left him, and went aboard of Capt. Swan. It was not from any dislike to my old
Captain, but to get some knowledge of the Northern Parts of this Continent of
Mexico: And I knew that Capt. Swan determined to Coast it as far North, as he
thought convenient, and then pass over for the East Indies; which was a way
very agreeable to my Inclination. Capt. Townley, with his two Barks, was
resolved to keep us Company; but Capt. Knight and Capt. Harris followed Captain
Davis. The 27th day in the Morning Capt. Davis with his Ships went out of the
Harbor, having a fresh Land Wind. They were in Company, Capt. Davis's Ship
with Capt. Harris in her; Capt. Davis's Bark and Fireship, and Capt. Knight in
his own Ship, in all 4 Sail. Capt. Swan took his last farewell of him by firing
15 Guns, and he fired 11 in return of the Civility.

We stayed here some time afterward to fill our Water and cut Firewood; but
our Men, who had been very healthy till now, began to fall down apace in
Fevers. Whether it was the badness of the Water, or the unhealthiness of the
Town was the cause of it we did not know; but of the two, I rather believe it
was a distemper we got at Ria Lexa; for it was reported that they had been
visited with a Malignant Fever in that Town, which had occasioned many People
to abandon it; and although this Visitation was over with them, yet their
Houses and Goods might still retain somewhat of the Infection, and communicate
the same to us.

I the rather believe this, because it afterward raged very much, not only
among us, but also among Capt. Davis and his Men, as he told me himself since,
when I met him in England: Himself had like to have died, as did several of his
and our Men. The 3d day of September we turned ashore all our Prisoners and
Pilots, they being unacquainted further to the West, which was the Coast that
we designed to visit: for the Spaniards have very little Trade by Sea beyond
the River Lempa, a little to the North West of this place.

About 10 a clock in the morning, the same day we went from hence, steering
Westward, being in company 4 Sail, as well as they who left us, viz. Captain
Swan and his Bark, and Capt. Townley and his Bark, and about 340 Men.

We met with very bad weather as we sailed along this Coast: seldom a day past
but we had one or two violent Tornadoes, and with them very frightful Flashes
of Lightnings and Claps of Thunder; I did never meet with the like before nor
since. These Tornadoes commonly came out of the N. E. the Wind did not last
long, but blew very fierce for the time. When the Tornadoes were over we had
the Wind at W. sometimes at W. S. W. and S. W. and sometimes to the North of
the West, as far as the N. W.

We kept at a good distance off shore, and saw no land till the 14th day; but
then, being in lat. 12 d. 50 m. the Volcan of Guatimala appeared in sight. This
is a very high Mountain with two peeks or heads, appearing like two
Sugar-loaves. It often belches forth Flames of Fire and Smoke from between the
two heads; and this, as the Spaniards do report, happens chiefly in tempestuous
weather. It is called so from the City Guatimala, which stands near the foot of
it, about 8 leagues from the South Sea, and by report, 40 or 50 leagues from
the Gulf of Matique in the Bay of Honduras, in the North Seas. This City is
famous for many rich Commodities that are produced thereabouts (some almost
peculiar to this Country) and yearly sent into Europe, especially 4 rich Dies,
Indico, Otta or Anatta, Silvester, and Cochineel.

Indico is made of an Herb which grows a foot and half or two foot high, full
of small Branches; and the Branches full of Leaves, resembling the Leaves which
grow on Flax, but more thick and substantial. They cut this Herb or Shrub and
cast it into a large Cistern made in the Ground for that purpose, which is half
full of Water. The Indico Stalk or Herb remains in the Water till all the
leaves, and I think, the skin, rind, or bark rot off, and in a manner dissolve:
but if any of the leaves should stick fast, they force them off by much labor,
tossing and tumbling the Mass in the Water till all the pulpy substance is
dissolved. Then the Shrub, or woody part, is taken out, and the Water which is
like Ink, being disturbed no more, settles, and the Indico falls to the bottom
of the Cistern like Mud. When it is thus settled they draw off the Water, and
take the Mud and lay it in the Sun to dry: which there becomes hard, as you see
it brought home.

Otta, or Anatta, is a red sort of Dye. It is made of a red Flower that grows
on Shrubs 7 or 8 foot high. It is thrown into a Cistern of Water as the Indico
is, but with this difference, that there is no stalk, nor so much as the head
of the Flower, but only the Flower it self pulled off from the head, as you
peel Rose-leaves from the bud. This remains in the Water till it rots, and by
much jumbling it dissolves to a liquid substance, like the Indico; and being
settled and the Water drawn off, the red Mud is made up into Rolls or Cakes,
and laid in the Sun to dry. I did never see any made but at a place called the
Angels in Jamaica, at Sir Tho. Muddiford's Plantations, about 20 years since;
but was grubb'd up while I was there, and the Ground otherwise employed. I do
believe there is none any where else on Jamaica: and even this probably was
owing to the Spaniards, when they had that Island. Indico is common enough in
Jamaica. I observed they planted it most in sandy Ground: they sow great Fields
of it, and I think they sow it every year; but I did never see the Seeds it
bears. Indico is produced all over the West Indies, on most of the Caribbe
Islands, as well as the Main; yet no part of the Main yields such great
quantities both of Indico and Otta as this Country about Guatimala. I believe
that Otta is made now only by the Spaniards; for since the destroying that at
the Angels Plantation in Jamaica, I have not heard of any Improvement made of
this Commodity by our Countrymen any where; and as to Jamaica I have since
been informed, that it is wholly left off there. I know not what quantities
either of Indico or Otta are made at Cuba or Hispaniola: but the place most
used by our Jamaica Sloops for these things is the Island Porto Rico, where our
Jamaica Traders did use to buy Indico for 3 Rials, and Otta for 4 Rials the
Pound, which is but 2 s. 3 d. of our Money: and yet at the same time Otta was
worth in Jamaica 5 s. the Pound, and Indico 3 s. 6 d. the Pound; and even this
also paid in Goods; by which means alone they got 50 or 60 per Cent. Our
Traders had not then found the way of trading with the Spaniards in the Bay of
Honduras; but Captain Coxon went thither (as I take it) at the beginning of the
Year 1679, under pretense to cut Logwood, and went into the Gulf of Matique,
which is in the bottom of that Bay. There he landed with his Canoas and took a
whole Storehouse full of Indico and Otta in Chests, piled up in several
parcels, and marked with different marks ready to be shipped off aboard two Ships
that then lay in the road purposely to take it in; but these Ships could not
come at him, it being sholewater. He opened some of the Chests of Indico, and
supposing the other Chests to be all of the same species ordered his Men to
carry them away. They immediately set to work, and took the nearest at hand;
and having carried out one heap of Chests, they seized on another great pile of
a different mark from the rest, intending to carry them away next. But a
Spanish Gentleman, their Prisoner, knowing that there was a great deal more
than they could carry away, desired them to take only such as belonged to the
Merchants, (whose marks he undertook to show them) and to spare such as had the
same mark with those in that great Pile they were then entering upon; because,
he said, those Chests belonged to the Ship Captains, who following the Seas, as
themselves did, he hoped they would, for that reason, rather spare their Goods
than the Merchants. They consented to his Request; but upon their opening their
Chests (which was not before they came to Jamaica, whereby connivance they were
permitted to sell them) they found that the Don had been to sharp for them; the
few Chests which they had taken of the same mark with the great Pile proving to
be Otto, of greater value by far than the other; whereas they might as well
have loaded the whole Ship with Otto, as with Indico.

The Cochineel is an Insect, bred in a sort of Fruit much like the
Prickle-Pear. The Tree or Shrub that bears it is like the Prickle-Pear Tree,
about 5 foot high, and so prickly; only the Leaves are not quite so big, but
the Fruit is bigger. On the top of the Fruit there grows a red Flower: This
Flower, when the Fruit is ripe, falls down on the top of the Fruit which then
begins to open, and covers it so, that no Rain nor Dew can wet the inside. The
next day, or two days after its falling down, the Flower being then scorched
away by the heat of the Sun, the Fruit opens as broad as the mouth of a Pint
Pot, and the inside of the Fruit is by this time sull of small red Insects,
with curious thin Wings. As they were bred here, so here they would die for
want of food, and rot in their husks, (having by this time eaten up their
mother Fruit) did not the Indians, who plant large fields of these Trees, when
once they perceive the Fruit open, take care to drive them out: for they spread
under the branches of the Tree a large Linen Cloth, and then with sticks they
shake the branches, and so disturb the poor Insects, that they take wing to be
gone, yet hovering still over the head of their native Tree, but the heat of
the Sun so disorders them, that they presently fall down dead on the Cloth
spread for that purpose, where the Indians let them remain 2 or 3 days longer,
till they are thoroughly dry. When they fly up they are red, when they fall
down they are black; and when first they are quite dry they are white as the
sheet wherein they lie, though the Color change a little after. These yield
the much esteemed Scarlet. The Cochineeltrees are called by the Spaniard
Toona's: They are planted in the Country about Guatimala, and about Cheap and
Guaxaca, all 3 in the Kingdom of Mexico. The Silvester is a red Grain growing
in a Fruit much resembling the Cochineel-fruit; as does also the Tree that
bears it. There first shoots forth a yellow Flower, then comes the Fruit, which
is longer than the Cochineel Fruit. The Fruit being ripe opens also very wide.
The inside being full of these small Seeds or Grains, they fall out with the
least touch or shake. The Indians that gather them hold a Dish under to receive
the Seed, and then shake it down. These Trees grow wild; and 8 or 10 of these
Fruits will yield an ounce of Seed: but of the Cochineel-fruits, 3 or 4 will
yield an ounce of Insects. The Silvester gives a Color almost as fair as the
Cochineel; and so like it as to be often mistaken for it, but it is not near so
valuable. I often made enquiry how the Silvester grows, and of the Cochineel;
but was never fully satisfied, till I met a Spanish Gentleman that had lived 30
years in the West Indies, and some years where these grow; and from him I had
these relations. He was a very Intelligent Person, and pretended to be well
acquainted in the Bay of Campeachy: therefore I examined him in many
particulars concerning that Bay, where I was well acquainted my self, living
there 3 years. He gave very true and pertinent answers to all my demands, so
that I could have no distrust of what he related.

When we first saw the Mountain of Guatimala, we were by judgment 25 leagues
distance from it. As we came nearer the Land it appeared higher and plainer,
yet we saw no Fire, but a little smoke proceeding from it. The Land by the Sea
was of a good height, yet but low in comparison with that in the Country. The
Sea for about 8 or 10 leagues from the shore, was full of floating Trees, or
Drift-Wood, as it is called, (of which I have seen a great deal, but no where
so much as here,) and Pumicestones floating, which probably are thrown out of
the burning Mountains, and washed down to the shore by the Rains, which are
very violent and frequent in this Country; and on the side of Honduras it is
excessively wet.

The 24th day we were in lat. 14 d. 30 m. North, and the Weather more settled.
Then Captain Townley took with him 106 Men in 9 Canoas, and went away to the
Westward, where he intended to Land, and romage in the Country for some
refreshment for our sick Men, we having at this time near half our Men sick,
and many were dead since we left Ria Lexa. We in the Ships lay still with our
Topsails furled, and our Corses or lower Sails haled up this day and the next,
that Captain Townley might get the start of us.

The 26th day we made sail again, coasting to the Westward, having the Wind at
North and fair weather. We ran along by a tract of very high Land which came
from the Eastward, more within Land than we could see, after we fell in with
it, it bare us company for about 10 leagues, and ended with a pretty gentle
descent toward the West.

There we had a perfect view of a pleasant low Country, which seemed to be rich
in Pasturage for Cattle. It was plentifully furnished with Groves of green
Trees, mixed among the grassy Savannahs: Here the Land was fenced from the Sea
with high sandy Hills, for the Waves all along this Coast run high, and beat
against the shore very boisterously, making the Land wholly unapproachable in
Boats or Canoas: So we coasted still along by this low Land, 8 or 9 leagues
farther, keeping close to the shore for fear of missing Captain Townley. We lay
by in the Night, and in the Day made an easy sail.

The 2d day of October, Captain Townley came aboard; he had coasted along shore
in his Canoas, seeking for an entrance, but found none. At last, being out of
hopes to find any Bay, Creek, or River, into which he might safely enter, he
put ashore on a sandy Bay, but overset all his Canoas; he had one Man drowned,
and several lost all their Arms, and some of them that had not waxt up their
Cartrage or Catouche Boxes, wet all their Powder. Captain Townley with much ado
got ashore, and dragged the Canoas up dry on the Bay; then every Man searched
his Catouche-Box, and drew the wet Powder out of his Gun, and provided to march
into the Country, but finding it full of great Creeks which they could not
ford, they were forced to return again to their Canoas. In the night they made
good fires to keep themselves warm; the next morning 200 Spaniards and Indians
fell on them, but were immediately repulsed, and made greater speed back than
they had done forward. Captain Townley followed them, but not far For fear of
his Canoas. These Men came from Teguantapeque, a Town that Captain Townley went
chiefly to seek, because the Spanish Books make mention of a large River there;
but whether it was run away at this time, or rather Captain Townley and his Men
were short-sighted, I know not; but they could not find it.

Upon his return we presently made sail, coasting still Westward, having the
Wind at E N. E. fair weather and a fresh gale. We kept within 2 mile of the
shore, sounding all the way; and found at 6 miles distance from Land 19 fathom;
at 8 miles distance 21 fathom, gross Sand. We saw no opening, nor sign of any
place to land at, so we sailed about 20 leagues farther, and came to a small
high Island called Tangola, were there is good anchoring. The Island is
indifferently well furnished with Wood and Water, and lies about a league from
the shore. The Main against the Island is pretty high champion Savannah Land by
the Sea; but 2 or 3 leagues within Land it is higher, and very woody.

We coasted a league farther and came to Guatulco. This Port is in lat. 15 d.
30 m. it is one of the best in all this Kingdom of Mexico. Near a mile from the
mouth of the Harbor, on the East Side, there is a little Island close by the
shore; and on the West Side of the mouth of the Harbor there is a great hollow
Rock, which by the continual working of the Sea in and out makes a great noise,
which may be heard a great way. Every Surge that comes in forces the Water out
of a little hole on its top, as out of a Pipe, from whence it flies out just
like the blowing of a Whale; to which the Spaniards also liken it. They call
this Rock and Spout the Buffadore: upon what account I know not. Even in the
calmest Seasons the Sea beats in there, making the Water spout out at the hole:
so that this is always a good mark to find the Harbor by. The Harbor is about
3 mile deep, and one mile broad; it runs in N. W. But the West Side of the
Harbor is best to ride in for small Ships; for there you may ride land-locked:
whereas any where else you are open to the S. W. Winds, which often blow here.
There is good clean Ground any where, and good gradual Soundings from 16 to 6
Fathom; it is bounded with a smooth sandy Shore, very good to land at; and at
the bottom of the Harbor there is a fine Brook of fresh Water running into the
Sea. Here formerly stood a small Spanish Town, or Village, which was taken by
Sir Francis Drake; but now there is nothing remaining of it, beside a little
Chapel standing among the Trees, about 200 paces from the Sea. The Land appears
in small short ridges parallel to the Shore, and to each other; the innermost
still gradually higher than that nearer the Shore; and they are all clothed
with very high flourishing Trees, that it is extraordinary pleasant and
delightful to behold at a distance: I have no where seen any thing like it.

At this place Captain Swan, who had been very sick, came ashore, and all the
sick Men with him, and the Surgeon to tend them. Captain Townley again took a
company of Men with him, and went into the Country to seek for Houses or
Inhabitants. He marched away to the Eastward, and came to the River Capalita;
which is a swift River, yet deep near the mouth, and is about a league from
Guatulco. There 2 of his Men swam over the River, and took 3 Indians that were
placed there as Sentinels, to watch for our coming. These could none of them
speak Spanish; yet our Men by Signs made them understand, that they desired to
know if there was any Town or Village near; who by the Signs which they made
gave our Men to understand, that they could guide them to a Settlement: but
there was no understanding by them, whether it was a Spanish or Indian
Settlement, nor how far it was thither. They brought these Indians aboard with
them, and the next day, which was the 6th day of October, Captain Townley with
140 Men (of whom I was one) went ashore again, taking one of these Indians with
us for a Guide to conduct us to to this Settlement. Our Men that stayed aboard
filled our Water, and cut Wood, and mended our Sails: and our Moskito Men
struck 3 or 4 Turtle every day They were a small sort of Turtle, and not very
sweet, yet very well esteemed by us all, because we had eaten no Flesh a great
while. The 8th day we returned out of the Country, having been about ^ miles
directly within Land before we came to any Settlement: There we found a small
Indian Village, and in it a great quantity of Vinello's drying in the Sun.

The Vinello is a little Cod full of small black Seeds; it is 4 or 5 Inches
long, about the bigness of the Stem of a Tobacco Leaf, and when dried, much
resembling it: so that our Privateers at first have often thrown them away when
they took any wondering why the Spaniards should lay up Tobacco Stems. This Cod
grows on a small Vine, which climbs about, and supports it self by the
neighboring Trees: it first bears a yellow Flower, from whence the Cod
afterward proceeds. It is first green, but when ripe it turns yellow; then the
Indians (whose Manufacture it is, and who sell it cheap to the Spaniards)
gather it, and lay it in the Sun which makes it soft; then it changes to a
Chestnut color. Then they frequently press it between their Fingers, which
makes it flat. If the Indians do any thing to them beside, I know not; but I
have seen the Spaniards sleek them with Oil.

These Vines grow plentifully at Bocca-toro, where I have gathered and tried to
cure them, but could not: which makes me think that the Indians have some
Secret that I know not of to cure them. I have often asked the Spaniards how
they were cured, but I never could meet with any could tell me. One Mr. Cree
also, a very curious Person, who spoke Spanish well, and had been a Privateer
all his Life, and 7 years a Prisoner among the Spaniards at Portobel and
Cartagena, yet upon all his Enquiry could not find any of them that understood
it. Could we have learnt the Art of it, several of us would have gone to
Bocca-toro yearly, at the dry Season, and cured them, and freighted our Vessel.
We there might have had Turtle enough for Food, and store of Vinello's. Mr.
Cree first showed me those at Bocca-toro. At, or near a Town also, called
Cai-hooca, in the Bay of Campeachy, these Cods are found. They are commonly
sold for 3 pence a Cod among the Spaniards in the West Indies, and are sold by
the Druggist, for they are much used among Chocolate to perfume it. Some will
use them among Tobacco, for it gives a delicate scent. I never heard of any
Vinello's but here in this Country, about Cai-hooca, and at Bocca-toro.

The Indians of this Village could speak but little Spanish. They seemed to be
a poor innocent People: and by them we understood, that here are very few
Spaniards in these parts; yet all the Indians hereabout are under them. The
Land from the Sea to their Houses is black Earth, mixed with some Stones and
Rocks: all the way full of very high Trees.

The 10th day we sent 4 Canoas to the Westward, who were ordered to lie for us
at Port Angels; where we were in hopes that by some means or other they might
get Prisoners, that might give us a better account of the Country than at
present we could have; and we followed them with our Ships; all our Men being
now pretty well recovered of the Fever, which had raged amongst us ever since
we departed from Ria Lexa.

CHAP. IX.
They set out from Guatulco. The Isle Sacrificio. Port Angels. Jaccals. A
narrow Escape. The Rock Algatross, and the neighboring Coast. Snooks, a sort
of Fish. The Town of Acapulco. Of the Trade it drives with the Philippine
Islands. The Haven of Acapulco. A Tornado. Port Marquess. Capt. Townley makes a
fruitless Attempt. A long sandy Bay, but very rough Seas. The Palm Tree great
and small. The Hill of Petaplan. A poor Indian Village. Jew-fish. Chequetan, a
good Harbor. Estapa; Muscles there. A Caravan of Mules taken. A Hill near
Thelupan. The Coast here abouts. The Volcan, Town, Valley, and Bay of Colima.
Sallagua Port. Orrha. Ragged Hills. Coronada, or the Crown-Land. Cape
Corrientes. Isles of Chametly. The City Purification. Valderas, or the Valley
of Flags. They miss their Design on this Coast. Captain Townley leaves them
with the Darien Indians. The Point and Isles of Pontique. Other Isles of
Chametley. The Penguin-fruit, the yellow and the red. Seals here. Of the River
of Cullacan, and the Trade of a Town there with California. Massaclau. River
and Town of Rosario. Caput Cavalli, and another Hill. The difficulty of
Intelligence on the Coast. The River of Oletta. River of St. Jago. Maxentelba
Rock, and Zelifco Hill. San^ Pechaque Town in the River of St. Jago. Of
Compostella. Many of them cut off at Sancta Pechaque. Of California; whether an
Island or not, and of the North-West and North-East Passage. A Method proposed
for Discovery of the North-West and North-East Passages. Isle of Santa Maria. A
prickly Plant. Capt. Swan proposes a Voyage to the East Indies. Valley of
Balderas again, and Cape Corrientes. The reason of their ill Success on the
Mexican Coast, and Departure thence for the East Indies.

IT was the 12th of October, 1685. when we set out of the Harbor of Guatulco
with our Ships. The Land here lies along West, and a little Southerly for about
20 or 30 Leagues, and the Sea-winds are commonly at W. S. W. sometimes at S. W.
the Land-winds at N. We had now fair Weather, and but little Wind. We coasted
along to the Westward, keeping as near the shole as we could for the benefit of
the Land-winds, for the Sea-winds were right against us; and we found a Current
setting to the Eastward which kept us back, and obliged us to anchor at the
Island Sacrificio, which is a small green Island about half a mile long. It
lies about a league to the West of Guatulco, and about half a mile from the
Main. There seems to be a fine Bay to the West of the Island; but it is full of
Rocks. The best riding is between the Island and the Main: there you will have
5 or 6 fathom Water. Here runs a pretty strong Tide; the Sea rises and falls
5 or 6 foot up and down.

The 18th day we sailed from hence, coasting to the Westward after our Canoas.
We kept near the shore, which was all sandy Bays, the Country pretty high and
woody, and a great Sea tumbling in upon the shore. The 22d day 2 of our Canoas
came aboard, and told us they had been a great way to the Westward, but could
not find Port Angels. They had attempted to land the day before, at a place
where they saw a great many Bulls and Cows feeding, in hopes to get some of
them; but the Sea run so high, that they over-set both Canoas, and wet all
their Arms, and lost 4 Guns, and had one Man drowned, and with much ado got off
again. They could give no account of the other 2 Canoas, for they lost company
the first night that they went from Guatulco, and had not seen them since.

We were now abrest of Port Angels, though our Men in the Canoas did not know
it; therefore we went in and anchored there. This is a broad open Bay, with 2
or 3 Rocks at the West Side. Here is good anchoring all over the Bay, in 30, or
20, or 12 fathom Water; but you must ride open to all Winds, except the
Land-winds, till you come into 12 or 13 fathom Water, then you are sheltered
from the W. S. W. which are the common Tradewinds. The Tide rises here about 5
foot; the Flood sets to the N. E. and the Ebb to the S. W. The landing in this
Bay is bad; the place of landing is close by the West Side, behind a few Rocks;
here always goes a great swell. The Spaniards compare this Harbor for goodness
to Guatulco, but there is a great difference between them. For Cuatulco is
almost Landlocked, and this an open road, and no one would easily know it by
their Character of it, but by its Marks and its Latitude, which is 15 d. North.
For this reason our Canoas, which were sent from Guatulco and ordered to tarry
here for us, did not know it, (not thinking this to be that fine Harbor) and
therefore went farther; ^ of them, as I said before, returned again, but the
other 2 were not yet come to us. The Land that bounds this Harbor is pretty
high, the Earth sandy and yellow, in some places red; it is partly Woodland,
partly Savannahs. The Trees in the Woods are large and tall, and the Savannahs
are plentifully stored with very kindly Grass. Two leagues to the East of this
place is a Beef Farm, belonging to Don Diego de la Rosa.

The 23 day we landed about 100 Men and marched thither, where we found plenty
of of fat Bulls and Cows feeding in the Savannahs, and in the House good store
of Salt and Maiz; and some Hogs, and Cocks and Hens: but the Owners or
Overseers were gone. We lay here 2 or 3 days feasting on fresh Provision, but
could not contrive to carry any quantity aboard, because the way was so long,
and our Men but weak, and a great wide River to ford. Therefore we returned
again from thence the 26th day, and brought every one a little Beef or Pork for
the Men that stayed aboard. The two nights that we stayed ashore at this place
we heard great droves of Jaccals, as we supposed them to be, barking all night
long, not far from us. None of us saw these; but I do verily believe they were
Jaccals; though I did never see those Creatures in America, nor hear any but at
this time. We could not think that there were less than 30 or 40 in a company.
We got aboard in the Evening; but did not yet hear any news of our two Canoas.

The 27th day in the morning we sailed from hence, with the Land-wind at N. by
W. The Seawind came about noon at W. S. W. and in the evening we anchored in 16
fathom Water, by a small rocky Island, which lies about half a mile from the
Main, and 6 leagues Westward from Port Angels. The Spaniards give no account of
this Island in their Pilot-book. The 28th day we sailed again with the
Land-wind: In the afternoon the Seabreez blew hard, and we sprung our Main
Topmast. This Coast is full of small Hills and Valleys, and a great Sea falls
in upon the shore. In the Night we met with the other two of our Canoas that
went from us at Guatulco. They had been as far as Acapulco to seek Port Angels.
Coming back from thence they went into a River to get Water, and were
encountered by 150 Spaniards, yet they filled their Water in spite of them,
but had one Man shot through the Thigh. Afterward they went into a Lagune, or
Lake of Salt Water, where they found much dried Fish, and brought some aboard.
We being now abrest of that place, sent in a Canoa manned with 12 Men for more
Fish. The mouth of this Lagune is not Pistol-shot-wide, and on both sides are
pretty high Rocks, so conveniently placed by Nature, that many Men may abscond
behind; and within the Rock and Lagune opens wide on both sides. The Spaniards
being alarmed by our two Canoas that had been there two or three days before,
came armed to this Place to secure their Fish; and seeing our Canoa coming,
they lay snug behind the Rocks, and suffered the Canoa to pass in, then they
fired their Volley, and wounded five of our Men. Our People were a little
surprised at this sudden Adventure, yet fired their Guns, and rowed farther
into the Lagune, for they durst not adventure to come out again through the
narrow Entrance, which was near a quarter of a Mile in length. Therefore they
rowed into the middle of the Lagune, where they lay out of Gunshot, and looked
about to see if there was not another Passage to get out at, broader than that
by which we entered, but could see none. So they lay still two Days and three
Nights, in hopes that we should come to seek them; but we lay off at Sea, about
three Leagues distant, waiting for their return, supposing by their long
absence, that they had made some greater Discovery, and were gone farther than
the Fish-Range; because it is usual with Privateers when they enter upon such
designs, to search farther than they proposed, if they meet any Encouragement.
But Capt. Townley and his Bark being nearer the shore, heard some Guns fired in
the Lagune. So he manned his Canoa, and went toward the shore, and beating the
Spaniards away from the Rocks, made a free passage for our Men to come out of
their Pound, where else they must have been starved or knocked on the head by
the Spaniards. They came aboard their Ships again the 31st of October. This
Lagune is about the lat. of 16 d. 40 m. North.

From hence we made sail again, coasting to the Westward, having fair Weather
and a Current setting to the West. The second day of November we past by a
Rock, called by the Spaniards the Algatross. The Land hereabout is of an
indifferent height, and woody, and more within the Country Mountainous. Here
are 7 or 8 white Cliffs by the Sea, which are very remarkable, because there
are none so white and so thick together on all the Coast. They are five or six
Mile to the West of the Algatross Rock. There is a dangerous shoal lies S. by
W. from these Cliffs, four or five Mile off at Sea. Two leagues to the West of
these Cliffs there is a pretty large River, which forms a small Island at its
Mouth. The Channel on the East side is but shoal and sandy, but the West
Channel is deep enough for Canoas to enter. On the Banks of this Channel the
Spaniards have made a Brestwork, to hinder an Enemy from landing, or filling
Water.

The 3d day we Anchored abrest of this River, in 14 fathom Water, about a Mile
and a half off shore. The next Morning we manned our Canoas, and went ashore to
the Brest-work with little resistance, although there were about 200 Men to
keep us off. They fired about 20 or 30 Guns at us, but seeing we were resolved
to land, they quitted the place; one chief reason why the Spaniards are so
frequently routed by us, although many times much our superiors in numbers, and
in many places fortified with Brestworks, is, their want of small Firearms,
for they have but few on all the Sea Coasts, unless near their larger Garrisons.
Here we found a great deal of Salt, brought hither, as I judge, for to salt
Fish, which they take in the Lagunes. The Fish I observed here mostly, were
what we call Snooks, neither a Seafish nor fresh Water-fish, but very numerous
in these salt Lakes. This Fish is about a Foot long, and round, and as thick as
the small of a Man's Leg, with a pretty long head: It has Scales of a whitish
color, and is good meat. How the Spaniards take them I know not, for we never
found any Nets, Hooks, or Lines, neither yet any Bark, Boat, or Canoa, among
them, on all this Coast, except the Ship I shall mention at Acapulco.

We marched two or three Leagues into the Country, and met with but one House,
where we took a Mulatto Prisoner, who informed us of a Ship that was lately
arrived at Acapulco; she came from Lima. Captain Townley wanting a good Ship,
thought now he had an opportunity of getting one, if he could persuade his Men
to venture with him into the Harbor of Acapulco, and fetch this Lima Ship out.
Therefore he immediately proposed it, and found not only all his own Men
willing to assist him, but many of Captain Swan's Men also. Captain Swan
opposed it, because Provision being scares with us, he thought our time might
be much better employed in first providing our selves with rood; and here was
plenty of Maiz in the River where we now were, as we were informed by the same
Prisoner, who offered to conduct us to the place where it was. But neither the
present necessity, nor Captain Swan's persuasion availed any thing, no nor yet
their own interest, for the great design we had then in hand, was to lie and
wait for a rich Ship which comes to Acapulco every Year richly laden from the
Philippine Islands. But it was necessary we should be well stored with
Provisions, to enable us to Cruise about, and wait the time of her coming.
However, Townley's Party prevailing, we only filled our Water here, and made
ready to be gone. So the fifth Day in the Afternoon we sailed again, Coasting
to the Westward, toward Acapulco. The 7th Day in the Afternoon, being about
twelve Leagues from the shore, we saw the high Land of Acapulco, which is very
remarkable: for there is a round Hill standing between two other Hills; the
Westermost of which is the biggest and highest, and has two Hillocks like two
Paps on its top: the Eastermost Hill is higher and sharper than the middlemost.
From the middle Hill the Land declines toward the Sea, ending in a high round
point. There is no Land shaped like this on all the Coast. In the evening
Captain Townley went away from the Ships with 140 Men in 12 Canoas, to try to
get the Lima Ship out of Acapulco Harbor.

Acapulco is a pretty large Town, 17 degrees North of the Equator. It is the
Seaport for the City of Mexico, on the West side of the Continent; as La Vera
Cruz, or St. John d' Ulloa in the Bay of Nova Hispania, is on the North side.
This Town is the only place of Trade on all this Coast; for there is little or
no Traffic by Sea on all the N. W. part of this vast Kingdom, here being, as I
have said, neither Boats, Barks nor Ships, (that I could ever see) unless only
what come hither from other parts, and some Boats near the S. E. end of
California; as I guess, by the intercourse between that and the Main, for
Pearl-fishing.

The Ships that Trade hither are only three, two that constantly go once a Year
between this and Manila in Luconia, one of the Philippine Islands, and one Ship
more every Year to and from Lima. This from Lima commonly arrives a little
before Christmas; she brings them Quicksilver, Cacao, and Pieces of Eight.
Here she stays till the Manila Ships arrive, and then takes in a Cargo of
Spices, Silks, Callicoes, and Muslins, and other East India Commodities, for
the use of Peru, and then returns to Lima. This is but a small Vessel of 20
Guns, but the two Manila Ships are each said to be above 1000 Tun. These make
their Voyages alternately, so that one or other of them is always at the
Manila's. When either of them sets out from Acapulco, it is at the latter end
of March, or the beginning of April; she always touches to refresh at Guam, one
of the Ladrone Islands, in about 60 Days space after she sets out. There she
stays but two or three Days, and then prosecutes her Voyage to Manila, where
she commonly arrives some time in June. By that time the other is ready to sail
from thence, laden with East India Commodities. She stretches away to the
North as far as 36, or sometimes into 40 degrees of North lat. before she gets
a Wind to stand over to the American shore. She falls in first with the Coast
of California, and then Coasts along the shore to the South again, and never
misses a Wind to bring her away from thence quite to Acapulco. When she gets
the length of Cape St. Lucas, which is the Southermost point of California, she
stretches over to Cape Corientes, which is in about the 20th degree of North
lat. from thence she Coasts along till she comes to Sallagua, and there she
sets ashore Passengers that are bound to the City of Mexico: From thence she
makes her best way, Coasting still along shore, till she arrives at Acapulco,
which is commonly about Christmas, never more than 8 or 10 days before or
after. Upon the return of this Ship to the Manila, the other which stays
there till her arrival, takes her turn back to Acapulco. Sir John Narborough
therefore was imposed on by the Spaniards, who told him that there were 8 Sail,
or more, that used this Trade.

The Port of Acapulco is very commodious for the reception of Ships, and so
large, that some hundreds may safely Ride there without damnifying each other.
There is a small low Island crossing the mouth of the Harbor; it is about a
Mile and a half long, and half a Mile broad, stretching East and West. It
leaves a good wide deep Channel at each end, where Ships may safely go in or
come out, taking the advantage of the Winds; they must enter with the Sea-Wind,
and go out with the Land-Wind, for these Winds seldom or never fail to succeed
each other alternately in their proper season of the Day or Night. The
Westermost Channel is the narrowest, but so deep, there is no Anchoring, and
the Manila Ships pass in that way, but the Ships from Lima enter on the S. W.
Channel. This Harbor runs in North about 3 Miles, then growing very narrow, it
turns short about to the West, and runs about a Mile farther, where it ends.
The Town stands on the N. W. side; at the mouth of this narrow passage, close
by the Sea, and at the end of the Town, there is a Platform with a great many
Guns. Opposite to the Town, on the East side, stands a high strong Castle, said
to have 40 Guns of a very great bore. Ships commonly Ride near the bottom of
the Harbor, under the Command both of the Castle and the Platform.

Captain Townly, who, as I said before, with 140 Men, left our Ships on a
design to fetch the Lima Ship out of the Harbor, had not Rowed above 3 or 4
Leagues before the Voyage was like to end with all their Lives; for on a sudden
they were encountered with a violent Tornado from the shore, which had like to
have foundered all the Canoas: but they escaped that danger, and the second
night got safe into Port Marquis. Port Marquis is a very good Harbor, a League
to the East of Acapulco Harbor. Here they staid all the next Day to dry
themselves, their Clothes, their Arms, and Ammunition, and the next Night they
rowed softly into Acapulco Harbor; and because they would not be heard, they
haled in their Oars, and paddled as softly as if they had been seeking Manatee.
They paddled close to the Castle; then struck over to the Town, and found the
Ship riding between the Brest-work and the Fort, within about 100 Yards of
each. When they had well viewed her, and considered the danger of the design,
they thought it not possible to accomplish it; therefore they paddled softly
back again, till they were out of command of the Forts, and then they went to
Land, and fell in among a Company of Spanish Soldiers (for the Spaniards having
seen them the day before, had set Guards along the Coast) who immediately fired
at them, but did them no damage, only made them retire farther from the shore.
They lay afterward at the mouth of the Harbor till it was day, to take a view
of the Town and Castle, and then returned aboard again, being tired, hungry,
and sorry for their Disappointment.

The 11th day we made sail again further on to the Westward, with the Land
wind, which is commonly at N. E. but the Sea winds are at S. W. We passed by a
long sandy Bay of above 20 Leagues. All the way along it the Sea falls with
such force on the shore, that it is impossible to come near it with Boat or
Canoa; yet it is good clean ground, and good anchoring a Mile or two from the
shore. The Land by the Sea is low, and indifferent Fertile, producing many
sorts of Trees, especially the spreading (...), which grows in spots from one
end of the Bay to the other.

The P^ tree is as big as an ordinary Ash, growing about 20 or 30 Foot high.
The Body is clear from Boughs or Branches, till just at the head; there it
spreads forth many large green Branches, not much unlike the Cabbage tree
before described. These Branches also grow in many Places, (as in Jamaica,
Darien, the Bay of Campeachy, etc.) from a stump not above a Foot or two high;
which is not the Remains of a Tree cut down; for none of these sort of Trees
will ever grow again when they have once lost their Head; but these are a sort
of Dwarf-palm, and the Branches which grow from the stump, are not so large as
those that grow on the great Tree. These smaller Branches are used both in the
East and West Indies for thatching Houses: They are very lasting and
serviceable, much surpassing the Palmeto. For this Thatch, if well laid on,
will endure five or six Years; and this is called by the Spaniards the Palmeto
Royal. The English at Jamaica give it the same Name. Whether this be the same
which they in Guinea get the Palm wine from, I know not; but I know that it is
like this.

The Land in the Country is full of small pecked barren Hills, making as many
little Valleys, which appear flourishing and green. At the West End of this Bay
is the Hill of Petaplan, in lat. 17 d. 30 m. N. This is a round Point
stretching out into the Sea: At a distance it seems to be an Island. A little
to the West of this Hill are several round Rocks, which we left without us,
steering in between them and the round Point, where we had 11 fathom Water. We
came to an Anchor on the N. W. side of the Hill, and went ashore, about 170 Men
of us, and marched into the Country 12 or 14 Miles. There we came to a poor
Indian Village that did not afford us a Meal of Victuals. The People all fled,
only a Mulatto Woman, and three or four small Children, who were taken and
brought aboard. She told us that a Carrier (one who drives a Caravan of Mules)
was goin to Acapulco, laden with Flower and other Goods, but stopped in the Road
for fear of us, a little to the West of this Village, (for he had heard of our
being on this Coast) and she thought he still remained there: And therefore it
was we kept the Woman to be our Guide to carry us to that place. At this place
where we now lay our Moskito-men struck some small Turtle, and many small
Jew-fish.

The Jew-fish is a very good Fish, and I judge so called by the English,
because it has Scales and Fins, therefore a clean Fish, according to the
Levitical Law, and the Jews at Jamaica buy them, and eat them very freely. It
is a very large Fish, shaped much like a Cod, but a great deal bigger; one will
weigh 3, or 4, or 5 hundred weight. It has a large Head, with great Fins and
Scales, as big as an Half-Crown, answerable to the bigness of his Body. It is
very sweet Meat, and commonly fat. This Fish lives among Rocks; there are
plenty of them in the West Indies, about Jamaica, and the Coast of Caraccos;
but chiefly in these Seas, especially more Westward.

We went from hence with our Ships the 18th day, and steered West about two
Leagues farther, to a place called Chequetan. A Mile and half from the shore
there is a small Key, and within it is a very good Harbor where Ships may
careen; there is also a small River of fresh Water, and Wood enough.

The 14th Day in the Morning we went with 95 Men in six Canoas to seek for the
Carrier, taking the Mulatto-Woman for our Guide; but Captain Townley would not
go with us. Before day we landed at a place called Estapa, a League to the West
of Chequeton. The Woman was well acquainted here, having been often at this
place for Muscles, as she told us; for here are great plenty of them. They seem
in all respects like our English Muscles. She carried us through the pathless
Wood by the side of a River, for about a League: Then we came into a Savannah
full of Bulls and Cows; and here the Carrier beforementioned was lying at the
Estantion-house with his Mules, not having dared to advance all this while, as
not knowing where we lay; so his own fear made him, his Mules, and all his
Goods, become a Prey to us. He had 40 Packs of Flower, some Chocolate, a great
many small Cheeses, and abundance of Earthen Ware. The Eatables we brought
away, but the Earthen Vessels we had no occasion for, and therefore left them.
The Mules were about 60: We brought our Prize with them to the Shore, and so
turned them away. Here we also killed some Cows, and brought with us to our
Canoas. In the Afternoon our Ships came to an Anchor half a Mile from the place
where we landed, and then we went aboard. Captain Townley seeing our good
success, went ashore with his Men to kill some Cows; for here were no
Inhabitants near to oppose us. The Land is very woody, of a good fertile Soil,
watered with many small Rivers; yet it has but few Inhabitants near the Sea.
Capt. Townley killed 18 Beefs, and after he came aboard, our Men, contrary to
Captain Swan's inclination, gave Capt. Townley part of the Flower which we took
ashore. Afterward we gave the Woman some Clothes for her, and her Children,
and put her and two of them ashore; but one of them, a very pretty Boy, about 7
or 8 Years old Capt. Swan kept. The Woman cried, and begged hard to have him;
but Capt. Swan would not, but promised to make much of him, and was as good as
his word. He proved afterward a very fine Boy for Wit, Courage, and Dexterity;
I have often wondered at his Expressions and Actions.

The 21st day in the evening, we sailed hence with the Land-Wind. The
Land-Winds on this part of the Coast are at N. and the Sea-Winds at W. S. W. We
had fair Weather, and Coasted along to the Westward. The Land is high, and full
of ragged Hills; and West from these ragged Hills, the Land makes many pleasant
and fruitful Valleys among the Mountains. The 25th day we were abrest of a very
remarkable Hill, which towering above the rest of its fellows, is divided in the
top, and makes two small parts. It is in lat. 18 d. 8 m. North. The Spaniards
make mention of a Town called Thelupan near this Hill, which we would have
visited if we could have found the way to it. The 26th day Captain Swan and
Capt. Townley, with 200 Men, of whom I was one, went in our Canoas to seek for
the City of Colima, a rich Place by report, but how far within Land I could
never learn: for, as I said before, here is no Trade by Sea, and therefore we
could never get Guides to inform us, or conduct us to any Town, but one or two,
on this Coast, and there is never a Town that lies open to the Sea but
Acapulco; and therefore our search was commonly fruitless, as now; for, we
rowed above 20 Leagues along shore, and found it a very bad Coast to Land. We
saw no House, nor sign of Inhabitants, although we past by a fine Valley,
called the Valley of Maguella; only at two places, the one at our first setting
out on this Expedition, and the other at the end of it, we saw a Horseman set,
as we supposed, as a Sentinel, to watch us. At both places we landed with
difficulty, and at each place we followed the track of the Horse on the sandy
Bay; but where they entered the Woods we lost the track, and although we
diligently searched for it, yet we could find it no more; so we were perfectly
at a loss to find out the Houses or Town they came from. The 28th Day, being
tired and hopeless to find any Town, we went aboard our Ships, that were now
come abrest of the place where we were; for always when we leave our Ships, we
either order a certain place of meeting, or else leave them a sign to know
where we are, by making one or more great Smoaks: yet we had all like to have
been ruined by such a signal as this, in a former Voyage under Captain Sharp,
when we made that unfortunate Attempt upon Arica, which is mentioned in the
History of the Buccaneers. For upon the routing our Men, and taking several of
them, some of those so taken told the Spaniards, that it was agreed between
them and their Companions on board, to make two great Smoaks at a distance from
each other, as soon as the Town should be taken, as a signal to the Ship, that
it might safely enter the Harbor. The Spaniards made these Smoaks presently: I
was then among those who staid on board; and whether the signal was not so
exactly made, or some other discouragement happened, I remember not, but we
forbore going in, till we saw our scattered Crew coming off in their Canoas.
Had we entered the Port upon the false signal, we must have been taken or sunk;
for we must have past close by the Fort, and could have had no Wind to bring us
out, till the Land-Wind should rise in the Night.

But to our present Voyage: After we came aboard we saw the Volcan of Colima.
This is a very high Mountain, in about 18 d. 36 m. North, standing 5 or 6
Leagues from the Sea, in the midst of a pleasant Valley. It appears with two
sharp peeks, from each of which there do always issue flames of fire or smoke.
The Valley in which this Volcan stands, is callel the Valley of Colima, from
the Town it self which stands there not far from the Volcan. The Town is said
to be great and rich, the chief of all its Neighborhood: and the Valley in
which it is seated, by the relation which the Spaniards give of it, is the most
pleasant and fruitful Valley in all the Kingdom of Mexico. This Valley is about
ten or twelve Leagues wide by the Sea, where it makes a small Bay: but how far
the Vale runs into the Country I know not. It is said to be full of
Cacoagardens, Fields of Corn, Wheat, and Plantain-Walks. The neighboring Sea
is bounded with a sandy shore; but there is no going ashore for the violence of
the Waves. The Land within it is low all along, and Woody for about two Leagues
from the East side; at the end of the Woods there is a deep River runs out into
the Sea, but it has such a great Bar, or sandy Shoal, that when we were here,
no Boat or Canoa could possibly enter, the Sea running so high upon the Bar:
otherwise, I judge, we should have made some farther discovery into this
pleasant Valley. On the West side of the River the Savannah land begins, and
runs to the other side of the Valley. We had but little Wind when we came
aboard, therefore we lay off this Bay that Afternoon and the Night ensuing.

The 29th Day our Captains went away from our Ships with 200 Men, intending at
the first convenient place to land and search about for a Path: for the Spanish
Books make mention of 2 or 3 other Towns hereabouts, especially one called
Sallagua, to the West of this Bay. Our Canoas rowed along as near the shore as
they could, but the Sea went so high that they could not land. About 10 or 11 a
Clock, two Horsemen came near the shore, and one of them took a Bottle out of
his Pocket, and drank to our Men. While he was drinking, one of our Men
snatched up his Gun, and let drive at him, and killed his Horse: so his Consort
immediately set Spurs to his Horse and rode away, leaving the other to come
after afoot. But he being Booted, made but slow haste; therefore two of our Men
stripped themselves, and swam ashore to take him. But he had a Macheat, or long
Knife, wherewith he kept them both from seizing him, they having nothing in
their Hands wherewith to defend themselves, or offend him. The 30th day our Men
came all aboard again, for they could not find any place to land in.

The first day of December we passed by the Port of Sallagua. This Port is in
lat. 18 d. 52 m. It is only a pretty deep Bay, divided in the middle with a
rocky point, which makes, as it were, two Harbors. Ships may ride securely in
either, but the West Harbor is the best: there is good Anchoring any where in
10 or 12 fathom, and a Brook of fresh Water runs into the Sea. Here we saw a
great new thatched House, and a great many Spaniards both Horse and Foot, with
Drums beating, and Colors flying, in defiance of us, as we thought. We took no
notice of them till the next Morning, and then we landed about 200 Men to try
their Courage; but they presently withdrew. The Foot never stayed to exchange
one shot, but the Horsemen stayed till two or three were knocked down, and then
they drew off, our Men pursuing them. At last, two of our Men took two Horses
that had lost their Riders, and mounting them, rode after the Spaniards full
drive till they came among them, thinking to have taken a Prisoner for
Intelligence, but had like to have been taken themselves: for four Spaniards
surrounded them, after they had discharged their Pistols, and unhorsed them;
and if some of our best Footmen had not come to their rescue, they must have
yielded, or have been killed. They were both cut in two or three places, but
their Wounds were not Mortal. The four Spaniards got away before our Men could
hurt them, and mounting their Horses, speeded after their Consorts, who were
marched away into the Country. Our Men finding a broad Road leading into the
Country, followed it about four Leagues in a dry stony Country, full of short
Wood; but finding no sign of Inhabitants, they returned again. In their way
back they took two Mullatto's, who were not able to march as fast as their
Consorts; therefore they had skulked in the Woods, and by that means thought to
have escaped our Men. These Prisoners informed us, that this great Road did
lead to a great City called Oarrha, from whence many of those Horsemen before
spoken of came: That this City was distant from hence as far as a Horse will go
in four Days; and that there is no place of consequence nearer: That the
Country is very poor, and thinly inhabited. They said also, that these Men came
to assist the Philippine Ship, that was every day expected here, to put ashore
Passengers for Mexico. The Spanish Pilot-Books, mention a Town also called
Sallogua hereabouts; but we could not find it, nor hear any thing of it by our
Prisoners.

We now intended to cruise off the Cape Corrientes, to wait for the Philippine
Ship. So the 6th Day of December. we set sail, coasting to the Westwards toward
Cape Corrientes. We had fair Weather, and but little Wind; the Sea-Breezes at
N. W. and the Land Wind at N. The Land is of an indifferent height, full of
ragged Points, which at a distance appear like Islands: The Country is very
woody, but the Trees are not high, nor very big.

Here I was taken sick of a Fever and Ague that afterward turned to a Dropsy,
which I labored under a long time after; and many of our Men died of this
Distemper, though our Surgeons used their greatest skill to preserve their
Lives. The Dropsy is a general Distemper on this Coast, and the Natives say,
that the best remedy they can find for it, is the Stone or Cod of an Allegator
(of which they have 4, one near each Leg, within the Flesh) pulverized and
drunk in Water: This Receipt we also found mentioned in an Almanac made at
Mexico: I would have tried it, but we found no Allegators here, though there are
several.

There are many good Harbors between Sallagua and Cape Corrientes: but we
passed by them all. As we drew near the Cape, the Land by the Sea appeared of
an indifferent height, full of white Cliffs; but in the Country the Land is
high and barren, and full of sharp pecked Hills, unpleasant to the sight. To
the West of this ragged Land is a Chain of Mountains running parallel with the
Shore; They end on the West with a gentle descent; but on the East side they
keep their height, ending with a high steep Mountain, which has three small
sharp pecked tops, somewhat resembling a Crown; and therefore called by the
Spaniards, Coronada, the Crown Land.

The 11th day we were fair in sight of Cape Corrientes, it bore N. by W. and
the Crown Land bore North. The Cape is of an indifferent height, with steep
Rocks to the Sea. It is flat and even on the top, clothed with Woods: The Land
in the Country is high and doubled. This Cape lies in 20 d. 28 m. North. I
find its longitude from Tenariff to be 230 d. 56 m. but I keep my longitude
Westward, according to our Course; and according to this reckoning, I find it
is from the Lizard in England 121 d. 41 m. so that the difference of time is
eight Hours, and almost six Minutes.

Here we had resolved to cruize for the Philippine Ship, because she always
makes this Cape in her Voyage homeward. We were (as I have said) four Ships in
Company; Captain Swan, and his Tender; Captain Townley, and his Tender. It was
so ordered that Captain Swan should lie Eight or Ten Leagues off shore, and the
rest about a League distant each from other, between him and the Cape, that so
we might not miss the Philippine Ship; but we wanted Provision, and therefore
we sent Capt. Townley's Bark, with 50 or 60 Men to the West of the Cape, to
search about for some Town or Plantations, where we might get Provision of any
sort. The rest of us in the mean time cruising in our Stations. The 17th Day
the Bark came to us again, but had got nothing, for they could not get about
the Cape, because the Wind on this Coast is commonly between the N. W. and the
S. W. which makes it very difficult getting to the Westward; but they left four
Canoas with 46 Men at the Cape, who resolved to row to the Westward. The 18th
Day we sailed to the Keys of Chametly to fill our Water. These Keys or Islands
of Chametly are about 16 or 18 Leagues to the Eastward of Cape Corrientes. They
are small, low, and woody, environed with Rocks; there are five of them lying
in the form of an half Moon, not a Mile from the shore, and between them and
the Main is very good Riding, secure from any Wind. The Spaniards do report,
that here live Fishermen, to fish for the Inhabitants of the City of
Purification. This is said to be a large Town, the best hereabouts; but is 14
Leagues up in the Country.

The 20th instant we entered within these Islands, passing in on the S. E. side,
and Anchored between the Islands and the Main, in five fathom clean Sand. Here
we found good fresh water and wood, and caught plenty of Rock-fish with Hook
and Line, a sort of Fish I described at the Isle of John Fernando, but we saw
no sign of Inhabitants, besides three or four old Hutts; therefore I do believe
that the Spanish or Indian Fishermen come hither only at Lent, or some other
such Season, but that they do not live here constantly. The 21st Day Captain
Townley went away, with about 60 Men, to take an Indian Village, 7 or 8 Leagues
from hence to the Westward more toward the Cape, and the next Day we went to
cruise off the Cape, where Captain Townley was to meet us. The 24th Day, as we
were cruising off the Cape, the four Canoas beforementioned, which Captain
Townley's Bark left at the Cape, came off to us. They, after the Bark left
them, past to the West of the Cape, and rowed into the Valley Valderas, or
perhaps Val d' Iris; for it signifies the Valley of Flags.

This Valley lies in the bottom of a pretty deep Bay, that runs in between Cape
Corrientes on the S. E. and the point of Pontique on the N. VV. which two
places are about 10 Leagues asunder. The Valley is about 3 Leagues wide; there
is a level sandy Bay against the Sea, and good smooth landing. In the midst of
the Bay is a fine River, whereinto Boats may enter; but it is brackish at the
latter end of the dry Season, which is in February, March, and part of April. I
shall speak more of the Seasons in my Chapter of Winds, in the Appendix. This
Valley is bounded within Land, with a small green Hill, that makes a very
gentle descent into the Valley, and affords a very pleasant prospect to
Sea-ward. It is enriched with fruitful Savannahs, mixed with Groves of Trees fit
for any uses, besides Fruit Trees in abundance, as Guava's, Oranges and Limes,
which here grow wild in such plenty, as if Nature had designed it only for a
Garden. The Savannahs are full of fat Bulls and Cows, and some Horses, but no
House in sight.

When our Canoas came to this pleasant Valley, they landed 37 Men, and marched
into the Country seeking for some Houses. They had not gone past three Mile
before they were attackt by 150 Spaniards, Horse and Foot: There was a small
thin VVood close by them, into which our Men retreated, to secure themselves
from the fury of the Horse: Yet the Spaniards rode in among them, and attackt
them very furiously, till the Spanish Captain, and 17 more, tumbled dead off
their Horses: then the rest retreated, being many of them wounded. We lost
four Men, and had two desperately wounded. In this action, the Foot, who were
armed with Lances and Swords, and were the greatest number, never made any
attack; the Horsemen had each a brace of Pistols, and some short Guns. If the
Foot had come in, they had certainly destroyed all our Men. When the Skirmish
was over, our Men placed the two wounded Men on Horses, and came to their
Canoas. There they killed one of the Horses, and dressed it, being afraid to
venture into the Savannah to kill a Bullock, of which there was store. When
they had eaten, and satisfied themselves, they returned aboard. The 25th Day,
being Christmas, we cruised in pretty near the Cape, and sent in 3 Canoas with
the Strikers to get Fish, being desirous to have a Christmas Dinner. In the
Afternoon they returned aboard with three great Jew fish, which feasted us all,
and the next Day we sent ashore our Canoas again, and got three or four more.

Captain Townley, who went from us at Chametly, came aboard the 28th Day, and
brought about 40 Bushels of Maiz. He had landed to the Eastward of Cape
Corrientes, and marched to an Indian Village that is 4 or 5 Leagues in the
Country. The Indians seeing him coming, set two Houses on fire that were full
of Maiz, and run away; yet he and his Men got in other Houses as much as they
could bring down on their backs, which he brought aboard.

January, 1686. and then made toward the Valley Valderas, to hunt for Beef,
and before Night we Anchored in the bottom of the Bay, in 60 fathom Water a
Mile from the Shore. Here we stayed hunting till the 7th Day, and Captain Swan
and Captain Townley went ashore every Morning with about 240 Men, and marched
to a small Hill; where they remained with 50 or 60 Men to watch the Spaniards,
who appeared in great companies on other Hills not far distant, but did never
attempt any thing against our Men. Here we killed and salted above two Months
Meat, besides what we spent fresh; and might have killed as much more, if we
had been better stored with Salt. Our hopes of meeting the Philippine Ship were
now over; for we did all conclude, that while we were necessitated to hunt here
for Provisions, she was past by to the Eastward, as indeed she was, as we did
understand afterward by Prisoners. So this design failed, through Captain
Townley's eagerness after the Lima Ship, which he attempted in Acapulco
Harbor, as I have related. For though we took a little Flower hard by, yet the
same Guide which told us of that Ship, would have conducted us where we might
have had store of Beef and Maiz: but instead thereof, we lost both our time,
and the opportunity of providing our selves; and so we were forced to be
victualling, when we should have been cruising off Cape Corrientes in
expectation of the Manila Ship.

Hitherto we had coasted along here with two different designs; the one was to
get the Manila Ship, which would have enriched us beyond measure; and this
Captain Townley was most for. Sir Tho. Cavendish formerly took the Manila Ship
off Cape St. Lucas in California, (where we also would have waited for her, had
we been early enough stored with Provisions, to have met her there) and threw
much rich Goods overboard. The other design, which Captain Swan and our Crew
were most for, was to search along the Coast for rich Towns, and Mines chiefly
of Gold and Silver, which we were assured were in this Country, and we hoped
near the shore: not knowing (as we afterward found) that it was in effect an
Inland Country, its Wealth remote from the South Sea Coast, and having little
or no commerce with it, its Trade being driven Eastward with Europe by La Vera
Cruz. Yet we had still some expectation of Mines, and so resolved to Steer on
farther Northward; but Captain Townley, who had no other design in coming on
this Coast, but to meet this Ship, resolved to return again toward the Coast
of Peru.

In all this Voyage on the Mexican Coast, we had with us a Captain, and two or
three of his Men, of our friendly Indians of the Isthmus of Darien; who having
conducted over some parties of our Privateers, and expressing a desire to go
along with us, were received, and kindly entertained aboard our Ships; and we
were pleased in having, by this means, Guides ready provided, should we be for
returning over Land, as several of us thought to do, rather than sail round
about. But at this time, we of Captain Swan's Ship designing farther to the
North-West; and Captain Townley going back, we committed these our Indian
Friends to his care, to carry them home. So here we parted; he to the Eastward,
and we to the Westward, intending to search as far to the Westward as the
Spaniards were settled.

It was the 7th Day of January in the Morning when we sailed from this pleasant
Valley. The Wind was at N. E. and the weather fair. At 11 a Clock the Sea-wind
came at N. W. Before Night we passed by Point Pontique; this is the West point
of the Bay of the Valley of Valderas, and is distant from Cape Corrientes 10
Leagues. This point is in lat. 20 d. 50 m. North; it is high, round, rocky and
barren. At a distance it appears like an Island. A league to the West of this
point are two small barren Islands, called the Islands of Pontique. There are
several high, sharp, white Rocks, that lie scattering about them: We passed
between these rocky Islands on the left, and the Main on the right, for there
is no danger. The Seacoast beyond this point runs Northward for about 18
Leagues, making many ragged points, with small sandy Bays between them. The
Land by the Seaside is low and pretty woody; but in the Country, full of high,
sharp, barren, rugged, unpleasant Hills.

The 14th Day we had sight of a small white Rock, which appears very much like
a Ship under sail. This Rock is in lat. 21 d. 15 m. it is 3 Leagues from the
Main. There is a good Channel between it and the Main, where you will have 12
or 14 fathom Water near the Island; but running nearer the Main, you will have
gradual soundings, till you come in with the shore. At Night we Anchored in six
fathom Water, near a League from the Main, in good ouzy ground. We caught a
great many Catfish here, and at several places on this Coast, both before and
after this.

From this Island the Land runs more Northerly, making a fair sandy Bay; but
the Sea falls in with such violence on the shore, that there is no landing, but
very good Anchoring on all the Coast, and gradual Soundings. About a League off
shore, you will havo 6 fathom, and 4 Mile off shore you will have 7 fathom
Water. We came to an Anchor every Evening; and in the Mornings we sailed off
with the Land-wind, which we found at N. E. and the Sea-breezes at N. W.

The 20th Day we Anchored about three Miles on the East side of the Islands
Chametly, different from those of that name beforementioned; for these are six
small Islands, in lat. 23 d. 11 m. a little to the South of the Tropic of
Cancer, and about 3 Leagues from the Main, where a Salt Lake has its outlet
into the Sea. These Isles are of an indifferent height: Some of them have a
few shrubby bushes; the rest are bare of any sort of Wood. They are rocky round
by the Sea; only one or two of them have sandy Bays on the North side. There is
a sort of Fruit growing on these Islands called Penguins; and it is all the
Fruit they have.

The Penguin Fruit is of two sorts, the yellow and the red. The yellow Penguin
grows on a green Stem, as big as a Man's Arm, above a Foot high from the
ground: The Leaves of this Stalk are half a Foot long, and an Inch broad; the
edges full of sharp prickles. The Fruit grows at the Head of the Stalk, in 2 or
3 great clusters, 16 or 20 in a cluster. The Fruit is as big as a Pullets Egg,
of a round form, and in color yellow. It has a thick Skin or Rind, and the
inside is full of small black Seeds, mixed among the Fruit. It is sharp pleasant
Fruit. The red Penguin is of the bigness and color of a small dry Onion, and
is in shape much like a Nine-pin; for it grows not on a Stalk, or Stem, as the
other, but one end on the ground, the other standing upright. Sixty or seventy
grow thus together, as close as they can stand one by another, and all from the
same Root, or cluster of Roots. These Penguins are encompassed or fenced with
long Leaves, about a Foot and an half, or two Foot long, and prickly like the
former; and the Fruit too is much alike. They are both wholesome, and never
offend the Stomach; but those that eat many, will find a heat or tickling in
their Fundament. They grow so plentifully in the Bay of Campeachy, that there
is no passing for their high prickly Leaves.

There are some Guanoes on these Islands, but no other sort of Land Animal. The
Bays about the Islands are sometimes visited with Seals; and this was the first
place where I had seen any of these Animals, on the North side of the Equator,
in these Seas. For the Fish on this sandy Coast lie most in the Lagunes or
Salt-lakes, and Mouths of Rivers; but the Seals come not so much there, as I
judge: For this being no rocky Coast, where Fish resort most, there seems to be
but little Food for the Seals, unless they will venture upon Cat-fish.

Capt. Swan went away from hence with 100 Men in our Canoas, to the Northward,
to seek for the River Coolecan, possibly the same with the River of Pastla,
which some Maps lay down in the Province or Region of Cullacan. This River
lies in about 24 d. N. lat. We were informed, that there is a fair rich
Spanish Town seated on the East Side of it, with Savannahs about it, full of
Bulls and Cows; and that the Inhabitants of this Town pass over in Boats to the
Island California, where they fish for Pearl. I have been told since by a
Spaniard, that said he had been at the Island California, that there are great
plenty of Pearl Oysters there, and that the Native Indians of California, near
the Pearl-fishery, are mortal Enemies to the Spaniards. Our Canoas were absent
3 or 4 Days, and said they had been above 30 leagues but found no River; that
the Land by the Sea was low, and all sandy Bay; but such a great Sea, that
there was no landing. They met us in their return in the lat. 23 d. 30 m.
coasting along shore after them toward Cullacan; so we returned again to the
Eastward. This was the farthest that I was to the N. on this Coast.

Six or seven leagues N. N. W. from the Isles of Chametly, there is a small
narrow entrance into a Lake, which runs about 12 leagues Easterly, parallel
with the shore, making many small low Mangrove Islands. The Mouth of this Lake
is in lat. about 23 d. 30 m. It is called by the Spaniards Rio de Sall: for it
is a salt Lake. There is Water enough for Boats and Canoas to enter, and smooth
landing after you are in. On the West Side of it, there is an House, and an
Estantion, or Farm of large Cattle. Our Men went into the Lake and landed, and
coming to the House, found 7 or 8 Bushels of Maiz: but the Cattle were driven
away by the Spaniards, yet there our Men took the Owner of the Estantion, and
brought him aboard. He said, that the Beefs were driven a great way in the
Country for fear we should kill them. While we lay here, Capt. Swan went into
this Lake again, and landed 150 Men on the N. E. side, and marched into the
Country: About a Mile from the Landing-place, as they were entering a dry
Salina, or Salt-pond, they fired at two Indians that crossed the way before
them; one of them being wounded in the Thigh, fell down, and being examined, he
told our Men, that there was an Indian Town 4 or 5 leagues off, and that the
way which they were going would bring them thither. While they were in
Discourse with the Indian they were attacked by 100 Spanish Horsemen, who came
with a design to scare them back, but wanted both Arms and Hearts to do it.

Our Men past on from hence, and in their way marched through a Savannah of
long dry Grass. This the Spaniards set on fire, thinking to burn them, but that
did not hinder our Men from marching forward, though it did trouble them a
little. They rambled for want of Guides all this Day, and part of the next,
before they came to the Town the Indian spoke of. There they found a company of
Spaniards and Indians, who made head against them, but were driven out of the
Town after a short Dispute. Here our Surgeon and one Man more were wounded with
Arrows, but none of the rest were hurt. When they came into the Town they found
two or three Indians wounded, who told them that the Name of the Town was
Massaclan; that there were a few Spaniards living in it, and the rest were
Indians; that five Leagues from this Town there were two rich Gold Mines, where
the Spaniards of Compostella, which is the chiefest Town in these parts, kept
many Slaves and Indians at Work for Gold. Here our Men lay that Night, and the
next Morning packt up all the Maiz that they could find, and brought it on
their backs to the Canoas, and came aboard.

We lay here till the 2d of February, and then Captain Swan went away with
about 80 Men to the River Rosario; where they landed, and marched to an Indian
Town of the same Name. They found it about 9 Mile from the Sea; the way to it
fair and even. This was a fine little Town, of about 60 or 70 Houses, with a
fair Church; and it was chiefly inhabited with Indians, they took Prisoners
there, which told them, That the River Rosario is rich in Gold, and that the
Mines are not above two Leagues from the Town. Captain Swan did not think it
convenient to go to the Mines, but made haste aboard with the Maiz which he
took there, to the quantity of about 80 or 90 Bushels; and which to us, in the
scarcity we were in of Provisions, was at that time more valuable than all the
Gold in the World; and had he gone to the Mines, the Spaniards would probably
have destroyed the Corn before his return. The 3d of February, we went with our
Ships also toward the River Rosario, and Anchored the next Day against the
Rivers mouth, 7 fathom, good ouzy ground, a League from the shore. This River
is in lat. 22d. 51 m. N. When you are at an Anchor against this River, you will
see a round Hill, like a Sugar Loaf, a little way within Land, right over the
River, and bearing N. E. by N. To the Westward of that Hill there is another
pretty long Hill, called by the Spaniards Caput Cavalli, or the Horse's head.

The 7th day Captain Swan came a board with the Maiz which he got. This was but
a small quantity for so many Men as we were, especially considering the place
we were in, being strangers, and having no Pilots to direct or guide us into
any River; and we being without all sort of Provision, but what we were forced
to get in this manner from the shore. And though our Pilot-Book directed us
well enough to find the Rivers, yet for want of Guides to carry us to the
Settlements, we were forced to search 2 or 3 Days before we could find a place
to land: for, as I have said before, besides the Seas being too rough for
landing in many places, they have neither Boat, Bark, nor Canoa, that we could
ever see or hear of: and therefore as there are no such landing places in these
Rivers, as there are in the North Seas; so when we were landed, we did not know
which way to go to any Town, except we accidentally met with a path. Indeed,
the Spaniards and Indians, whom we had aboard, knew the Names of several Rivers
and Towns near them, and knew the Towns when they saw them; but they knew not
the way to go to them from the Sea.

The 8th day, Captain Swan sent about 40 Men to seek for the River Oleta, which
is to the Eastward of the River Rosario. The next day we followed after with
the Ships, having the Wind at W. N. W. and fair weather. In the Afternoon our
Canoas came again to us, for they could not find the River Oleta; therefore we
designed next for the River St. Jago, to the Eastward still. The 11th day in
the Evening, we Anchored against the mouth of the River, in 7 fathom Water,
good soft ouzy ground, and about two Mile from the shore. There was a high
white Rock without us, called Maxentelbo. This Rock at a distance, appears like
a Ship under sail; it bore from us W. N. W. distant about 3 Leagues. The Hill
Zelisco bore S. E. which is a very high Hill in the Country, with a Saddle or
bending on the top. The River St. Jago is in lat. 22 d. 15 m. It is one of the
principal Rivers on this Coast; there is 10 Foot Water on the Bar at low Water,
but how much it flows here I know not. The mouth of this River is near half a
Mile broad, and very smooth entering. Within the mouth it is broader, for there
are three or four Rivers more meet there, and issue all out together, is fresh
Water, is brackish a great way up; yet there, the Water is to be had, by
digging or making Wells in the sandy Bay, two or three Foot deep, just at the
mouth of the River.

The 11th Day Captain Swan sent 70 Men in four Canoas into this River, to seek
a Town; for although we had no intelligence of any, yet the Country appearing
very promising, we did not question but they would find Inhabitants before they
returned. They spent two Days in rowing up and down the Creeks and Rivers; at
last they came to a large Field of Maiz, which was almost ripe: they
immediately fell to gathering as fast as they could, and intended to lade the
Canoas; but seeing an Indian that was set to watch the Corn, they quitted that
troublesome and tedious work, and seized him, and brought him aboard, in hopes
by his information, to have some more easy and expedite way of a supply, by
finding Corn ready cut and dried. He being examined, said, that there was a
Town called Santa Pecaque, four leagues from the place where he was taken, and
that if we designed to go thither he would undertake to be our Guide. Captain
Swan immediately ordered his Men to make ready, and the same Evening went away
with Eight Canoas and 140 Men, taking the Indian for their Guide.

He rowed about five Leagues up the River, and landed the next Morning. The
River at this place was not above Pistol-shot wide, and the Banks pretty high
on each side, and the Land plain and even. He left 23 Men to guard the Canoas,
and marched with the rest to the Town. He set out from the Canoas at six a Clock
in the Morning, and reached the Town by 10. The way through which he passed was
very plain, part of it Wood-land, part Savannahs The Savannahs were full of
Horses, Bulls and Cows. The Spaniards seeing him coming run all away; so he
entered the Town without the least opposition.

This Town of Santa Pecaque stands on a Plain, in a Savannah, by the side of a
Wood, with many Fruit Trees about it. It is but a small Town, but very regular,
after the Spanish mode, with a Parade in the midst. The Houses fronting the
Parade had all Balconies: there were two Churches; one against the Parade, the
other at the end of the Town. It is inhabited most with Spaniards. Their
chiefest occupation is Husbandry. There are also some Carriers, who are
employed by the Merchants of Compostella, to Trade for them to and from the
Mines.

Compostella is a rich Town, about 21 leagues from hence. It is the chiefest in
all this part of the Kingdom, and is reported to have 70 white Families; which
is a great matter in these parts; for it may be, that such a Town has not less
than 500 Families of copper-coloured People, besides the white. The Silver
Mines are about five or six leagues from Santa Pecaque; where, as we were told,
the Inhabitants of Compostella had some hundreds of Slaves at Work. The Silver
here, and all over the Kingdom of Mexico, is said to be finer and richer in
proportion than that of Potosi or Peru, though the Oar be not so abundant; and
the Carriers of this Town of Santa Pecaque, carry the Oar to Compostella, where
it is refined. These Carriers, or Sutlers, also furnish the Slaves at the Mines
with Maiz, whereof here was great plenty now in the Town designed for that use:
Here was also Sugar, Salt, and Salt-fish.

Captain Swan's only business at Santa Pecaque was to get Provision; therefore
he ordered his Men to divide themselves into two parts, and by turns carry down
the Provision to the Canoas; one half remaining in the Town to secure what they
had taken, while the other half were going and coming. In the Afternoon they
caught some Horses, and the next Morning, being the 17th day, 57 Men, and some
Horses, went laden with Maiz to the Canoas. They found them, and the Men left
to guard them, in good order; though the Spaniards had given them a small
diversion, and wounded one Man: but our Men of the Canoas landed, and drove
them away. These that came loaded to the Canoas left 7 Men more there, so that
now they were 30 Men to guard the Canoas. At Night the other returned; and the
18th Day in the Morning, that half which staid the Day before at the Town, took
their turn of going with every Man his burden, and 24 Horses-laden. Before
they returned, Captain Swan, and his other Men at the Town, caught a Prisoner,
who said, that there were near a thousand Men of all colors, Spaniards and
Indians, Negroes and Mulatto's, in arms, at a place called St. Jago, but 3
Leagues off, the chief Town on this River; that the Spaniards were armed with
Guns and Pistols, and the Copper-coloured with Swords and Lances. Captain Swan,
fearing the ill consequence of separating his small Company, was resolved the
next Day to march away with the whole Party; and therefore he ordered his Men
to catch as many Horses as they could, that they might carry the more Provision
with them. Accordingly, the next Day, being the 19th Day of February 1686.
Captain Swan called out his Men betimes to be gone; but they refused to go, and
said, that they would not leave the Town till all the Provision was in the
Canoas: Therefore he was forced to yield to them, and suffered half the company
to go as before: They had now 54 Horses laden, which Captain Swan ordered to be
tied one to another, and the Men to go in two bodies, 25 before, and as many
behind; but the Men would go at their own rate, every Man leading his Horse.
The Spaniards observed their manner of marching, and laid an Ambush about a
Mile from the Town, which they managed with such success, that falling on our
body of Men, who were guarding the Corn to the Canoas, they killed them every
one. Capt. Swan hearing the report of their Guns, ordered his Men, who were
then in the Town with him, to march out to their assistance; but some opposed
him, despising their Enemies, till two of the Spaniards Horses, that had lost
their Riders, came galloping into the Town in a great fright, both bridled and
saddled, with each a pair of Holsters by their sides, and one had a Carbine
newly discharged; which was an apparent token that our Men had been engaged,
and that by Men better armed than they imagined they should meet with.
Therefore Captain Swan immediately marched out of the Town, and his Men all
followed him; and when he came to the place where the Engagement had been, he
saw all his Men that went out in the Morning lying dead. They were stripped, and
so cut and mangled that he scarce knew one Man. Captain Swan had not more Men
then with him, than those were who lay dead before him, yet the Spaniards never
came to oppose him, but kept at a great distance; for it is probable, the
Spaniards had not cut off so many Men of ours, but with the loss of a great
many of their own. So he marched down to the Canoas, and came aboard the Ship
with the Maiz that was already in the Canoas. We had about 50 Men killed, and
among the rest, my Ingenious Friend Mr. Ringrose was one, who wrote that Part
of the History of the Buccaneers, which relates to Captain Sharp. He was at
this time Cape-Merchant, or Super-Cargo of Captain Swan's Ship. He had no mind
to this Voyage; but was necessitated to engage in it or starve.

This loss discouraged us from attempting any thing more hereabouts. Therefore
Captain Swan proposed to go to Cape St. Lucas on California to careen. He had
two reasons for this: First, that he thought he could lie there secure from the
Spaniards; and next, that if he could get a Commerce with the Indians there, he
might make a discovery in the Lake of California, and by their Assistance try
for some of the Plate of New Mexico.

This Lake of California (for so the Sea, Channel or Straight, between that and
the Continent, is called) is but little known to the Spaniards, by what I could
ever learn; for their Drafts do not agree about it. Some of them do make
California an Island, but give no manner of account of the Tides flowing in the
Lake, or what depth of Water there is, or of the Harbors, Rivers, or Creeks,
that border on it: Whereas on the West side of the Island, toward the Asiatick
Coast, their Pilot-Book gives an account of the Coast from Cape St. Lucas to 40
d. North. Some of their Drafts newly made do make California to join to the
Main. I do believe that the Spaniards do not care to have this Lake discovered,
for fear lest other European Nations should get knowledge of it, and by that
means visit the Mines of New Mexico. We heard that not long before our arrival
here, the Indians in the Province of New Mexico made an Insurrection, and
destroyed most of the Spaniards there, but that some of them flying toward the
Gulf or Lake of California, made Canoas in that Lake, and got safe away;
though the Indians of the Lake of California, seem to be at perfect Enmity with
the Spaniards. We had an old intelligent Spaniard now aboard, who said that he
spoke with a Friar that made his Escape among them.

New Mexico, by report of several English Prisoners there, and Spaniards I have
met with, lies N. W. from Old Mexico between four and 500 Leagues, and the
biggest part of the Treasure which is found in this Kingdom, is in that
Province; but without doubt there are plenty of Mines in other parts, as well
in this part of the Kingdom where we now were, as in other places; and
probably, on the Main, bordering on the Lake of California; although not yet
discovered by the Spaniards, who have Mines enough, and therefore, as yet, have
no reason to discover more.

In my opinion, here might be very advantageous Discoveries made by any that
would attempt it: for the Spaniards have more than they can well manage. I
know, they would lie like the Dog in the Manger; although not able to eat
themselves, yet they would endeavor to hinder others. But the Voyage thither
being so far, I take that to be one reason that has hindered the Discoveries
of these parts: yet it is possible, that a Man may find a nearer way hither
than we came; I mean by the North West.

I know there have been diverse attempts made about a North West Passage, and
all unsuccessful: yet I am of opinion, that such a Passage may be found. All
our Countrymen that have gone to discover the N. W. Passage, have endeavored
to pass to the Westward, beginning their search along Davis's or Hudson's Bay.
But if I was to go on this Discovery, I would go first into the South Seas,
bend my course from thence along by California, and that way seek a Passage
back into the West Seas. For as others have spent the Summer, in first
searching on this more known side nearer home, and so before they got through,
the time of the year obliged them to give over their search, and provide for a
long Course back again, for fear of being left in the Winter; on the contrary,
I would search first on the less known Coast of the South Seaside, and then as
the Year past away, I should need no retreat, for I should come farther into my
knowledge, if I succeeded in my attempt, and should be without that Dread and
Fear which the others must have in passing from the known to the unknown: who,
for ought I know, gave over their search just as they were on the point of
accomplishing their Desires.

I would take the same Method if I was to go to discover the North-East
Passage. I would winter about Japan, Corea, or the North-East part of China;
and taking the Spring and Summer before me, I would make my first trial on the
Coast of Tartary, wherein, if I succeeded, I should come into some known Parts,
and have a great deal of time before me to reach Archangel or some other Port.
Captain Wood, indeed, says, this N. East Passage is not to be found for Ice:
but how often do we see that sometimes Designs have been given over as
impossible, and at another time, and by other ways, those very things have been
accomplished; but enough of this.

The next day after that fatal Skirmish near Santa Pecaque, Capt. Swan ordered
all our Water to be filled, and to get ready to sail. The 21st day we sailed
from hence, directing our Course toward California: we had the wind at N. W.
and W. N. W. a small gale, with a great Sea out of the West. We past by 3
Islands called the Maria's. After we past these Islands we had much wind at N.
N. W. and N. W. and at N. with thick rainy weather. We beat till the 6th day of
February, but it was against a brisk wind, and proved labor in vain. For we
were now within reach of the Land Trade-wind, which was opposite to us: but
would we go to California upon the discovery, or otherwise we should bear 60 or
70 Leagues off from the shore; where we should avoid the Land-winds, and have
the benefit of the true Easterly Trade-wind.

Finding therefore that we got nothing, but rather lost ground, being then 21
d. 5 m. N. we steered away more to the Eastward again for the Islands Maria's,
and the 7th day we came to an anchor at the East End of the middle Island, in 8
fathom Water, good clean Sand.

The Maria's are three uninhabited Islands in lat. 21 d. 40 m. they are distant
from Cape St. Lucas on California 40 leagues, bearing East South East, and they
are distant from Cape Corrientes 20 leagues, bearing upon the same points of
the Compass with Cape St. Lucas. They stretch N. W. and S. E. about 14 leagues.
There are 2 or 3 small high Rocks near them: The westermost of them is the
biggest Island of the three; and they are all three of an indifferent height.
The Soil is stony and dry, the Land in most places is covered with a shrubby
sort of Wood, very thick and troublesome to pass through. In some places there
is plenty of straight large Cedars, though speaking of the places where I have
found Cedars, Chap. 3. I forgot to mention this place. The Spaniards make
mention of them in other places: but I speak of those which I have seen. All
round by the Seaside it is sandy; and there is produced a green prickly Plant,
whose leaves are much like the Penguin-leaf, and the root like the root of a
Sempervive, but much larger. This root being baked in an Oven is good to eat:
and the Indians on California, as I have been informed, have great part of
their subsistence from these Roots. We made an Oven in a sandy Bank, and baked
of these Roots, and I eat of them: but none of us greatly cared for them. They
taste exactly like the Roots of our English Burdock boiled, of which I have
eaten. Here are plenty of Guanoes and Raccoons (a large sort of Rat) and Indian
Conies, and abundance of large Pigeons and Turtle-Doves. The Sea is also pretty
well stored with Fish, and Turtle or Tortoise, and Seal. This is the second
place on this Coast where I did see any Seal: and this place helps to confirm
what I have observed, that they are seldom seen but where there is plenty of
Fish. Captain Swan gave the middle Island the Name of Prince George's Island.

The 8th Day we run nearer the Island, and anchored in five fathom, and moored
Head and Stern, and unrigg'd both Ship and Bark, in order to Careen. Here Capt.
Swan proposed to go into the East Indies. Many were well pleased with the
Voyage; but some thought, such was their Ignorance, that he would carry them
out of the World; for about two thirds of our Men did not think there was any
such way to be found; but at last he gained their Consents.

At our first coming hither we did eat nothing but Seal; but after the first 2
or 3 Days our Strikers brought aboard Turtle every Day; on which we fed all the
time that we lay here, and saved our Maiz for our Voyage. Here also we measured
all our Maiz, and found we had about 80 Bushels. This we divided into three
parts; one for the Bark, and two for the Ship; our Men were divided also, 100
Men aboard the Ship, and 50 aboard the Bark, besides three or four Slaves in
each.

I had been a long time sick of a Dropsy, a Distemper, whereof, as I said
before, many of our Men died; so here I was laid and covered all but my Head in
the hot Sand: I endured it near half an Hour, and then was taken out and laid
to Sweat in a Tent. I did sweat exceedingly while I was in the Sand, and I do
believe it did me much good, for I grew well soon after.

We staid here till the 26th Day, and then both Vessels being clean, we sailed
to the Valley of Balderas to Water, for we could not do it here now. In the
wet Season indeed here is Water enough, for the Brooks then run down
plentifully; but now, though there was Water, yet it was bad filling, it being
a great way to fetch it from the holes where it lodged. The 28th Day we
anchored in the bottom of the Bay in the Valley of Balderas, right against the
River, where we watered before; but this River was brackish now in the dry
season; and therefore we went 2 or 3 Leagues nearer Cape Corrientes, and
anchored by a small round Island, not half a Mile from the Shore. The Island is
about four Leagues to the Northward of the Cape; and the Brook where we filled
our Water is just within the Island, upon the Main. Here our Strikers struck 9
or 10 Jew-fish; some we did eat, and the rest we salted: and the 29th Day we
filled 32 Tuns of very good Water.

Having thus provided our selves, we had nothing more to do, but to put in
execution our intended Expedition to the East Indies, in hopes of some better
success there, than we had met with on this little frequented Coast. We came
on it full of expectations; for besides the richness of the Country, and the
probability of finding some Seaports worth visiting, we persuaded our selves
that there must needs be Shipping and Trade here, and that Acapulca and La Vera
Cruz were to the Kingdom of Mexico, what Panama and Portobel are to that of
Peru, viz. Marts for carrying on a constant Commerce between the South and
North Seas, as indeed they are. But whereas we expected that this Commerce
should be managed by Sea, we found our selves mistaken: that of Mexico being
almost wholly a Land-trade, and managed more by Mules than by Ships: so that
instead of profit we met with little on this Coast, besides fatigues, hardships
and losses, and so were the more easily induced to try what better fortune we
might have in the East Indies. But to do right to Captain Swan, he had no
intention to be as a Privateer in the East Indies; but, as he has often
assured me with his own Mouth, he resolved to take the first opportunity of
returning to England: So that he feigned a compliance with some of his Men, who
were bent upon going to cruise at Manila, that he might have leisure to take
some favorable opportunity of quitting the Privateer Trade.

CHAP. X.
Their Departure from Cape Corrientes for the Ladrone Islands, and the
East Indies. Their Course thither, and Accidents by the way: with a Table of
each days Run, etc. Of the different accounts of the breadth of these Seas.
Guam, one of the Ladrone Islands. The Coco-Nut Tree, Fruit, etc. The Toddi, or
Arack that distills from it; with other Uses that are made of it. Coire Cables.
The Lime, or Crab Limon. The Bread-fruit. The Native Indians of Guam. Their
Proe's, a remarkable sort of Boats: and of those used in the East Indies. The
State of Guam: and the Provisions with which they were furnished there.

I Have given an Account in the last Chapter of the Resolutions we took of
going over to the East Indies. But having more calmly considered on the length
of our Voyage, from hence to Guam, one of the Ladrone Islands, which is the
first place that we could to^ch at, and there also being not certain to find
Provisions, most of our Men were almost daunted at the thoughts of it; for we
had not 60 days Provision, at a little more than half a pint of Maiz a day for
each Man, and no other Provision, except 3 Meals of salted Jew-fish; and we had
a great many Rars aboard, which we could not hinder from eating part of our
Maiz. Beside, the great distance between Cape Corrientes and Guam: which is
variously set down. The Spaniards, who have the greatest reason to know best,
make it to be between 2300 and 2400 Leagues; our Books also reckon it
differently, between 90 and 100 degrees, which all comes short indeed of 2000
Leagues, but even that was a Voyage enough to frighten us, considering our
scanty Provisions. Captain Swan, to encourage his Men to go with him, persuaded
them that the English Books did give the best account of the distance; his
Reasons were many, although but weak. He urged among the rest, that Sir Thomas
Candish and Sir Francis Drake, did run it in less than 50 Days, and that he did
not question but that our Ships were better sailers, than those which were
built in that Age, and that he did not doubt to get there in little more than
40 Days: This being the best time in the Year for breezes, which undoubtedly is
the reason that the Spaniards set out from Acapulco about this time; and that
although they are 60 Days in their Voyage, it is because they are great Ships,
deep laden, and very heavy sailers; besides, they wanting nothing, are in no
great haste in their way, but sail with a great deal of their usual Caution.
And when they come near the Island Guam, they lie by in the Night for a Week,
before they make Land. In prudence we also should have contrived to lie by in
the Night when we came near Land, for otherwise we might have run ashore, or
have outsailed the Islands, and lost sight of them before Morning. But our bold
Adventures seldom proceed with such wariness when in any straights.

But of all Captain Swan's Arguments, that which prevailed most with them was,
his promising them, as I have said, to cruise off the Manila's. So he and his
Men being now agreed, and they encouraged with the hope of gain, which works
its way through all Difficulties, we set out from Cape Corrientes March the 31st,
1686. We were 2 Ships in Company, Captain Swan's Ship, and a Bark commanded
under Captain Swan, by Captain Teat, and we were 150 Men, 100 aboard of the
Ship, and 50 aboard the Bark, beside Slaves, as I said.

We had a small Land-wind at E. N. E. which carried us 3 or 4 Leagues, then the
Sea-wind came at W. N. W. a fresh gale, so we steered away S. W. By 6 a Clock
in the Evening we were about 9 leagues S. W. from the Cape, then we met a
Land-wind which blew fresh all Night, and the next Morning about 10 a Clock we
had the Sea-breez at N. N. E. so that at Noon we were 30 leagues from the Cape.
It blew a fresh gale of Wind, which carried us off into the true Trade-wind,
(of the difference of which Trade-winds I shall speak in the Chapter of Winds,
in the Appendix) for although the constant Sea-breez near the Shore is at W. N.
W. yet the true Trade off at Sea, when you are clear of the Land-winds, is at
E. N. E. At first we had it at N. N. E. so it came about Northerly, and then to
the East as we run off. At 250 leagues distance from the Shore we had it at E.
N. E. and there it stood till we came within 40 leagues of Guam. When we had
eaten up our 3 Meals of salted Jewfish, in so many Days time, we had nothing
but our small allowance of Maiz.

After the 31st Day of March we made great runs every Day, having very fair
clear Weather, and a fresh Trade wind, which we made use of with all our Sails,
and we made many good Observations of the Sun. At our first setting out, we
steered into the lat. of 13 degrees, which is near the lat. of Guam; then we
steered West, keeping in that lat. By that time we had sailed 20 Days, our Men
seeing we made such great runs, and the Wind like to continue, repined because
they were kept at such short allowance. Captain Swan endeavored to persuade
them to have a little Patience; yet nothing but an augmentation of their daily
allowance would appease them. Captain Swan, though with much reluctance, gave
way to a small enlargement of our Commons, for now we had not above 10
spoonfuls of boiled Maiz a Man, once a day, whereas before we had ^: I do
believe that this short allowance did me a great deal of good, though others
were weakened by it; for I found that my Strength increased, and my Dropsy
wore off. Yet I drank 3 times every 24 Hours; but many of our Men did not drink
in 9 or 10 days time, and some not in 12 days; one of our Men did not drink in
17 days time, and said he was not adry when he did drink; yet he made water
every day more or less. One of our Men in the midst of these hardships was
found guilty of theft, and condemned for the same, to have ^ blows from each
Man in the Ship, with a 2 inch and a half rope on his bare back. Captain Swan
began first, and struck with a good will; whose example was followed by all of
us.

It was very strange, that in all this Voyage we did not see one Fish, not so
much as a Flying-Fish, nor any sort of Fowl; but at one time, when we were by
my account 4975 miles West from Cape Corrientes, then we saw a great number of
Boobies, which we supposed came from some Rocks not far from us, which were
mentioned in some of our Sea-Carts, but we did not see them.

After we had run the 1900 Leagues by our reckoning, which made the English
account to Guam, the Men began to murmur against Captain Swan, for persuading
them to come this Voyage; but he gave them fair words, and told them that the
Spanish account might probably be the truest, and seeing the Gale was likely to
continue, a short time longer would end our troubles.

map of the East Indies A Map of the EAST INDIES


As we drew nigh the Island, we met with some small Rain, and the Clouds
settling in the West, were an apparent token that we were not far from Land;
for in these Climates, betwixt or near the Tropicks, where the Trade-wind blows
constantly, the Clouds which fly swift over head, yet seem near the Limb of the
Horizon to hang without much motion or alteration, where the Land is near. I
have often taken notice of it, especially if it is high Land, for you shall
then have the Clouds hang about it without any visible motion.

The 20th day of May, our Bark being about 3 Leagues ahead of our Ship, sailed
over a rocky Shole, on which there was but 4 fathom water, and abundance of
Fish swimming about the Rocks. They imagined by this that the Land was not far
off; so they clapped on a Wind with the Barks Head to the North, and being past
the Shole lay by for us. When we came up with them, Captain Teat came aboard
us, and related what he had seen. We were then in lat. 12. d. 55 m. steering
West. The Island Guam is laid down in Lat. 13. d. N. by the Spaniards, who are
Masters of it, keeping it as a baiting-place as they go to the Philippine
Islands. Therefore we clapped on a Wind and stood to Northward, being somewhat
troubled and doubtful whether we were right, because there is no Shole laid
down, in the Spanish Drafts about the Island Guam, At 4 a Clock, to our great
Joy, we saw the Island Guam, at about 8 Leagues distance.

It was well for Captain Swan that we got sight of it before our Provision was
spent, of which we had but enough for 3 days more; for, as I was afterward
informed, the Men had contrived, first to kill Captain Swan, and eat him when
the Victuals was gone, and after him all of us who were accessory in promoting
the undertaking this Voyage. This made Captain Swan say to me after our
ararrival at Guam, Ah! Dampier, you would have made them but a poor Meal; for I
was as lean as the Captain was lusty and fleshy. The Wind was at E. N. E. and
the Land bore at N. N. E. therefore we stood to the Northward, till we brought
the Island to bear East, and then we turned to get in to an anchor.

The account I have given hitherto of our Course from Cape Corrientes in the
Kingdom of Mexico, (for I have mentioned another Cape of that name in Peru,
South of the Bay of Panama) to Guam, one of the Ladrone Islands, has been in
the gross. But for the satisfaction of those who may think it serviceable to
the fixing the Longitudes of these Parts, or to any other Use in Geography or
Navigation, I have here subjoined a particular Table of every Days run, which
was as follows.

Day Course. Did S. W Latt. Winds. March. 31 SW 5d W. 27 17 20 20: 11 W N W Ap
1 SW 5 W 106 68 81 R. 19: 25 N W: NNW 2 SW 1 W 142 98 101 R. 17: 25 N b W 3 W
bv S 102 19 100 Ob. 17: 6 N 4 W 12 S 140 29 136 Ob. 16: 37 N: N N E 5 W 20 S
160 54 150 Ob. 15: 43 N 6 W 10 S 108 18 106 Ob. 15: 25 N E: 7 W 15 S 89 23 86
Ob. 15: 2 N E: E N E 8 W 2 S 64 5 63 Ob. 14: 57 E N E 9 W 4 S 94 6 93 Ob. 14:
51 E N E 10 W 5 S 138 12 137 Ob. 14: 39 E N E 11 W 5 S 124 10 123 Ob. 14: 29 E
N E 12 W 5 S 170 14 169 R. 14: 15 E N E 13 W 5 S 170 14 169 R. 14: 1 E N E 14 W
5 S 180 15 177 R. 13: 46 E N E 15 W 6 S 174 18 172 R. 13: 28 ENE clo^ 16 W 6 S
182 19 180 R. 13: 9 E N E m^ 17 W 6 S 216 22 224 R. 12: 47 E N E Ra^ The Sum
of the Westings hitherto is -- 2283 which make Degrees. of Longitude -- 39 d. 5 m.
From hence my Course is most West, sometimes Southerly, sometimes Northerly.
Day Course. Did N. or S. W. Lat. Winds. 18 W 192 0 192 R. 12: 47 E by N 19 W
180 0 180 R. 12: 47 E cloudy 20 W 177 0 170 R 12: 47 E N E 21 W 171 0 171 R.
12: 47 E N E 22 W 180 0 180 R. 12: 47 E N E 23 R. W. Ob. W4N 170 11N 168 R. 12:
47 Ob. 12: 58 E by N 24 R. W. 146 0 146 R. 12: 58 E by N 25 W 146 0 146 R. 12:
58 E by N 26 W 3 N 185 9N 184 Ob. 13: 7 E by N 27 W 140 0 140 Ob. 13: 7 E by N
28 W 167 0 167 R. 13: 7 E by N 29 W 2 N 172 5 171 Ob. 13: 12 E 30 W 172 0 173
Ob. 13: 12 E N E M 1 W 196 0 196 R. 13: 12 E by N 2 W 160 0 160 Ob. 13: 12 E by
N 3 W 154 0 154 R. 13: 12 E N E 4 R. W. 153 5S 152 R. 13: 12 E N E Ob. W. 2S
Ob. 13: 7 5 W 2 N 180 7 N 179 Ob. 13: 14 E N E 6 W 2 N 172 9 N 171 Ob. 13. 22 E
N E 7 W 160 0 160 Ob. 13: 22 E N E 8 W 3 S 149 7 S 148 Ob. 13: 15 E by N 9 W 4
S 134 9 S 33 Ob. 13: 6 E N E 10 W 128 0 128 R. 13: 6 E N E 11 W 5 S 112 9 111
Ob. 12: 57 E N E 12 W 128 0 128 R. 12: 57 E N E 13 W 129 0 129 R. 12: 57 E N E
14 W 128 0 128 R. 12: 57 E N E 15 W 4 N 118 8 N 117 Ob. 13: 5 E N E 16 W 6 S
114 11 S 113 Ob. 12: 54 E N E 17 W 3 S 109 5 S 108 Ob. 12: 49 E N E 18 W 120 0
120 R. 12: 49 E N E 19 W 127 0 137 R. 12: 49 E N E 20 W 134 0 130 R. 12: 50 E
21 NW7W 13 8 N 10 R. 12: 59 E N E Sum of all the Westings -- 7323 Making Degrees.
of Longitude in all -- 125 d. 11. m.

Now the Island Guam bore N. N. E. 8 Leagues did. this gives 22 m. to my Lat.
and takes 9 from my Meridian did. so that the Island is in Lat. 13: 21; and
the Merid. did. from Corrientes 7302 miles; which, reduced into degrees, makes
125 d. 11 m.

The Table consists of 7 Columns. The first is of the days of the Month. The 2d
Column contains each days course, or the point of the Compass we ran upon. The
3d gives the distance or length of such course in Italian or Geometrical miles,
(at the rate of 60 to a degree (or the Progress the Ship makes every day; and
is reckoned always from noon to noon. But because the Course is not always made
upon the same Rumb in a direct line, therefore the 4th and 5th Columns show how
many miles we ran to the South every day, and how many to the West; which last
was our main run in this Voyage. By the 17th of April we were got pretty near
into the latitude of Guam, and our Course then lying along that parallel, our
Northing and Southing consequently were but little, according as the Ship
deviated from its direct Course; and such deviation is thenceforward expressed by
N. or S. in the 5th Column, and the Ships keeping straight on the West Rumb, by
0, that is to say, no Northing or Southing. The 6th Column shows the lat. we
were in every day, where R. signifies the dead Reckoning, by the running of the
Logs, and Ob. shows the lat. by observation. The 7th Column shows the Wind and
Weather.

To these I would have added an 8th Column, to show the variation of the
Needle; but as it was very small in this Course, so neither did we make any
observation of it, above once, after we were set out from the Mexican Coast. At
our departure from Cape Corrientes, we found it to be 4 d. 28 m. Easterly: and
the observation we made of it afterward, when we had gone about a third of the
Voyage, showed it to be so near the same, to be decreasing: Neither did we
observe it at Guam, for Captain Swan who had the Instruments in his Cabin, did
not seem much to regard it: Yet I am inclined to think that at Guam, the
Variation might be either none at all, or even increasing to the Westward.

To conclude, May 20th at Noon (when we begin to call it 21st) we were in lat.
12 d. 50 m. N. by R. having run since the Noon before 134 Miles directly West.
We continued the same Course till Two that Afternoon, for which I allow ten
Miles more West still, and then, finding the parallel we ran upon to be too
much Southerly, we clapped on a Wind and sailed directly North, till Five in the
Afternoon, having in that time run 8 Miles, and increased our latitude so many
Minutes, making it 12 d. 58 m. We then saw the Island Guam bearing N. N. E.
distant from us about 8 leagues, which gives the latitude of the Island 13 d.
20 m. And according to the account foregoing, its longitude is 125 d. 11 m.
West from the Cape Corrientes on the Coast of Mexico, allowing 58 and 59
Italian Miles to a degree in these latitudes, at the common rate of 60 Miles to
a degree of the Equator, as before computed.

As a Corollary from hence it will follow, that upon a supposal of the truth of
the general allowance, Seamen make of 60 Italian Miles to an Equinoctial
degree, that the South Sea must be of a greater breadth by 25 degrees, than
it is commonly reckoned by Hydrographers, who make it only about 100, more or
less. For since we found (as I shall have occasion to say) the distance from
Guam to the Eastern parts of Asia, to be much the same with the common
reckoning; it follows by way of necessary consequence from hence, that the 25
degrees of longitude, or thereabouts, which are under-reckoned in the distance
between America and the East Indies Westward, are over-reckoned in the breadth
of Asia and Africa, the Atlantic Sea, or the American Continent, or all
together; and so that Tract of the Terraqueous Globe, must be so much shortened.
And for a further confirmation of the fact, I shall add, that as to the
Aethiopick or Indian Sea, its breadth must be considerably less than it is
generally calculated to be; if it be true what I have heard over and over, from
several able Seamen, whom I have conversed with in these parts, that Ships
sailing from the Cape of Good Hope to New Holland, (as many Ships bound to
Java, or thereabouts, keep that latitude) find themselves there, (and sometimes
to their cost) running aground when they have thought themselves to be a great
way off; and it is from hence possibly, that the Dutch call that part of this
Coast the Land of Indraught, (as if it magnetically drew Ships too fast to it)
and give cautions to avoid it: But I rather think, it is the nearness of the
Land, than any Whirlpool, or the like, that surprises them. As to the breadth
of the Atlantic Sea, I am from good hands assured, that it is over-reckoned by
six, seven, eight, or ten degrees; for besides the concurrent Accounts of
several experienced Men, who have confirmed the same to me: Mr. Canby
particularly, who has sailed as a Mate in a great many Voyages, from Cape
Lopez, on the Coast of Guinea, to Barbados, and is much esteemed as a very
sensible Man, has often told me, that he constantly found the distance to be
between 60 and 62 degrees; whereas it is laid down in 68, 69, 70, and 72
degrees, in the common draughts.

As to the supposition it self, which our Seamen make, in the allowing but 60
Miles to a Degree, I am not ignorant how much this has been canvased of late
Years especially, and that the prevailing opinion has been that about 70, or
upwards, should be allowed. But till I can see some better grounds for the
exactness of those trials, that have been made on Land by Mr. Norwood and
others, considering the inequality of the Earths surface, as well as the
obliquity of the way; in their allowing for which, I am somewhat doubtful of
their measures. Upon the whole matter, I cannot but adhere to the general
Sea-calculation, confirmed as to the main by daily experience, till some more
certain estimate shall be made, than those hitherto attempted. For we find our
selves, when we sail North or South, to be brought to our intended place, in a
time agreeable enough with what we expect upon the usual supposition, making
all reasonable allowance, for the little unavoidable deviations East or West:
and there seems no reason why the same estimate should not serve us in crossing
the Meridians, which we find so true in Sailing under them. As to this course
of ours to Guam particularly, we should rather increase than shorten our
estimate of the length of it, considering that the Easterly Wind and Current
being so strong, and bearing therefore our Log after us, as is usual in such
cases; should we therefore, in casting up the run of the Log, make allowance
for so much space as the Log it self drove after us (which is commonly 3 or 4
Miles in 100, in so brisk a gale as this was) we must have reckoned more than
125 degrees; but in this Voyage we made no such allowance: (though it be usual
to do it) so that how much soever this computation of mine exceeds the common
Draughts, yet is it of the shortest, according to our experiment and
calculation.

But to proceed with our Voyage: The Island Guam or Guahon, (as the Native
Indians pronounce it) is one of the Ladrone Islands, belongs to the Spaniards,
who have a small Fort with six Guns in it, with a Governor, and 20 or 30
Soldiers. They keep it for the relief and refreshment of their Philippine
Ships, that touch here in their way from Acapulco to Manila, but the Winds will
not so easily let them take this way back again. The Spaniards of late have
named Guam, the Island Maria, it is about 12 leagues long, and 4 broad, lying
N. and S. It is pretty high Champain Land.

The 21st day of May, 1686. at 11 a Clock in the Evening, we anchored near the
middle of the Island Guam, on the West side; a Mile from the shore. At a
distance it appears flat and even, but coming near it you will find it stands
shelving, and the East side, which is much the highest, is fenced with steep
Rocks, that oppose the Violence of the Sea, which continually rage against it,
being driven with the constant Trade-wind, and on that side there is no
Anchoring. The West side is pretty low, and full of small sandy Bays, divided
with as many rocky Points. The Soil of the Island is reddish, dry and
indifferent fruitful. The Fruits are chiefly Rice, Pine-Apples, Water-melons,
Musk-melons, Oranges and Limes, Coco-nuts, and a sort of Fruit called by us
Bread-fruit.

The Coco-nut Trees grow by the Sea, on the Western side in great Groves, 3 or
4 Miles in length, and a Mile or two broad. This Tree is in shape like the
Cabbage-tree, and at a distance they are not to be known each from other, only
the Coco-nut Tree is fuller of Branches; but the Cabbage-tree generally is much
higher, though the Coco-nut Trees in some places are very high.

The Nut or Fruit grows at the head of the Tree, among the Branches and in
Clusters, 10 or 12 in a Cluster. The Branch to which they grow is about the
bigness of a Man's Arm, and as long, running small toward the end. It is of a
yellow Color, full of Knots, and very tough. The Nut is generally bigger than
a Man's Head. The outer Rind is near two Inches thick, before you come to the
Shell; the Shell it self is black, thick, and very hard. The Kernel in some
Nuts is near an Inch thick, sticking to the inside of the Shell clear round,
leaving a hollow in the middle of it, which contains about a Pint, more or
less, according to the bigness of the Nut, for some are much bigger than others.

This Cavity is full of sweet, delicate, wholesome and resreshing Water. While
the Nut is growing, all the inside is full of this Water, without any Kernel at
all; but as the Nut grows toward its Maturity, the Kernel begins to gather and
settle round on the inside of the Shell, and is soft like Cream; and as the Nut
ripens, it increases in substance and becomes hard. The ripe Kernel is sweet
enough, but very hard to digest, therefore seldom eaten, unless by Strangers,
who know not the effects of it; but while it is young and soft like Pap, some
Men will eat it, scraping it out with a Spoon, after they have drunk the Water
that was within it. I like the Water best when the Nut is almost ripe, for it
is then sweetest and briskest.

When these Nuts are ripe and gathered, the outside Rind becomes of a brown
rusty color; so that one would think that they were dead and dry; yet they
will sprout out like Onions, after they have been hanging in the Sun 3 or 4
Months, or thrown about in a House or Ship, and if planted afterward in the
Earth, they will grow up to a Tree. Before they thus sprout out, there is a
small spungy round knob grows in the inside, which we call an Apple. This at
first is no bigger than the top of ones finger, but increases daily, sucking
up the Water till it is grown so big as to fill up the Cavity of the Coco-nut,
and then it begins to sprout forth. By this time the Nut that was hard, begins
to grow oily and soft, thereby giving passage to the Sprout that springs from
the Apple, which Nature has so contrived, that it points to the hole in the
Shell, (of which there are three, till it grows ripe, just where it is fastened
by its Stalk to the Tree; but one of these holes remains open, even when it is
ripe) through which it creeps and spreads forth its Branches. You may let these
teeming Nuts sprout out a foot and half, or two foot high before you plant
them, for they will grow a great while like an Onion out of their own Substance.

Beside the Liquor or Water in the Fruit, there is also a sort of Wine drawn
from the Tree called Toddy, which looks like Whey. It is sweet and very
pleasant, but it is to be drunk within 24 hours after it is drawn, for
afterward it grows sour. Those that have a great many Trees, draw a Spirit
from the sour Wine, called Arack. Arack is distilled also from Rice, and other
things in the East Indies; but none is so much esteemed for making Punch as
this sort, made of Toddy, or the sap of the Coco-nut Tree, for it makes most
delicate Punch; but it must have a dash of Brandy to hearten it, because this
Arack is not strong enough to make good Punch of it self. This sort of Liquor
is chiefly used about Goa; and therefore it has the Name of Goa Arack. The way
of drawing the Toddy from the Tree, is by cutting the top of a Branch that
would bear Nuts; but before it has any Fruit; and from thence the Liquor which
was to feed its Fruit, distills into the hole of a Callabash that is hung upon
it.

This Branch continues running almost as long as the Fruit would have been
growing, and then it dries away. The Tree has usually three fruitful Branches,
which if they be all tapp'd thus, then the Tree bears no Fruit that Year; but
if one or two only be tapp'd, the other will bear Fruit all the while. The
Liquor which is thus drawn is emptied out of the Callabash duly Morning and
Evening, so long as it continues running, and is sold every Morning and Evening
in most Towns in the East Indies, and great gains are produced from it even
this way; but those that distill it and make Arack, reap the greatest profit.
There is also great profit made of the Fruit, both of the Nut and the Shell.

The Kernel is much used in making Broth. When the Nut is dry, they take off
the Husk, and giving two good Blows on the middle of the Nut, it breaks in two
equal parts, letting the Water fall on the Ground; then with a small Iron Rasp
made for the purpose, the Kernel or Nut is rasped out clean, which being put
into a little fresh Water, makes it become white as Milk. In this milky Water
they boil a Fowl, or any other sort of Flesh, and it makes very savory Broth.
English Seamen put this Water into boiled Rice, which they eat instead of
Ricemilk, carrying Nuts purposely to Sea with them. This they learn from the
Natives.

But the greatest use of the Kernel is to make Oil, both for burning and for
frying. The way to make the Oil is to grate or rasp the Kernel, and steep it in
fresh Water; then boil it, and scum off the Oil at top as it rises: But the
Nuts that make the Oil ought to be a long time gathered, so as that the Kernel
may be turning soft and oily.

The Shell of this Nut is used in the East Indies for Cups, Dishes, Ladles,
Spoons, and in a manner for all eating and drinking Vessels. Well shaped Nuts
are often brought home to Europe, and much esteemed. The Husk of the Shell is
of great use to make Cables; for the dry Husk is full of small Strings and
Threads, which being beaten, become soft, and the other Substance which was
mixed among it falls away like Saw-dust, leaving only the Strings. These are
afterward spun into long Yarns, and twisted up into Balls for Convenience: and
many of these Rope-Yarns joined together make good Cables. This Manufactory is
chiefly used at the Maldive-Islands, and the Threads sent in Balls into all
places that Trade thither, purposely for to make Cables. I made a Cable at
Achin with some of it. These are called Coire Cables; they will last very well.
But there is another sort of Coire Cables (as they are called) that are black,
and more strong and lasting; and are made of Strings that grow, like
Horse-hair, at the heads of certain Trees, almost like the Coconut Tree. This
sort comes most from the Island Timor. In the South Seas the Spaniards do make
Oakam to chalk their Ships, with the Husk of the Coco-nut, which is more
serviceable than that made of Hemp, and they say it will never rot. I have been
told by Captain Knox, who wrote the Relation of Ceylon, that in some places of
India they make a sort of course Cloth of the Husk of the Coco-nut, which is
used for Sails. I my self have seen a sort of course Sail-cloth made of such a
kind of substance; but whether the same or no I know not.

I have been the longer on this subject, to give the Reader a particular
Account of the use and profit of a Vegetable, which is possibly of all others
the most generally serviceable to the conveniences, as well as the necessities
of humane Life. Yet this Tree, that is of such great use, and esteemed so much
in the East Indies, is scarce regarded in the West Indies, for want of the
knowledge of the benefit which it may produce. And it is partly for the sake of
my Countrymen, in our American Plantations, that I have spoken so largely of
it. For the hot Climates there are a very proper soil for it: and indeed it is
so hardy, both in the raising it, and when grown, that it will thrive as well
in dry sandy ground as in rich land. I have found them growing very well in low
sandy Islands (on the West of Sumatra) that are over-flowed with the Sea every
Springtide; and though the Nuts there are not very big, yet this is no loss,
for the Kernel is thick and sweet; and the Milk, or Water in the inside, is
more pleasant and sweet than of the Nuts that grow in rich ground, which are
commonly large indeed, but not very sweet. These at Guam grow in dry ground,
are of a middle size, and I think the sweetest that I did ever taste. Thus much
for the Coco-nut.

The Lime is a sort of bastard or Crab Limon. The Tree, or Bush that bears it,
is prickly, like a Thorn, growing full of small boughs. In Jamaica, and other
places, they make of the Lime Bush Fences about Gardens, or any other
Enclosure, by planting the seeds close together, which growing up thick, spread
abroad, and make a very good Hedge. The Fruit is like a Limon, but a smaller;
the rind thin, and the enclosed substance full of Juice. The Juice is very
tart, yet of a pleasant taste sweetened with Sugar. It is chiefly used for
making Punch, both in the East and West Indies, as well ashore as at Sea, and
much of it is for that purpose yearly brought home to England, from out West
India Plantations. It is also used for a particular kind of Sauce, which is
called Pepper-Sauce, and is made of Cod-pepper, commonly called Guinea-pepper,
boiled in Water, and then pickled with Salt, and mixed with Lime-juice to
preserve it. Limes grow plentiful in the East and West Indies, within the
Tropicks.

The Bread-fruit (as we call it) grows on a large Tree, as big and high as our
largest Apple Trees. It has a spreading Head full of Branches, and dark
Leaves. The Fruit grows on the Boughs like Apples; it is as big as a
Penny-loaf, when Wheat is at five Shillings the Bushel. It is of a round shape,
and has a thick t^ugh rind. When the Fruit is ripe, it is yellow and soft; and
the taste is sweet and pleasant. The Natives of this Island use it for Bread:
they gather it when full grown, while it is green and hard; then they bake it
in an Oven, which scorcheth the rind and makes it black: but they scrape off
the outside black crust, and there remains a tender thin crust, and the inside
is soft, tender and white, like the crumb of a Penny Loaf. There is neither
Seed nor Stone in the inside, but all is of a pure substance like Bread: it
must be eaten new, for if it is kept above 24 hours, it becomes dry, and eats
harsh and choaky; but it is very pleasant before it is too stale. This Fruit
lasts in season 8 Months in the Year; during which time the Natives eat no
other sort of food of Bread-kind. I did never see of this Fruit any where but
here. The Natives told us, that there is plenty of this Fruit growing on the
rest of the Ladrone Islands; and I did never hear of any of it any where else.

They have here some Rice also: but the Island being of a dry Soil, and
therefore not very proper for it, they do not sow very much. Fish is scarce
about this Island; yet on the shole that our Bark came over there was great
plenty, and the Natives commonly go thither to fish.

The Natives of this Island are strong bodied, large limbed, and well-shap'd.
They are Copper-coloured, like other Indians: their Hair is black and long,
their Eyes meanly proportioned; they have pretty high Noses; their Lips are
pretty full, and their Teeth indifferent white. They are long visaged, and
stern of Countenance; yet we found them to be affable and Courteous. They are
many of them troubled with a kind of a Leprosy. This distemper is very common
at Mindanao: therefore I shall-speak more of it in my next Chapter. They of
Guam are otherwise very healthy, especially in the dry season: but in the wet
season, which comes in in June, and holds till October, the Air is more thick
and unwholesome; which occasions Fevers: but the Rains are not violent nor
lasting. For the Island lies so far Westerly from the Philippine Islands, or
any other Land, that the Westerly Winds do seldom blow so far; and when they
do, they do not last long: but the Easterly Winds do constantly blow here,
which are dry and healthy; and this Island is found to be very healthful, as we
were informed while we lay by it. The Natives are very ingenious beyond any
People, in making Boats, or Proes, as they are called in the East Indies, and
therein they take great delight. These are built sharp at both ends; the bottom
is of one piece, made like the bottom of a little Canoa, very neatly dug, and
left of a good substance. This bottom part is instead of a Keel. It is about 26
or 28 foot long; the under part of this Keel is made round, but inclining to a
wedge, and smooth; and the upper part is almost flat, having a very gentle
hollow, and is about a foot broad: From hence both sides of the Boat are
carried up to about 5 foot high with narrow Plank, not above 4 or 5 inches
broad, and each end of the Boat turns up round, very prettily. But what is very
singular, one side of the Boat is made perpendicular, like a Wall, while the
other side is rounding, made as other Vessels are, with a pretty full belly.
Just in the middle it is about 4 or 5 foot broad aloft, or more, according to
the length of the Boat. The Mast stands exactly in the middle, with a long Yard
that (...) up and down like a Mizen-yard. One end of it reaches down to the
end or head of the Boat, where it is placed in a notch, that is made there
purposely to receive it, and keep it fast. The other end hangs over the Stern:
To this Yard the Sail is fastened. At the foot of the Sail there is another
small Yard, to keep the Sail out square, and to roll up the Sail on when it
blows hard; for it serves instead of a Reef to take up the Sail to what degree
they please, according to the strength of the Wind. Along the Belly-side of the
Boat, parallel with it, at about 6 or 7 foot distance, lies another small Boat,
or Canoa, being a Log of very light Wood, almost as long as the great Boat, but
not so wide, being not above a foot and an half wide at the upper part, and
very sharp like a Wedge at each end. And there are two Bamboas of about 8 or 10
foot long, and as big as ones Leg, placed over the great Boats side, one near
each end of it, and reaching about 6 or 7 foot from the side of the Boat: By
the help of which, the little Boat is made firm and contiguous to the other.
These are generally called by the Dutch, and by the English from them,
Outlayers. The use of them is to keep the great Boat upright from over-setting;
because the Wind here being in a manner constantly East, (or if it were at West
it would be the same thing) and the Range of these Islands, where their
business lies to and fro, being mostly North and South, they turn the flat side
of the Boat against the Wind, upon which they sail, and the Belly-side,
consequently, with its little Boat, is upon the Lee: And the Vessel having a
Head at each end, so as to sail with either of them foremost (indifferently)
they need not tack, or go about, as all our Vessels do, but each end of the
Boat serves either for Head or Stern as they please. When they ply to Windward,
and are minded to go about, he that Steers bears away a little from the Wind,
by which means the Stern comes to the Wind; which is now become the Head, only
by shifting the end of the Yard. This Boat is steered with a broad Paddle,
instead of a Rudder. I have been the more particular in describing these Boats,
because I do believe, they Sail the best of any Boats in the World. I did here
for my own satisfaction, try the swistness of one of them; sailing by our Log,
we had 12 Knots on our Reel, and she run it all out before the half
Minute-Glass was half out; which, if it had been no more, is after the rate of
12 Mile an Hour; but I do believe she would have run 24 Mile an Hour. It was
very pleasant to see the little Boat running a long so swift by the others side.

The Native Indians are no less dextrous in managing, than in building these
Boats. By report, they will go from hence to another of the Ladrone Islands
about 30 Leagues off, and there do their Business, and return again in less
than 12 Hours. I was told that one of these Boats was sent Express to Manila,
which is above 400 Leagues, and performed the Voyage in 4 Days time. There are
of these Proes or Boats used in many places of the East Indies, but with a
Belly and a little Boat on each side. Only at Mindanao I saw one like these,
with the Belly and a little Boat only on one side, and the other flat, but not
so neatly built.

The Indians of Guam have neat little Houses, very handsomely thatched with
Palmeto-thatch. They inhabit together in Villages built by the Sea, on the
West Side, and have Spanish Priests to instruct them in the Christian Religion.

The Spaniards have a small Fort on the West side, near the South end, with six
Guns in it. There is a Governor, and 20 or 30 Spanish Soldiers. There are no
more Spaniards on this Island, beside 2 or 3 Priests. Not long before we
arrived here, the Natives rose on the Spaniards to destroy them, and did kill
many: But the Governor with his Soldiers at length prevailed, and drove them
out of the Fort: So when they found themselves disappointed of their intent,
they destroyed the Plantations and Stock, and then went away to other Islands:
There were then 3 or 400 Indians on this Island; but now there are not above
100; for all that were in this Conspiracy went away. As for these who yet
remain, if they were not actually concerned in that broil, yet their Hearts
also are bent against the Spaniards: for they offered to carry us to the Fort,
and assist us in the Conquest of the Island; but C. Swan was not for molesting
the Spaniards here.

Before we came to an Anchor here, one of the Priests came aboard in the Night,
with 3 Indians. They first haled us to know from whence we came, and what we
were: To whom answer was made in Spanish, that we were Spaniards, and that we
came from Acapulco. It being dark they could not see the make of our Ship, nor
very well discern what we were: Therefore we came aboard; but perceiving the
mistake they were in, in taking us for a Spanish Ship, they endeavored to get
from us again, but we held their Boat fast, and made them ^ome in. Capt. Swan
received the Priest with much Civility, and conducting him into the Great
Cabin, declared, That the reason of our coming to this Island was want of
Provison, and that he came not in any hostile manner, but as a Friend to
purchase with his Money what he wanted: And therefore desired the Priest to
write a Letter to the Governor, to inform him what we were, and on what
account we came. For having him now aboard, the Captain was willing to detain
him as an Hostage, till we had Provision. The Padre told Captain Swan, that
Provision was now scarce on the Island; but he would engage, that the Governor
would do his utmost to furnish us.

In the Morning the Indians, in whose Boat or Proe the Friar came aboard, were
sent to the Governor with two Letters; one from the Friar, and another very
obliging one from Captain Swan, and a Present of four Yards of Scarlet-cloath,
and a piece of broad Silver and Gold Lace. The Governor lives near the South
end of the Island on the West side; which was about 5 Leagues from the place
where we were; therefore we did not expect an answer till the Evening, not
knowing then how nimble they were. Therefore when the Indian Canoa was
dispatched away to the Governor, we hoised out 2 of our Canoas, and sent one a
fishing, and the other ashore for Coco-nuts. Our fishing Canoa got nothing; but
the Men that went ashore for Coco-nuts came off laden.

About 11 a Clock, that same Morning, the Governor of the Island sent a Letter
to Capt. Swan, complimenting him for his Present, and promising to support us
with as much Provision, as he could possibly spare; and as a Token of his
Gratitude, he sent a Present of 6 Hogs, of a small sort, most excellent Meat,
the best I think, that ever I eat: They are fed with Coco-nuts, and their Flesh
is hard as Brisket Beef. They were doubtless of that breed in America which
came originally from Spain. He sent also 12 Musk-melons, larger than ours in
England, and as many Water-melons, both sorts here being a very excellent
Fruit; and sent an order to the Indians that lived in a Village not far from
our Ship, to bake every day as much of the Bread-fruit as we did desire, and to
assist us in getting as many dry Coco-nuts as we would have; which they
accordingly did, and brought off the Bread-Fruit every day hot, as much as we
could eat. After this the Governor sent every day a Canoa or two with Hogs and
Fruit, and desired for the same, Powder, Shot and Arms; which was sent
according to his Request. We had a delicate large English Dog; which the
Governor did desire, and had it given him very freely by the Captain, though
much against the grain of many of his Men, who had a great value for that Dog.
Captain Swan endeavored to get this Governor's Letter of Recommendation to
some Merchants at Manila, for he had then a design to go to Fort St. George,
and from thence intended to trade to Manila: but this his design was concealed
from the company. While we lay here, the Acapulco Ship arrived in sight of the
Island, but did not come in the sight of us; for the Governor sent an Indian
Proe, with advice of our being here. Therefore she stood off to the Southward
of the Island, and coming foul of the same shole that our Bark had run over
before, was in great danger of being lost there, for she struck off her Rudder,
and with much ado got clear; but not till after three days labor. For though the
shole be so near the Island, and the Indians go off and fish there every day,
yet the Master of the Acapulco Ship, who should (one would think) know these
Parts, was utterly ignorant of it. This their striking on the shole we heard
afterward, when we were on the Coast of Manila; but these Indians of Guam did
speak of her being in sight of the Island while we lay there, which put our Men
in a great heat to go out after her, but Captain Swan persuaded them out of
that humor, for he was now wholly averse to any Hostile action.

The 30th day of May, the Governor sent his last Present, which was some Hogs,
a Jar of pickled Mangoes, a Jar of excellent pickled Fish, and a Jar of fine
Rusk, or Bread of fine Wheat Flower, baked like Biscuit, but not so hard. He
sent besides, 6 or 7 packs of Rice, desiring to be excused from sending any
more Provision to us, saying he had no more on the Island that he could spare.
He sent word also, that the West Monsoon was at hand, that therefore it behoved
us to be jogging from hence, unless we were resolved to return back to America
again. Captain Swan returned him thanks for his kindness and advice, and took
his leave; and the same day sent the Friar ashore, that was seized on at our
first arrival, and gave him a large Brass Clock, an Astrolable, and a large
Telescope: for which Present the Friar sent us aboard six Hogs, and a Roasting
Pig, 3 or 4 Bushels of Potatoes, and 50 pound of Manila Tobacco. Then we
prepared to be gone, being pretty well furnished with Provision to carry us to
Mindanao, where we designed next to touch. We took aboard us as many Coco-nuts
as we could well stow, and we had a good stock of Rice, and about 50 Hogs in
Salt.

CHAP. XI.
They resolve to go to Mindanao. Their departare from Guam. Of the Philippine
Islands. The Isle Luconia, and its chief Town and Port, Manilo, Manila, or
Manilbo. Of the rich Trade we might establish with these Islands. St. John's
Island. They arrive at Mindanao. The Island described. Its Fertility. The Libby
Trees, and the Sago made of them. The Plantain Tree, Fruit, Liquor, and Cloth.
A smaller Plantain at Mindanao. The Bonano. Of the Clove bark Cloves and
Nutmegs, and the Methods taken by the Dutch to Monopolize the Spices. The
Betel-Nut, and Arek-Tree. The Durian, and the Jaca-Tree and Fruit. The Beasts
of Mindanao. Centapees or Forty Legs, a venomous Insect, and others. Their
Fowls, Fish, etc. The temperature of the Climate, with the Course of the Winds,
Tornadoes, Rain, and temper of the Air throughout the Year.

WHile we lay at Guam, we took up a Resolution of going to Mindanao, one of the
Philippine Islands, being told by the Friar, and others, that it was
exceedingly well stored with Provisions; that the Natives were Mahometans, and
that they had formerly a Commerce with the Spaniards, but that now they were at
Wars with them. This Island was therefore thought to be a convenient place for
us to go to; for besides that, it was in our way to the East Indies, which we
had resolved to visit; and that the Westerly Monsoon was at hand, which would
oblige us to shelter somewhere in a short time, and that we could not expect
good Harbors in a better place than in so large an Island as Mindanao: besides
all this, I say, the Inhabitants of Mindanao being then, as we were told, (though
falsely) at Wars with the Spaniards, our Men, who it should seem were very
squeamish of plundering without License, derived hopes from thence of getting a
Commission there from the Prince of the Island, to plunder the Spanish Ships
about Manila, and so to make Mindanao their common Rendezvous. And it Captain
Swan was minded to go to an English Port, yet his Men, who thought he intended
to leave them, hoped to get Vessels and Pilots at Mindanao fit for their turn,
to cruize on the Coast of Manila. As for Captain Swan, he was willing enough to
go thither, as best suiting his own design; and therefore this Voyage was
concluded on by general consent.

Accordingly June 2d, 1686. we left Guam, bound for Mindanao. We had fair
Weather, and a pretty smart gale of Wind at East, for 3 or 4 Days, and then it
shifted to the S. W. being Rainy, but it soon came about again to the East, and
blew a gentle gale; yet it often shuffled about to the S. E. For though in the
East Indies the Winds shift in April, yet we found this to be the shifting
season for the Winds here; the other shifting season being in October, sooner
or later, all over India. As to our course from Guam to the Philippine Islands,
we found it (as I intimated before) agreeable enough with the account of our
common Draughts.

The 21st Day of June we arrived at the Island St. John, which is one of the
Philippine Islands. The Philippines are a great company of large Islands,
taking up about 13 degrees. of Lat. in length, reaching near upon, from 5 d. of
North Lat. to the 19th degree, and in breadth about 6 degrees. of Longitude. They
derive this Name from Philip II. King of Spain; and even now they do most of
them belong to that Crown.

The chiefest Island in this range is Luconia, which lies on the North of them
all. At this Island Magellan died on the Voyage that he was making round the
World. For after he had past those Streights between the South end of America
and Terra del Fuego, which now bear his Name, and had ranged down in the South
Seas on the back of America; from thence stretching over to the East Indies, he
fell in with the Ladrone Islands, and from thence steering East still, he fell
in with these Philippine Islands, and anchored at Luconia; where he warred with
the Native Indians, to bring them in Obedience to his Master the King of Spain,
and was by them killed with a Poisoned Arrow. It is now wholly under the
Spaniards, who have several Towns there. The chief is Manilo, which is a large
Seaport Town near the S. E. end, opposite to the Island Mindora. It is a place
of great Strength and Trade: The two great Acapulco Ships before mentioned
fetching from hence all sorts of East India Commodities; which are brought
hither by Foreigners, especially by the Chinese, and the Portuguese. Sometimes
the English Merchants of Fort St. George send their Ships hither as it were by
stealth, under the charge of Portuguese Pilots and Mariners: For as yet we
cannot get the Spaniards there to a Commerce with us or the Dutch, although
they have but few Ships of their own. This seems to arise from a Jealousy or
Fear of discovering the Riches of these Islands, for most, if not all the
Philippine Islands, are rich in Gold: And the Spaniards have no place of much
strength in all these Islands that I could ever hear of, besides Manilo it
self. Yet they have Villages and Towns on several of the Islands, and Padres or
Priests to instruct the Native Indians, from whom they get their Gold.

The Spanish Inhabitants, of the smaller Islands especially, would willingly
trade with us if the Government was not so severe against it: for they have no
Goods but what are brought from Manilo at an extraordinary dear rate. I am of
the Opinion, That if any of our Nations would seek a Trade with them, they
would not lose their labor; for the Spaniards can and will Smuggle (as our
Seamen call Trading by stealth) as well as any Nation that I know; and our
Jamaicans are to their profit sensible enough of it. And I have been informed
that Captain Goodlud of London, in a Voyage which he made from Mindanao to
China, touched at some of these Islands, and was civilly treated by the
Spaniards, who bought some of his Commodities, giving him a very good Price for
the same.

There are about 12 or 14 more large Islands lying to the Southward of Luconia;
most of which as I said before, are inhabited by the Spaniards. Besides these
there are an infinite number of small Islands of no account, and even the great
Islands, many of them, are without Names; or at least so variously set down,
that I find the same Islands named by diverse Names.

The Island St. John and Mindanao are the Southermost of all these Islands, and
are the only Islands in all this Range that are not subject to the Spaniards.

St. John's Island is on the East Side of the Mindanao, and distant from it 3
or 4 Leagues. It is in lat. about 7 or 8 North. This Island is in length about
38 Leagues, stretching N. N. W. and S. S. E. and it is in breadth about 24
Leagues, in the middle of the Island. The Northermost end is broader, and the
Southermost is narrower: This Island is of a good height, and is full of many
small Hills. The Land at the South-East end (where I was ashore) is of a black
fat Mould; and the whole Island seems to partake of the same fatness, by the
vast number of large Trees that it produces; for it looks all over like one
great Grove.

As we were passing by the S. E. end we saw a Canoa of the Natives under the
shore; therefore one of our Canoas went after to have spoken with her; but she
run away from us, seeing themselves chaced, put their Canoa ashore, leaving
her, fled into the Woods; nor would be allured to come to us, although we did
what we could to entice them; besides these Men, we saw no more here, nor sign
of any Inhabitants at this end.

When we came aboard our Ship again, we steered away for the Island Mindanao,
which was now fair in sight of us: it being about 10 leagues distant from this
part of St. John's. The 22d day we came within a league of the East Side of the
Island Mindanao, and having the Wind at S. E. we steered toward the North-end,
keeping on the East Side, till we came into the lat. of 7 d. 40 m. and there we
anchored in a small Bay, about a Mile from the Shore, in 10 Fathom Water, Rocky
foul ground.

Some of our Books gave us an account, That Mindanao City and Isle lies in 7 d.
40 m. we guest that the middle of the Island might lie in this lat. but we were
at a great loss where to find the City, whether on the East or West side.
Indeed, had it been a small Island, lying open to the Eastern Wind, we might
probably have searched first on the West Side; for commonly the Islands within
the Tropicks, or within the bounds of the Trade-Winds, have their Harbors on
the West Side, as best sheltered; but the Island Mindanao being guarded on the
East Side by St. John's Island, we might as reasonably expect to find the
Harbor and City on this side, as any where else: but coming into the Lat. in
which we judged the City might be, found no Canoas, or People, that might give
us any umbrage of a City, or place of Trade near at hand, though we coasted
within a League of the Shore.

The Island Mindanao is the biggest of all the Philippine Islands, except
Luconia. It is about 60 Leagues long, and 40 or 50 broad. The South end is in
about 5 d. N. and the N. W. end reaches almost to 8 d. N. It is a very
Mountainous Island, full of Hills and Valleys. The Mould in general is deep and
black, and extraordinary fat and fruitful. The sides of the Hills are stony,
yet productive enough of very large tall Trees. In the heart of the Country
there are some Mountains that yield good Gold. The Valleys are well moistened
with pleasant Brooks, and small Rivers of delicate Water; and have Trees of
diverse sorts flourishing and green all the Year. The Trees in general are very
large, and most of them are of kinds unknown to us.

There is one sort which deserves particular notice; called by the Natives
Libby-Trees. These grow wild in great Groves of 5 or 6 Miles long, by the sides
of the Rivers. Of these Trees Sago is made, which the poor Country People eat
instead of Bread 3 or 4 Months in the Year. This Tree for its body and shape is
much like the Palmeto-Tree, or the Cabbage-Tree, but not so tall as the latter.
The Bark and Wood is hard and thin like a Shell, and full of white Pith, like
the Pith of an Elder. This Tree they cut down, and split it in the middle, and
scrape out all the Pith; which they beat Iustily with a Wooden Pestle in a
great Mortar or Trough, and then put it into a Cloth or Strainer held over a
Trough; and pouring Water in among the Pith, they stir it about in the Cloth:
So the Water carries all the substance of the Pith through the Cloth down into
the Trough, leaving nothing in the Cloth but a light sort of Husk, which they
throw away; but that which falls into the Trough settles in a short time to the
bottom like Mud; and then they draw off the Water, and take up the muddy
substance, wherewith they make Cakes; which being baked proves very good Bread.

The Mindanao People live 3 or 4 Months of the Year on this Food for their
Bread kind. The Native Indians of Teranate, and Tidore, and all the Spice
Islands, have plenty of these Trees, and use them for Food in the same manner;
as I have been informed by Mr. Caril Rofy, who is now Commander of one of the
King's Ships. He was one of our Company at this time; and being left with
Captain Swan at Mindanao, went afterward to Teranate, and lived there among
the Dutch a Year or two. The Sago which is transported into other parts of the
East Indies, is dried in small pieces like little Seeds or Comfits, and
commonly eaten with Milk of Almonds, by those that are troubled with the Flux;
for it is a great binder, and very good in that Distemper.

In some places of Mindanao there is plenty of Rice; but in the hilly Land they
plant Yams, Potatoes, and Pumkins; all which thrive very well. The other Fruits
of this Island are Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, Plaintains, Bonanoes, Guavas,
Nutmegs, Cloves, Betel-Nuts, Durians, Jacks, or Jacas, Coco-Nuts, Oranges, etc.

The Plantain I take to be the King of all Fruit, not except the Coco it self.
The Tree that bears this Fruit is about 3 Foot, or 3 Foot and an half round,
and about 10 or 12 Foot high. These Trees are not raised from Seed, (for they
seem not to have any) but from the Roots of other old Trees. If these young
suckers are taken out of the Ground, and planted in another place, it will be
15 Months before they bear, but if let stand in their own native Soil they will
bear in 12 Months. As soon as the Fruit is ripe the Tree decays, but then there
are many young ones growing up to supply its place. When this Tree first
springs out of the Ground, it comes up with two Leaves; and by that time it is
a Foot high, two more springs up in the inside of them; and in a short time
after two more within them; and so on. By that time the Tree is a Month old,
you may perceive a small body almost as big as ones Arm, and then there are
eight or ten Leaves, some of them four or five Foot high. The first Leaves that
it shoots forth are not above a Foot long, and half a Foot broad; and the Stem
that bears them no bigger than ones Finger; but as the Tree grows higher the
Leaves are larger. As the young Leaves spring up up in the inside, so the old
Leaves spread off, and their tops droop downward, being of a greater length and
breadth, by how much they are nearer the Root, and at last decay and rot off:
but still there are young Leaves spring up out of the top, which makes the Tree
look always green and flourishing. When the Tree is full grown, the Leaves are
7 or 8 Foot long, and a Foot and half broad; toward the end they are smaller,
and end with a round point. The Stem of the Leaf is as big as a Man's Arm,
almost round, and about a Foot in length, between the Leaf and the Body of the
Tree. That part of the Stem which comes from the Tree, if it be the outside
Leaf, seems to enclose half the Body, as it were with a thick Hide; and right
against it, on the other side of the Tree, is another such answering to it. The
next two Leaves, in the inside of these, grow opposite to each other, in the
same manner, but so that if the two outward grow North and South, these grow
East and West, and those still within them keep the same order. Thus the Body
of this Tree seems to be made up of many thick Skins, growing one over another,
and when it is full grown, there springs out of the top a strong Stem, harder
in substance than any other part of the Body. This Stem shoots forth at the
Heart of the Tree, is as big as a Man's Arm, and as long; and the Fruit grows
in clusters round it, first blossoming, and then shooting forth the Fruit. It
is so excellent, that the Spaniards give it the pre-eminence of all other
Fruit, as most conducing to Life. It grows in a Cod about 6 or 7 Inches long,
and as big as a Man's Arm. The Shell, Rind or Cod, is soft, and of a yellow
color when ripe. It resembles in shape a Hogs-gut Pudding. The enclosed Fruit
is no harder than Butter in Winter, and is much of the color of the purest
yellow Butter. It is of a delicate taste, and melts in ones Mouth like
Marmalet. It is all pure Pulp, without any Seed, Kernel or Stone. This Fruit is
so much esteemed by all Europeans that settle in America, that when they make a
new Plantation, they commonly begin with a good Plantain-walk, as they call it,
or a Field of Plantains; and as their Family increases, so they augment the
Plantain-walk, keeping one Man purposely to prune the Trees, and gather the
Fruit as he sees convenient. For the Trees continue bearing, some or other,
most part of the Year; and this is many times the whole Food on which a whole
Family subsists. They thrive only in rich fat ground, for poor sandy will nor
bear them. The Spaniards in their Towns in America, as at Havana, Cartagena,
Portabel, etc. have their Markets full of Plantains, it being the common Food
for poor People: Their common price is half a Riol, or 3 d. a Dozen. When this
Fruit is only used for Bread, it is roasted or boiled when it is just full
grown, but not yet ripe, or turned yellow. Poor People, or Negroes, that have
neither Fish nor Flesh to eat with it, make Sauce with Cod-pepper, Salt and
Lime-juice, which makes it eat very savory; much better than a crust of Bread
alone. Sometimes for a change they eat a roasted Plantain, and a ripe raw
Plantain together, which is instead of Bread and Butter. They eat very pleasant
so, and I have made many a good meal in this manner. Sometimes our English take
5 or 7 ripe Plantains, and mashing them together, make them into a lump, and
boil them instead of a Bag-pudding; which they call a Buff-Jacket: and this is
a very good way for a change. This Fruit makes also very good Tarts; and the
green Plantains sliced thin, and dried in the Sun, and grated, will make a sort
of Flour which is very good to make Puddings. A ripe Plantain sliced and dried
in the Sun may be preserved a great while; and then eats like Figs, very sweet
and pleasant. The Darien Indians preserve them a long time, by drying them
gently over the Fire; mashing them first, and moulding them into lumps The
Moskito Indians will take a ripe Plantain and roast it; then take a pint and
half of Water in a Calabash, and squeeze the Plantain in pieces with their
Hands, mixing it with the Water; then they drink it all off together: This they
call Mishlaw, and it is pleasant and sweet, and nourishing; somewhat like
Lambs-wool (as it is called) made with Apples and Ale: and of this Fruit alone
many thousands of Indian Families in the West Indies have their whole
subsistence. When they make Drink with them, they take 10 or 12 ripe Plantains
and mash them well in a Trough: then they put 2 Gallons of Water among them;
and this in 2 Hours time will ferment and froth like Wort. In 4 Hours it is fit
to Drink, and then they Bottle it, and Drink it as they have occasion: but this
will not keep above 24 or 30 Hours. Those therefore that use this Drink, Brew
it in this manner every Morning. When I went first to Jamaica I could relish no
other Drink they had there. It drinks brisk and cool, and is very pleasant.
This Drink is windy, and so is the Fruit eaten raw; but boiled or roasted it is
not so. If this Drink is kept above 30 Hours it grows sharp: but if then it be
put out into the Sun, it will become very good Vinegar. This Fruit grows all
over the West Indies (in the proper Climates) at Guinea, and in the East Indies.

As the Fruit of this Tree is of great use for Food, so is the Body no less
serviceable to make Clothes; but this I never knew till I came to this Island.
The ordinary People of Mindanao do wear no other Cloth. The Tree never bearing
but once, and so being felled when the Fruit is ripe, they cut it down close by
the Ground, if they intend to make Cloth with it. One blow with a Hachet, or
long Knife, will strike it asunder; then they cut off the top, leaving the
trunk 8 or 10 foot long, stripping off the outer Rind, which is thickest
toward the lower end, having stripped 2 or 3 of these Rinds, the Trunk becomes
in a manner all of one bigness, and of a whitish color: Then they split the
Trunk in the middle; which being done, they split the two halves again, as near
the middle as they can. This they leave in the Sun 2 or 3 Days, in which time
part of the juicy substance of the Tree dries away, and then the ends will
appear full of small Threads. The Women, whose employment it is to make the
Cloth, take hold of those Threads one by one, which rend away easily from one
end of the Trunk to the other, in bigness like whited brown-thread; for the
threads are naturally of a determinate bigness, as I observed their Cloth to be
all of one substance and equal fineness; but it is stubborn when new, wears out
soon, and when wet, feels a little slimy. They make their pieces 7 or 8 Yards
long, their Warp and Woof all one thickness and substance.

There is another sort of Plantains in that Island, which are shorter and less
than the others, which I never saw any where but here. These are full of black
Seeds mixed quite through the Fruit. They are binding, and are much eaten by
those that have Fluxes. The Country People gave them us for that use, and with
good success.

The Bonano Tree is exactly like the Plantain for shape and bigness, nor easily
distinguishable from it but by its Fruit, which is a great deal smaller, and
not above half so long as a Plantain, being also more mellow and soft, less
luscious, yet of a more delicate taste. They use this for the making Drink
oftener than Plantains, and it is best when used for Drink, or eaten as Fruit;
but it is not so good for Bread, nor does it eat well at all when roasted or
boiled; so it is only necessity that makes any use it this way. They grow
generally where Plantains do, being set intermixed with them purposely in their
Plantain-walks. They have plenty of Clove-bark, of which I saw a Ship load; and
as for Cloves, Raja Laut, whom I shall have occasion to mention, told me, that
if the English would settle there, they could order Matters so in a little
time, as to send a Ship-load of Cloves from thence every Year. I have been
informed that they grow on the Boughs of a Tree about as big as a Plumb-tree,
but I never happened to see any of them.

I have not seen the Nutmeg-trees any where; but the Nutmegs this Island
produces are sair and large, yet they have no great store of them, being
unwilling to propagate them or the Cloves, for fear that should invite the
Dutch to visit them, and bring them into subjection, as they have done the rest
of the neighboring Islands where they grow. For the Dutch being seated among
the Spice-Islands, have monopolized all the Trade into their own Hands, and
will not suffer any of the Natives to dispose of it, but to themselves alone.
Nay, they are so careful to preserve it in their own Hands, that they will not
suffer the Spice to grow in the uninhabited Islands, but send Soldiers to cut
the Trees down. Captain Rofy told me, that while he lived with the Dutch, he
was sent with other Men to cut down the Spice-Trees; and that he himself did at
several times cut down 7 or 800 Trees. Yet although the Dutch take such care to
destroy them, there are many uninhabited Islands that have great plenty of
Spice-Trees, as I have been informed by Dutch Men that have been there,
particularly by a Captain of a Dutch Ship that I met with at Achin, who told
me, that near the Island Banda there is an Island where the Cloves falling from
the Trees do lie and rot on the ground, and they are at the time when the Fruit
falls, 3 or 4 Inches thick under the Trees. He and some others told me, that it
would not be a hard matter for an English Vessel to purchase a Ships Cargo of
Spice, of the Natives of some of these Spice-Islands.

He was a free Merchant that told me this. For by that name the Dutch and
English in the East Indies, distinguish those Merchants who are not Servants to
the Company. The free Merchants are not suffered to Trade to the Spice-Islands,
nor to many other places where the Dutch have Factories; but on the other Hand,
they are suffered to Trade to some places where the Dutch Company themselves
may not Trade, as to Achin particularly, for there are some Princes in the
Indies, who will not Trade with the Company for fear of them. The Seamen that
go to the Spice-Islands are obliged to bring no Spice from thence for
themselves, except a small matter for their own use, about a pound or two. Yet
the Masters of those Ships do commonly so order their business, that they often
secure a good quantity, and send it ashore to some place near Batavia, before
they come into that Harbor, (for it is always brought thither first before
it is sent to Europe,) and if they meet any Vessel at Sea that will buy their
Cloves, they will sell 10 or 15 Tuns out of 100, and yet seemingly carry their
Complement to Batavia; for they will pour Water among the remaining part of
their Cargo, which will swell them to that degree, that the Ships Hold will be
as full again, as it was before any were sold. This Trick they use whenever
they dispose of any clandestinely, for the Cloves when they first take them in
are extraordinary dry; and so will imbibe a great deal of Moisture. This is but
one Instance, of many hundreds, of little deceitful Arts the Dutch Seamen have
in these Parts among them, of which I have both seen and heard several. I
believe there are no where greater Thieves; and nothing will persuade them to
discover one another; for should any do it, the rest would certainly knock him
on the Head. But to return to the Products of Mindanao.

The Betel-Nut is much esteemed here, as it is in most places of the East
Indies. The Betel-Tree grows like the Cabbage-Tree, but it is not so big, nor
so high. The Body grows strait, about 12 or 14 foot high, without Leaf or
Branch, except at the Head. There it spreads forth long Branches, like other
Trees of the like nature, as the Cabbage-Tree, the Coco-Nut Tree, and the Palm.
These Branches are about 10 or 12 foot long, and their stems near the head of
the Tree, as big as a Man's Arm. On the top of the Tree among the Branches the
Betel-Nut grows on a tough stem, as big as a Man's Finger, in clusters much as
the Coco-Nuts do, and they grow 40 or 50 in a cluster. This Fruit is bigger
than a Nutmeg, and is much like it, but rounder. It is much used all over the
East Indies. Their way is to cut it in four pieces, and wrap one of them up in
an Arek leaf, which they spread with a soft Paste made of Lime or Plaster, and
then chew it altogether. Every Man in these parts carries his Lime-Box by his
side, and dipping his Finger into it, spreads his Betel and Arek leaf with it.
The Arek is a small Tree or Shrub, of a green Bark, and the Leaf is long and
broader than a Willow. They are packt up to sell into Parts that have them not,
to chew with the Betel. The Betel-Nut is most esteemed when it is young, and
before it grows hard, and then they cut it only in two pieces with the green
Husk or Shell on it. It is then exceeding juicy, and therefore makes them spit
much. It tastes rough in the Mouth, and dies the Lips red, and makes the Teeth
black, but it preserves them, and cleanses the Gums. It is also accounted very
wholesome for the Stomach; but sometimes it will cause great giddiness in the
Head of those that are not used to chew it. But this is the effect only of the
old Nut, for the young Nuts will not do it. I speak of my own Experience.

This Island produces also Durians and Jacks, The Trees that bear the Durians,
are as big as Apple Trees, full of Boughs. The Rind is thick and rough; the
Fruit is so large that they grow only about the Bodies, or on the Limbs near
the Body, like the Cacao. The Fruit is about the bigness of a large Pumkin,
covered with a thick green rough Rind. When it is ripe, the Rind begins to turn
yellow, but it is not fit to eat till it opens at the top. Then the Fruit in
the inside is ripe, and sends forth an excellent Scent. When the Rind is
opened, the Fruit may be split into four quarters; each quarter has several
small Cells, that enclose a certain quantity of the Fruit, according to the
bigness of the Cell, for some are larger than others. The largest of the Fruit
may be as big as a Pullets Egg: It Is as white as Milk, and as soft as Cream,
and the Taste very delicious to those that are accustomed to them; but those
who have not been used to eat them, will dislike them at first, because they
smell like roasted Onions. This Fruit must be eaten in its prime, (for there is
no eating of it before it is ripe) and even then 'twill not keep above a day or
two before it putrifies, and turns black, or of a dark color, and then it is
not good. Within the Fruit there is a Stone as big as a small Bean, which has
a thin Shell over it. Those that are minded to eat the Stones or Nuts, roast
them, and then a thin Shell comes off, which incloses the Nut; and it eats like
a Chestnut.

The Jack or Jaca is much like the Durian, both in bigness and shape. The Trees
that bear them also are much a like, and so is their manner of the Fruits
growing. But the inside is different; for the Fruit of the Durian is white,
that of the Jack is yellow, and fuller of Stones. The Durian is most esteemed;
yet the Jack is very pleasant Fruit, and the Stones or Kernels are good roasted.

There are many other sorts of Grain, Roots and Fruits in this Island, which to
give a particular description of would fill up a large Volume.

In this Island are also many sorts of Beasts, both wild and tame; as Horses,
Bulls, and Cows, Buffaloes, Goats, Wild Hogs, Deer, Monkies, Guano's, Lizards,
Snakes, etc. I never saw or heard of any Beasts of Prey here, as in many other
places. The Hogs are ugly Creatures; they have all great Knobs growing over
their Eyes, and there are multitudes of them in the Woods. They are commonly
very poor, yet sweet. Deer are here very plentiful in some places, where they
are not disturbed.

Of the venomous kind of Creatures here are Scorpions, whose sting is in their
Tail; and Centapees, called by the English 40 Legs, both which are also common
in the West Indies, in Jamaica, and elsewhere. These Centapees are 4 or 5
Inches long, as big as a Goose-Quill, but flattish; of a Dun or reddish color
on the Back, but Belly whitish, and full of Legs on each side the Belly. Their
Sting or bite is more raging than the Scorpion. They lie in old Houses, and dry
Timber. There are several sorts of Snakes, some very Poisonous. There is
another sort of Creature like a Guano both in color and shape, but four times
as big, whose Tongue is like a small Harpoon, having two beards like the beards
of a Fishook. They are said to be very venomous, but I know not their Names. I
have seen them in other places also, as at Pulo Condore, or the Island Condore,
and at Achin, and have been told that they are in the Bay of Bengal.

The Fowls of this Country are Ducks and Hens: Other tame Fowl I have not seen
nor heard of any. The wild Fowl are Pigeons, Parrots, Parakits, Turtle Doves,
and abundance of small Fowls. There are Bats as big as a Kite.

There are a great many Harbors, Creeks, and good Bays for Ships to ride in;
and Rivers navigable for Canoas, Proes or Barks, which are all plentifully
stored with Fish of diverse sorts, so is also the adjacent Sea. The chiefest
Fish are Bonetas, Snooks, Cavally's, Bremes, Mullets, 10 Pounders, etc. Here
are also plenty of Sea Turtle, and small Manatee, which are not near so big as
those in the West Indies. The biggest that I saw would not weigh above 600
Pound, but the flesh both of the Turtle and Manatee are very sweet.

The Weather at Mindanao is temperate enough as to heat, for all it lies so
near the Equator, and especially on the borders near the Sea. There they
commonly enjoy the breezes by day, and cooling Land Winds at Night. The Winds
are Easterly one part of the Year, and Westerly the other. The Easterly Winds
begin to blow in October, and it is the middle of November before they are
settled.

These Winds bring fair Weather. The Westerly Winds begin to blow in May, but
are not settled till a Month afterward. The West Winds always bring Rain,
Tornadoes, and very Tempestuous Weather. At the first coming in of these Winds
they blow but faintly; but then the Tornadoes rise one in a Day, sometimes two.
These are Thunder-showers which commonly come against the Wind, bringing with
them a contrary Wind to what did blow before. After the Tornadoes are over, the
Wind shifts about again, and the Sky becomes clear, yet then in the Valleys and
the sides of the Mountains, there rises a thick fog, which covers the Land.
The Tornadoes continue thus for a Week or more; then they come thicker, two or
three in a Day, bringing violent gusts of Wind, and terrible claps of Thunder.
At last they come so fast, that the Wind remains in the quarter from whence
these Tornadoes do rise, which is out of the West, and there it settles till
October or November. When these Westward Winds are thus settled, the Sky is all
in mourning, being covered with black Clouds, pouring down excessive Rains some
times mixed with Thunder and Lightning, that nothing can be more dismal. The
Winds raging to that degree, that the biggest Trees are torn up by the Roots,
and the Rivers swell and overflow their Banks, and drown the low Land, carrying
great Trees into the Sea. Thus it continues sometimes a week together, before
the Sun or Stars appear. The fiercest of this Weather is in the latter end of
July and in August, for then the Towns seem to stand in a great Pond, and they
go from one House to another in Canoas. At this time the Water carries away all
the filth and nastiness from under their Houses. Whilst this tempestuous season
lasts, the Weather is Cold and Chilly. In September the Weather is more
moderate, and the Winds are not so fierce, nor the Rain so violent. The Air
thenceforward begins to be more clear and delightsome; but then in the morning
there are thick Fogs, continuing till 10 or 11 a Clock before the Sun shines
out, especially when it has rained in the Night. In October the Easterly Winds
begin to blow again, and bring fair Weather till April. Thus much concerning
the natural state of Mindanao.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Inhabitants, and Civil State of the Isle of Mindanao. The Mindanayans,
Hilanoones, Sologues, and Alfoorees. Of the Mindanayans, properly so called;
Their Manners and Habits. The Habits and Manners of their Women. A Comical
Custom at Mindanao. Their Houses, their Diet, and Washings. The Languages
spoken there, and Transactions with the Spaniards. Their fear of the Dutch, and
seeming desire of the English. Their Handy-crafts, and peculiar sort of Smiths
Bellows. Their Shipping, Commodities, and Trade. The Mindanao and Manila
Tobacco. A sort of Leprosy there, and other Distempers. Their Marriages. The
Sultan of Mindano, his Poverty, Power, Family, etc. The Proes or Boats here.
Raja Laut the General, Brother to the Sultan, and his Family. Their way of
Fighting. Their Religion. Raja Laut's Devotion. A Clock or Drum in their
Mosques. Of their Circumcision, and the Solemnity then used. Of other their
Religious Observations and Superstitions. Their abhorrence of Swines Flesh, etc.

THis Island is not subject to one Prince, neither is the Language one and the
same; but the People are much alike, in color, strength, and stature. They are
all or most of them of one Religion, which is Mahometanism, and their customs
and manner of living are alike. The Mindanao People, more particularly so
called, are the greatest Nation in the Island, and trading by Sea with other
Nations, they are therefore the more civil. I shall say but little of the rest,
being less known to me, but so much as has come to my knowledge, take as
follows. There are besides the Mindanayans, the Hilanoones, (as they call them)
or the Mountaneers, the Sologues and Alsoores.

The Hilanoones live in the heart of the Country: They have little or no
commerce by Sea, yet they have Proe's that row with 12 or 14 Oars apiece. They
enjoy the benefit of the Gold Mines; and with their Gold buy foreign
Commodities of the Mindanao People. They have also plenty of Beeswax, which
they exchange for other Commodities.

The Sologues inhabit the N. W. end of the Island. They are the least Nation of
all; they Trade to Manila in Proes, and to some of the Neighboring Islands,
but have no Commerce with the Mindanao People.

The Alsoores are the same with the Mindanayans, and were formerly under the
subjection of the Sultan of Mindanao, but were divided between the Sultan's
Children, and have of late had a Sultan of their own; but having by Marriage
contracted an alliance with the Sultan of Mindanao, this has occasioned that
Prince to claim them again as his Subjects; and he made War with them a little
after we went away, as I afterward understood.

The Mindanayans properly so called, are Men of mean statures; small Limbs,
straight Bodies, and little Heads. Their Faces are oval, their Foreheads flat,
with black small Eyes, short low Noses, pretty large Mouths; their Lips thin
and red, their Teeth black, yet very sound, their Hair black and straight, the
color of their Skin tawney, but inclining to a brighter yellow than some other
Indians, especially the Women. They have a Custom to wear their Thumb-nails
very long, especially that on their left Thumb, for they do never cut it but
scrape it often. They are endued with good natural Wits, are ingenious, nimble,
and active, when they are minded; but generally very lazy and thievish, and
will not work except forced by Hunger. This laziness is natural to most
Indians; but these People's laziness seems rather to proceed not so much from
their natural Inclinations, as from the severity of their Prince of whom they
stand in awe: For he dealing with them very arbitrarily, and taking from them
what they get, this damps their Industry, so they never strive to have any
thing but from Hand to Mouth. They are generally proud, and walk very stately.
They are civil enough to Strangers, and will easily be acquainted with them,
and entertain them with great freedom; but they are implacable to their
Enemies, and very revengeful if they are injured, frequently poisoning secretly
those that have affronted them.

They wear but few Clothes; their Heads are circled with a short Turbat,
fringed or laced at both ends; it goes once about the Head, and is tied in a
knot, the laced ends hanging down. They wear Frocks and Breeches, but no
Stockings nor Shoes.

The Women are fairer than the Men; and their Hair is black and long; which
they tie in a knot, that hangs back in their Poles. They are more round visaged
than the Men, and generally well featured; only their Noses are very small, and
so low between their Eyes, that in some of the Female Children the rising that
should be between the Eyes is scarce discernable; neither is there any sensible
rising in their Foreheads. At a distance they appear very well; but being nigh,
these Impediments are very obvious. They have very small Limbs. They wear but
two Garments; a Frock, and a sort of Petticoat; the Petticoat is only a piece
of Cloth, sowed both ends together: but it is made two Foot too big for their
Wastes, so that they may wear either end uppermost: that part that comes up to
their Wastes, because it is so much to big, they gather it in their Hands, and
twist it till it sits close to their Wastes, tucking in the twisted part
between their Waste and the edge of the Petticoat, which keeps it close. The
Frock sits loose about them, and reaches down a little below the Waste. The
Sleeves are a great deal longer than their Arms, and so small at the end, that
their Hands will scarce go through. Being on, the Sleeve sits in folds about
the wrist, wherein they take great pride.

The better sort of People have their Garments made of long Cloth; but the
ordinary sort wear Cloth made of Plantain-tree, which they call Saggen, by
which Name they call the Plantain. They have neither Stocking or Shoe, and the
Women have very small Feet.

The Women are very desirous of the company of Strangers, especially of White
Men; and doubtless would be very familiar, if the Custom of the Country did not
debar them from that freedom, which seems coveted by them. Yet from the highest
to the lowest they are allowed liberty to converse with, or treat Strangers in
the fight of their Husbands.

There is a kind of begging Custom at Mindanao, that I have not met elsewhere
with in all my Travels; and which I believe is owing to the little Trade they
have; which is thus: When Strangers arrive here, the Mindanao Men will come
aboard, and invite them to their Houses, and inquire who has a Comrade, (which
word I believe they have from the Spaniards) or a Pagally, and who has not. A
Comrade is a familiar Male-friend; a Pagally is an Innocent Platonic Friend of
the other Sex. All Strangers are in a manner obliged to accept of this
Acquaintance and Familiarity, which must be first purchased with a small
Present, and afterward confirmed with some Gift or other to continue the
Acquaintance: and as often as the Stranger goes ashore, he is welcome to his
Comrade or Pagally's House, where he may be entertained for his Money, to Eat,
Drink, or Sleep; and complimented, as often as he comes ashore, with Tobacco
and Betel-Nut, which is all the Entertainment he must expect gratis. The
richest Men's Wives are allowed the freedom to converse with her Pagally in
public, and may give or receive Presents from him. Even the Sultans and the
Generals Wives, who are always coopt up, will yet look out of their Cages when
a Stranger passes by, and demand of him if he wants a Pagally: and to invite
him to their Friendship, will send a Present of Tobacco and Betel-nut to him by
their Servants.

The chiefest City on this Island is called by the same name of Mindanao. It is
seated on the South side of the Island, in lat. 7 d. 20 m. N. on the banks of a
small River, about two Mile from the Sea. The manner of building is somewhat
strange: yet generally used in this part of the East Indies. Their Houses are
all built on Posts, about 14, 16, 18, or 20 Foot high. These Posts are bigger
or less, according to the intended magnificence of the Superstructure. They
have but one Floor, but many Partitions or Rooms, and a Ladder or Stairs to go
up out of the Streets. The Roof is large, and covered with Palmeto or
Palm-leaves. So there is a clear passage like a Piazza (but a filthy one) under
the House. Some of the poorer People that keep Ducks or Hens, have a fence made
round the Posts of their Houses, with a Door to go in and out; and this
Under-room serves for no other use. Some use this place for the common draught
of their Houses, but building mostly close by the River in all parts of the
Indies, they make the River receive all the filth of their House; and at the
time of the Land-floods, all is washed very clean.

The Sultan's House is much bigger than any of the rest. It stands on about 180
great Posts or Trees, a great deal higher than the common Building, with great
broad Stairs made to go up. In the first Room he has about 20 Iron Guns, all
Saker and Minion, placed on Field-Carriages. The General, and other great Men
have some Guns also in their Houses. About 20 paces from the Sultan's House
there is a small low House, built purposely for the Reception of Ambassadors or
Merchant Strangers. This also stands on Posts, but the Floor is not raised
above three or four Foot above the Ground, and is neatly Matted purposely for
the Sultan and his Council to sit on; for they use no Chairs, but sit
cross-legg'd like Tailors on the Floor.

The common Food at Mindanao is Rice, or Sago, and a small Fish or two. The
better sort eat Buffalo, or Fowls ill dressed, and abundance of Rice with it.
They use no Spoons to eat their Rice, but every Man takes a handful out of the
Platter, and by wetting his Hand in Water, that it may not stick to his Hand,
squeezes it into a lump, as hard as possibly he can make it, and then crams it
into his Mouth. They all strive to make these lumps as big as their Mouths can
receive them; and seem to vie with each other, and glory in taking in the
biggest lump; so that sometimes they almost choke themselves. They always wash
after Meals, or if they touch any thing that is unclean; for which reason they
spend abundance of Water in their Houses. This Water, with the washing of
their Dishes, and what other filth they make, they pour down near their
Fireplace: for their Chambers are not boarded, but floored with split Bamboes,
like Lathe, so that the Water presently falls underneath their dwelling Rooms,
where it breeds Maggots, and makes a prodigious stink. Besides this filthiness,
the sick People ease themselves, and make Water in their Chambers; there being
a small hole made purposely in the floor, to let it drop through. But healthy
sound People commonly ease themselves, and make Water in the River. For that
reason you shall always see abundance of People, of both Sexes in the River.
from Morning till Night; some easing themselves, others washing their bodies or
Clothes. If they come into the River purposely to wash their Clothes, they
strip and stand naked till they have done; then put them on, and march out
again: both Men and Women take great delight in swimming, and washing
themselves, being bred to it from their Infancy. I do believe it is very
wholesome to wash Mornings and Evenings in these hot Countries, at least three or
four Days in the Week: For I did use my self to it when I lived afterward at
Ben-cooly, and found it very refreshing and comfortable. It is very good for
those that have Fluxes to wash and stand in the River Mornings and Evenings. I
speak it experimentally; for I was brought very low with that distemper at
Achin; but by washing constantly Mornings and Evenings I found great benefit,
and was quickly cured by it.

In the City of Mindanao they speak two Languages indifferently; their own
Mindanao Language, and the Malaya: but in other parts of the Island they speak
only their proper Language, having little Commerce abroad. They have Schools,
and instruct the Children to Read and Write, and bring them up in the
Mohammedan Religion. There fore many of the words, especially their Prayers, are
in Arabic; and many of the words of civility the same as in Turkey; and
especially when they meet in the Morning, or take leave of each other, they
express themselves in that Language.

Many of the old People, both Men and Women, can speak Spanish, for the
Spaniards were formerly settled among them, and had several Forts on this
Island; and then they sent two Friars to the City, to convert the Sultan of
Mindanao and his People. At that time these People began to learn Spanish, and
the Spaniards incroached on them and endeavored to bring them into subjection;
and probably before this time had brought them all under their yoke, if they
themselves had not been drawn off from this Island to Manila, to resist the
Chiness, who threatened to invade them there. When the Spaniards were gone, the
old Sultan of Mindanao, Father to the present, in whose time it was, razed and
demolished their Forts, brought away their Guns, and sent away the Friars; and
since that time will not suffer the Spaniards to settle on the Islands.

They are now most afraid of the Dutch, being sensible how they have inslaved
many of the Neighboring Islands. For that Reason they have a long time desired
the English to settle among them, and have offered them any convenient Place to
build a Fort in, as the General himself told us; giving this Reason, that they
do not find the English so incroaching as the Dutch or Spanish. The Dutch are
no less jealous of their admitting the English, for they are sensible what
detriment it would be to them if the English should settle here.

There are but few Tradesmen at the City of Mindanao. The chiefest Trades are
Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths, and Carpenters. There are but two or three Goldsmiths;
these will work in Gold or Silver, and make any thing that you desire: but they
have no Shop furnished with Ware ready made for Sale. Here are several
Blacksmiths who work very well, considering the Tools that they work with.
Their Bellows are much different from ours. They are made of a wooden Cylinder,
the trunk of a Tree, about three Foot long, bored hollow like a Pump, and set
upright on the ground, on which the Fire it self is made. Near the lower end
there is a small hole, in the side of the Trunk next the Fire, made to receive
a Pipe, through which the wind is driven to the Fire by a great bunch of fine
Feathers fastened to one end of the Stick, which closing up the inside of the
Cylinder, drives the Air out of the Cylinder through the Pipe: Two of these
Trunks or Cylinders are placed so nigh together, that a Man standing between
them may work them both at once alternately, one with each Hand. They have
neither Vice nor Anvil, but a great hard Stone or a piece of an old Gun, to
hammer upon: yet they will perform their work making both common Utensils and
Iron-works about Ships to admiration. They work altogether with Charcoal. Every
Man almost is a Carpenter, for they can work with the Ax and Adds. Their Ax is
but small, and so made that they can take it out of the Helve, and by turning
it make an Adds of it. They have no Saws; but when they make Plank, they split
the Tree in two, and make a Plank of each part, plaining it with the Ax and
Adds. This requires much pains, and takes up a great deal of time; but they
work cheap, and the goodness of the Plank thus hewed, which has its grain
preserved entire, makes amends for their cost and pains.

They build good and serviceable Ships or Barks for the Sea, some for Trade,
others for Pleasure; and some Ships of War. Their trading Vessels they send
chiefly to Manila. Thither they transport Beeswax, which, I think, is the only
Commodity, besides Gold that they vend there. The Inhabitants of the City of
Mindanao get a great deal of Beeswax themselves: but the greatest quantity
they purchase is of the Mountaneers, from whom they also get the Gold which
they send to Manila; and with these they buy their Calicoes, Muslins, and China
Silk. They send sometimes their Barks to Borneo and other Islands; but what
they transport thither, or import from thence, I know not. The Dutch come
hither in Sloops from Ternate and Tidore, and buy Rice, Beeswax, and Tobacco:
for here is a great deal of Tobacco grows on this Island, more than in any
Island or Country in the East Indies, that I know of, Manila only excepted. It
is an excellent sort of Tobacco; but these People have not the Art of managing
this Trade to their best advantage, as the Spaniards have at Manila. I do
believe the Seeds were first brought hither from Manila by the Spaniards, and
even thither, in all probability, from America: the difference between the
Mindanao and Manila Tobacco is, that the Mindanao Tobacco is of a darker
color; and the Leaf larger and grosser than the Manila Tobacco, being
propagated or planted in a fatter Soil. The Manila Tobacco is of a bright
yellow color, of an indifferent size, not strong, but pleasant to Smoke. The
Spaniards at Manila are very curious about this Tobacco, having a peculiar way
of making it up nearly in the Leaf. For they take two little Sticks, each about
a Foot long, and flat, and placing the Stalks of the Tobacco Leaves in a row,
40 or 50 of them between the two Sticks, they bind them hard together, so that
the Leaves hang dangling down. One of these bundles is sold for a Rial at Fort
St. George: but you may have 10 or 12 pound of Tobacco at Mindanao for a Rial;
and the Tobacco is as good, or rather better than the Manila Tobacco but they
have not that vent for it as the Spaniards have.

The Mindanao People are much troubled with a sort of Leprosy, the same as we
observed at Guam. This Distemper runs with a dry Scurf all over their Bodies,
and causes great itching in those that have it, making them frequently scratch
and scrub themselves, which raises the outer skin in small whitish flakes,
like the scales of little Fish, when they are raised on end with a Knife. This
makes their skin extraordinary rough, and in some you shall see broad white
spots in several parts of their Body. I judge such have had it, but are cured;
for their skins were smooth, and I did not perceive them to scrub themselves:
yet I have learnt from their own mouths that these spots were from this
Distemper. Whether they use any means to cure themselves, or whether it goes
away of it self, I know not: but I did not perceive that they made any great
matter of it, for they did never refrain any company for it; none of our People
caught it of them, for we were afraid of it, and kept off. They are sometimes
troubled with the Small Pox, but their ordinary Distempers are Fevers, Agues,
Fluxes, with great pains, and gripings in their Guts. The Country affords a
great many Drugs and Medicinal Herbs, whose Virtues are not unknown to some of
them that pretend to cure the Sick.

The Mindanao Men have many Wives: but what Ceremonies are used when they Marry
I know not. There is commonly a great Feast made by the Bridegroom to entertain
his Friends, and the most part of the Night is spent in Mirth.

The Sultan is absolute in his Power over all his Subjects. He is but a poor
Prince; for as I mentioned before, they have but little Trade, and therefore
cannot be rich. If the Sultan understands that any Man has Money, if it be but
20 Dollars, which is a great matter among them, he will send to borrow so much
Money, pretending urgent occasions for it; and they dare not deny him.
Sometimes he will send to sell one thing or another that he has to dispose of,
to such whom he knows to have Money, and they must buy it, and give him his
price; and if afterward he has occasion for the same thing, he must have it
if he sends for it. He is but a little Man, between 50 or 60 Years old, and by
relation very good natured, but overruled by those about him. He has a Queen,
and keeps about 29 Women, or Wives more, in whose company he spends most of his
time. He has one Daughter by his Sultaness or Queen, and a great many Sons and
Daughters by the rest. These walk about the Streets, and would be always
begging things of us; but it is reported, that the young Princess is kept in a
Room, and never stirs out, and that she did never see any Man but her Father
and Raja Laut her Uncle, being then about Fourteen Years Old.

When the Sultan visits his Friends he is carried in a small Couch on four Men's
shoulders, with eight or ten armed Men to guard him; but he never goes far this
way; for the Country is very Woody, and they have but little Paths, which
renders it the less commodious. When he takes his pleasure by Water, he carries
some of his Wives along with him. The Proes that are built for this purpose,
are large enough to entertain 50 or 60 Persons or more. The Hull is neatly
built, with a round Head and Stern, and over the Hull there is a small slight
House built with Bamboes; the sides are made up with split Bamboes, about four
Foot high, with little Windows in them of the same, to open and shut at their
pleasure. The roof is almost flat, neatly thatched with Palmeto Leaves. This
House is divided into two or three small Partitions or Chambers, one
particularly for himself. This is neatly Matted underneath, and round the
sides; and there is a Carpit and Pillows for him to sleep on. The second Room
is for his Women, much like the former. The third is for the Servants, who tend
them with Tobacco and Betel-Nut; for they are always chewing or smoking. The
fore and after-parts of the Vessel are for the Mariners to sit and Row.
Besides this, they have Outlayers, such as those I described at Guam; only the
Boats and Outlayers here are larger. These Boats are more round, like the
Half Moon almost; and the Bamboes or Outlayers that reach from the Boat are
also crooked. Besides, the Boat is not flat on one side here, as at Guam; but
has a Belly and Outlayers on each side: and whereas at Guam there is a little
Boat fastened to the Outlayers, that lies in the Water; the Beams or Bamboes
here are fastened traversewise to the Outlayers on each side, and touch not the
Water like Boats, but 1, 3 or 4 Foot above the Water, and serve for the Barge
Men to sit and Row and paddle on; the inside of the Vessel, except only just
before and abaft, being taken up with the apartments for the Passengers. There
run across the Outlayers two tire of Beams for the Padlers to sit on, on each
side the Vessel. The lower tire of these Beams is not a bove a Foot from the
Water: so that upon any the least reeling of the Vessel, the Beams are dipped in
the Water, and the Men that sit are wet up to their Waste: their Feet seldom
escaping the Water. And thus as all our Vessels are Rowed from within, these
are Paddled from without.

The Sultan has a Brother called Raja Laut, a brave Man. He is the second Man
in the Kingdom. All Strangers that come hither to Trade must make their Address
to him, for all Sea Affairs belong to him. He Licenceth Strangers to Import or
Export any Commodity, and it is by his Permission that the Natives themselves
are suffered to Trade: Nay the very Fishermen must ache a Permit from him: So
that there is no Man can come into the River or go out but by his leave. He is
two or three Years younger than the Sultan, and a little Man like him. He has
eight Women, by some of whom he has Issue. He has only one Son, about twelve
or fourteen Years old, who was Circumcised while we were there. His Eldest Son
died a little before we came hither, for whom he was still in great heaviness.
If he had lived a little longer he should have Married the Young Princess, but
whether this second Son must have her I know not, for I did never hear any
Discourse about it. Raja Laut is a very sharp Man; he speaks and writes
Spanish, which he learned in his Youth. He has by often conversing with
Strangers, got a great sight into the Customs of other Nations, and by Spanish
Books has some knowledge of Europe. He is General of the Mindanayans, and is
accounted an expert Soldier and a very stout Man; and the Women in their
Dances, Sing many Songs in his praise.

The Sultan of Mindanao sometimes makes War with his Neighbors the Mountaneers
or Alfoores. Their Weapons are Swords, Lances and some Hand-Cressets. The
Cresset is a small thing like a Baggonet, which they always wear in War or
Peace, at Work or Play, from the greatest of them to the poorest, or the
meanest Persons. They do never meet each other so as to have a pitched Battle,
but they build small Works or Forts of Timber, wherein they plant little Guns,
and lie in sight of each other 2 or 3 Months, skirmishing every Day in small
Parties, and sometimes surprising a Brest-work; and whatever side is like to be
worsted, if they have no probability to escape by flight, they sell their lives
as dear as they can; for there is seldom any quarter given, but the Conqueror
cuts and hacks his Enemies to pieces.

The Religion of these People is Mahometanism, Friday is their Sabbath; but I
did never see any difference that they make between this Day and any other Day,
only the Sultan himself goes then to the Mosque twice. Raja Laut never goes to
the Mosque, but Prays at certain Hours, Eight or Ten times in a Day; where ever
he is, he is very punctual to his Canonical Hours, and if he be aboard will go
ashore, on purpose to Pray. For no Business nor Company hinders him from this
Duty. Whether he is at home or abroad, in a House or in the Field, he leaves
all his Company, and goes about 100 Yards off, and there kneels down to his
Devotion. He first kisses the Ground, then prays aloud, and diverse times in his
Prayers he kisses the Ground, and does the same when he leaves off. His
Servants, and his Wives and Children talk and sing, or play how they please all
the time, but himself is very serious. The meaner sort of People have little
Devotion: I did never see any of them at their Prayers, or go into a Mosque.

In the Sultan's Mosque there is a great Drum with but one Head called a Gong;
which is instead of a Clock. This Gong is beaten at 12 a Clock, at 3, 6, and 9;
a Man being appointed for that Service. He has a Stick as big as a Man's Arm,
with a great knob at the end, bigger than a Man's Fist, made with Cotton, bound
fast with small Cords: with this he strikes the Gong as hard as he can, about
20 strokes; beginning to strike leisurely the first 5 or 6 strokes; then he
strikes faster, and at last strikes as fast as he can; and then he strikes
again slower and slower so many more strokes: thus he rises and falls three
times, and then leaves off till three Hours after. This is done Night and Day.

They circumcise the Males at 11 or 12 Years of Age, or older; and many are
circumcised at once. This Ceremony is performed with a great deal of Solemnity.
There had been no Circumcision for some Years before our being here; and then
there was one for Raja Laut's Son. They choose to have a general Circumcision
when the Sultan, or General, or some other great Person has a Son fit to be
Circumcised; for with him a great many more are Circumcised. There is notice
given about 8 or 10 Days before for all Men to appear in Arms, and great
preparation is made against the solemn Day. In the Morning before the Boys are
Circumcised, Presents are sent to the Father of the Child, that keeps the
Feast; which, as I said before, is either the Sultan, or some great Person: and
about 10 or 11 a Clock the Mohammedan Priest does his Office. He takes hold of
the foreskin with two Sticks, and with a pair of Scissors snips it off. After
this most of the Men, both in City and Country being in Arms before the House,
begin to act as if they were engaged with an Enemy, having such Arms as I
described. Only one acts at a time, the rest make a great Ring of 2 or 300
Yards round about him. He that is to exercise comes into the Ring with a great
shriek or two, and a horrid look; then he fetches two or three large stately
strides, and falls to work. He holds his broad Sword in one Hand, and his Lance
in the other, and traverses his Ground, leaping from one side of the Ring to
the other; and in a menacing posture and look, bids defiance to the Enemy, whom
his fancy frames to him; for there is nothing but Air to oppose him. Then he
stamps and shakes his Head, and grinning with his Teeth makes many ruful Faces.
Then he throws his Lance, and nimbly snatches out his Cresset, with which he
hacks and hews the Air like a Madman, often shrieking At last, being almost
tired with motion, he flies to the middle of the Ring, where he seems to have
his Enemy at his Mercy, and with two or three blows cuts on the Ground as if he
was cutting off his Enemy's Head. By this time he is all of a Sweat, and
withdraws triumphantly out of the Ring, and presently another enters with the
like shrieks and gesture. Thus they continue combating their imaginary Enemy
all the rest of the Day; toward the conclusion of which the richest Men act,
and at last the General, and then the Sultan concludes this Ceremony: He and
the General with some other great Men, are in Armor, but the rest have none.
After this the Sultan returns home, accompanied with abundance of People who
wait on him there till they are dismissed. But at the time when we were there,
there was an after game to be played; for the General's Son being then
Circumcised, the Sultan intended to give him a second visit in the Night, so
they all waited to attend him thither. The General also provided to meet him in
the best manner, and therefore desired Captain Swan with his Men to attend him.
Accordingly Captain Swan ordered us to get our Guns, and wait at the General's
House till further Orders. So about 40 of us waited till Eight a Clock in the
Evening: When the General with Captain Swan, and about 1000 Men, went to meet
the Sultan, with abundance of Torches that made it as light as Day. The manner
of the march was thus. First of all there was a Pageant, and upon it two
dancing Women gorgeously apparelled, with Coronets on their Heads, full of
glistering Spangles, and Pendants of the same, hanging down over their Breast
and Shoulders. These are Women bred up purposely for dancing: Their Feet and
Legs are but little employed, except sometimes to turn round very gently; but
their Hands, Arms, Head and Body, are in continual motion, especially their
Arms, which they turn and twist so strangely, that you would think them to be
made without Bones. Besides the two dancing Women, there were two old Women in
the Pageant, holding each a lighted Torch in their Hands, close by the two
dancing Women, by which light the glittering Spangles appeared very gloriously.
This Pageant was carried by six lusty Men: Then came six or seven Torches,
lighting the General and Captain Swan, who marched side by side next, and we
that attended Captain Swan followed close after, marching in order six and six
abrest, with each Man his Gun on his Shoulder, and Torches on each side. After
us came twelve of the General's Men with old Spanish Match-locks, marching four
in a row. After them about forty Lances, and behind them as many with great
Swords, marching all in order. After them came abundance only with Cressers by
their fides, who marched up close without any order. When we came near the
Sultan's House, the Sultan and his Men met us, and we wheeled off to let them
pass. The Sultan had three Pageants went before him: In the first Pageant were
four of his Sons, who were about 10 or 11 Years old. They had gotten abundance
of small Stones, which they roguishly threw about on the Peoples Heads. In the
next were four young Maidens, Nieces to the Sultan, being his Sisters
Daughters; and in the 3d, there were three of the Sultan's Children, not above
six Years old. The Sultan himself followed next, being carried in his Couch,
which was not like your Indian Palankins, but open, and very little and
ordinary. A multitude of People came after, without any order: but as soon as
he was past by, the General, and Captain Swan, and all our Men, closed in just
behind the Sultan, and so all marched together to the General's House. We came
thither between 10 and 11 a Clock, where the biggest part of the Company were
immediately dismissed; but the Sultan and his Children, and his Nieces, and some
other Persons of Quality, entered the General's House. They were met at the head
of the Stairs by the General's Women, who with a great deal of Respect
conducted them into the House. Captain Swan, and we that were with him followed
after. It was not long before the General caused his dancing Women to enter the
Room, and divert the Company with that pastime. I had forgot to tell you that
they have none but vocal Music here, by what I could learn, except only a row
of a kind of Bells without Clappers, 16 in number, and their weight increasing
gradually from about three to ten pound weight. These were set in a row on a
Table in the General's House, where for seven or eightDays together before the
Circumcision Day, they were struck each with a little Stick, for the biggest
part of the Day making a great noise, and they ceased that Morning. So these
dancing Women sung themselves, and danced to their own Music. After this the
General's Women, and the Sultan's Sons, and his Nieces danced. Two of the
Sultan's Nieces were about 18 or 19 Years Old, the other two were three or four
Years Younger. These Young Ladies were very richly dressed, with loose Garments
of Silk, and small Coronets on their Heads. They were much fairer than any
Women that I did ever see there, and very well featured; and their Noses, though
but small, yet higher than the other Women's, and very well proportioned. When
the Ladies had very well diverted themselves and the Company with dancing, the
General caused us to fire some Sky-rockets, that were made by his and Captain
Swan's Order, purposely for this Nights Solemnity; and after that the Sultan
and his retinue went away with a few Attendants, and we all broke up, and thus
ended this Days Solemnity: but the Boys being sore with their Amputation, went
stradding for a fortnight after.

They are not, as I said before, very curious, or strict in observing any Days,
or Times of particular Devotions, except it be Ramdam time, as we call it. The
Ramdam time was then in August, as I take it, for it was shortly after our
arrival here. In this time they Fast all Day and about seven a Clock in the
Evening, they spend near an Hour in Prayer. Toward the latter end of their
Prayer, they loudly invoke their Prophet, for about a quarter of an Hour, both
old and young bawling out very strangely, as if they intended to fright him out
of his sleepiness or neglect of them. After their Prayer is ended, they spend
some time in Feasting before they take their repose. Thus they do every Day for
a whole Month at least; for sometimes it is two or three Days longer before the
Ramdam ends: For it begins at the New Moon, and lasts till they see the next
New Moon, which sometimes in thick hazy Weather is not till three or four Days
after the Change, as it happened while I was at Achin, where they continued the
Ramdam till the New Moon's appearance. The next Day after they have seen the
New Moon, the Guns are all discharged about Noon, and then the time ends.

A main part of their Religion consists in washing often, to keep themselves
from being defiled; or after they are defiled to cleanse themselves again. They
also take great care to keep themselves from being polluted, by tasting or
touching any thing that is accounted Unclean; therefore Swines Flesh is very
abominable to them; nay, any one that has either tasted of Swines flesh, or
touched those Creatures, is not permitted to come into their Houses in many
Days after, and there is nothing will scare them more than a Swine. Yet there
are wild Hogs in the Islands, and those so plentiful, that they will come in
Troops out of the Woods in the Night into the very City, and come under their
Houses, to romage up and down the Filth that they find there. The Natives
therefore would even desire us to lie in wait for the Hogs, to destroy them,
which we did frequently, by shooting them and carrying them presently on board,
but were prohibited their Houses afterward.

And now I am on this Subject, I cannot omit a Story concerning the General. He
once desired to have a pair of Shoes made after the English Fashion, though he
did very seldom wear any: So one our Men made him a Pair, which the General
liked very well. Afterward some Body told him, That the Thread wherewith the
Shoes were sowed, were pointed with Hogs-bristles. This put him into a great
Passion; so he sent the Shoes to the Man that made them, and sent him withal
more Leather to make another Pair, with Threads pointed with some other Hair,
which was immediately done, and then he was well pleased.

CHAP. XIII.
Their coasting along the Isle of Mindanao, from a Bay on the East Side to
another at the S. E. end. Tornadoes and boisterous Weather. The S. E. Coast,
and its Savannah and plenty of Deer. They coast along the South Side to the
River of Mindanao City, and anchor there. The Sultan's Brother and Son come
aboard them, and invite them to settle there. Of the Feasibleness and probable
Advantage of such a Settlement, from the Neighboring Gold and Spice Islands.
Of the best way to Mindanao by the South Sea and Terra Australis; and of an
accidental Discovery there by Captain Davis, and a probability of a greater.
The Capacity they were in to settle here. The Mindanayans measure their Ship.
Captain Swan's Present to the Sultan: his Reception of it, and Audience given
to Captain Swan, with Raja Laut, the Sultans Brother's Entertainment of him.
The Contents of two English Letters shown them by the Sultan of Mindanao. Of
the Commodities, and the Punishments there. The General's Caution how to demean
themselves: at his Persuasion they lay up their Ships in the River. The
Mindanaians Caresses. The great Rains and Floods at the City. The Mindanaians
have Chinese Accomptants. How their Women dance. A Story of one John Thacker.
Their Bark eaten up, and their Ship endangered by the Worm. Of the Worms here
and elsewhere. Of Captain Swan Raja Laut, the General's Deceitfulness. Hunting
wild Kine. The Prodigality of some of the English. Captain Swan treats with a
Young Indian of a Spice-Island. A Hunting Voyage with the General. His
punishing a Servant of his. Of his Wives and Women. A sort of strong
Rice-drink. The General's foul Dealing and Exactions. Captain Swan's Uneasiness
and indiscreet Management. His Men Mutiny. Of a Snake twisting about one of
their Necks. The main part of the Grew go away with the Ship, leaving Captain
Swan and some of his Men: Several others poisoned there.

HAving in the two last Chapters given some Account of the Natural, Civil, and
Religious State of Mindanao, I shall now go on with the prosecution of our
Affairs during our stay there.

'Twas in a Bay on the N. East Side of the Island that we came to an Anchor, as
has been said. We lay in this Bay but one Night, and part of the next Day. Yet
there we got Speech with some of the Natives, who by signs made us to
understand, that the City Mindanao was on the West Side of the Island. We
endeavored to persuade one of them, to go with us to be our Pilot, but he
would not: Therefore in the Afternoon we loosed from hence, steering again to
the South East, having the Wind at S. W. When we came to the S. E. end of the
Island Mindanao, we saw two small Islands about three Leagues distant from it.
We might have passed between them and the main Island, as we learnt since; but
not knowing them, nor what dangers we might encounter there, we chose rather to
Sail to the Eastward of them. But meeting very strong Westerly Winds, we got
nothing forward in many Days. In this time we first saw the Islands Meangis,
which are about 16 Leagues distant from the Mindanao, bearing S. E. I shall
have occasion to speak more of them hereafter.

The 4th Day of July we got into a deep Bay, four Leagues N. W. from the two
small Islands before mentioned. But the Night before, in a violent Tornado, our
Bark being unable to beat any longer, bore away, which put us in some pain for
fear she was overset, as we had like to have been our selves. We anchored on
the South West side of the Bay, in fifteen fathom Water, about a Cables length
from the shore. Here we were forced to shelter our selves from the violence of
the Weather, which was so boisterous with Rains, and Tornadoes, and a strong
Westerly Wind, that we were very glad to find this place to Anchor in, being
the only shelter on this side from the West Winds.

This Bay is not above two Mile wide at the Mouth, but farther in it is three
Leagues wide, and seven fathom deep, running in N. N. W. There is a good depth
of Water about four or five Leagues in, but Rocky foul Ground for about two
Leagues in, from the mouth on both sides of the Bay, except only in that place
where we lay. About three Leagues in from the mouth, on the Eastem side, there
are fair sandy Bays, and very good anchoring in four, five, and six fathom. The
Land on the East side is high, Mountainous, and Woody, yet very well watered
with small Brooks, and there is one River large enough for Canoes to enter. On
the West side of the Bay, the Land is of a mean height with a large Savannah,
bordering on the Sea, and stretching from the mouth of the Bay, a great way to
the Westward.

This Savannah abounds with long Grass, and it is plentifully stocked with
Deer. The adjacent Woods are a covert for them in the heat of the Day: but
Mornings and Evenings they feed in the open Plains, as thick as in our Parks in
England. I never saw any where such plenty of wild Deer, though I have met with
them in several parts of America, both in the North and South Seas.

The Deer live here pretty peaceably and unmolested; for there are no
Inhabitants on that side of the Bay. We visited this Savannah every Morning,
and killed as many Deer as we pleased, sometimes 16 or 18 in a Day; and we did
eat nothing but Venison all the time we staid here.

We saw a great many Plantations by the sides of the Mountains, on the East
side of the Bay, and we went to one of them, in hopes to learn of the
Inhabitants whereabouts the City was, that we might not over-sail it in the
Night: but they fled from us.

We lay here till the 12th Day before the Winds abated of their fury, and then
we sailed from hence, directing our course to the Westward. In the Morning we
had a Land Wind at North. At 11 a Clock the Sea breeze came at West, just in
our Teeth, but it being fair Weather, we kept on our way, turning and taking
the advantage of the Land breezes by Night, and the Sea breezes by Day.

Being now past the S. E part of the Island, we coasted down on the South side,
and we saw abundance of Canoas a fishing, and now and then a small Village.
Neither were these Inhabitants afraid of us (as the former) but came aboard;
yet we could not understand them, nor they us, but by signs: and when we
mentioned the word Mindanao, they would point toward it.

The 18th Day of July we arrived before the River of Mindanao; the mouth of
which lies in lat. 6 d. 22 m. N. and is laid in 231 d. 12 m. Longitude West,
from the Lizard in England. We anchored right against the River in 15 fathom
Water, clear hard Sand; about 2 Miles from the shore, and 3 or 4 Miles from a
small Island, that lay without us to the Southward. We fired 7 or 9 Guns, I
remember not well which, and were answered again with 3 from the shore; for
which we gave one again. Immediately after our coming to an Anchor Raja Laut,
and one of the Sultan's Sons came off in a Canoa, being rowed with 10 Oars, and
demanded in Spanish what we were? and from whence we came? Mr. Smith (he who
was taken Prisoner at Leon in Mexico) answered in the same Language, that we
were English, and that we had been a great while out of England. They told us
that we were welcome, and asked us a great many questions about England;
especially concerning our East India Merchants; and whether we were sent by
them to settle a Factory here? Mr. Smith told them that we came hither only to
buy Provision. They seemed a little discontented when they understood that we
were not come to settle among them: for they had heard of our arrival on the
East Side of the Island a great while before, and entertained hopes that we
were sent purposely out of England hither to settle a Trade with them; which it
should seem they are very desirous of. For Capt. Goodlud had been here not long
before to treat with them about it; and when he went away told them (as they
said) that in a short time they might expect an Ambassador from England, to
make a full bargain with them.

Indeed upon mature thoughts, I should think we could not have done better,
than to have complied with the desire they seemed to have of our settling here;
and to have taken up our quarters among them. For as thereby we might better
have consulted our own profit and satisfaction, than by the other loose roving
way of life; so it might probably have proved of public benefit to our Nation,
and been a means of introducing an English Settlement and Trade, not only here,
but through several of the Spice-Islands, which lie in its neighborhood.

For the Islands Meangis, which I mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter,
lie within twenty Leagues of Mindanao. These are three smalls Islands that
abound with Gold and Cloves, If I may credit my Author Prince Jeoly, who was
born on one of them, and was at that time a Slave in the City of Mindanao. He
might have been purchased by us of his Master for a small matter, as he was
aftewards by Mr. Moody, (who came hither to trade, and laded a Ship with
Clove-Bark) and by transporting him home to his own Country, we might have
gotten a Trade there. But of Prince Jeoly I shall speak more hereafter. These
Islands are as yet probably unknown to the Dutch, who as I said before,
endeavor to ingross all the Spice into their own Hands.

There was another opportunity offered us here of settling on another
Spice-Island that was very well inhabited: for the Inhabitants fearing the
Dutch, and understanding that the English were settling at Mindanao, their
Sultan sent his Nephew to Mindanao while we were there to invite us thither:
Captain Swan conferred with him about it diverse times, and I do believe he had
some Inclination to accept the offer; and I am sure most of the Men were for
it: but this never came to a head, for want of a true understanding between
Captain Swan and his Men, as may be declared hereafter.

Beside the benefit which might accrue from this Trade with Meangis, and other
the Spice Islands, the Philippine Islands themselves, by a little care and
industry, might have afforded us a very beneficial Trade, and all these Trades
might have been managed from Mindanao, by settling there first. For that Island
lies very convenient for Trading either to the Spice-Islands, or to the rest
of the Philippine Islands: since as its Soil is much of the same nature with
either of them, so it lies as it were in the Center of the Gold and Spice Trade
in these parts; the Islands North of Mindanao abounding most in Gold, and those
South of Meangis in Spice.

As the Island Mindanao lies very convenient for Trade, so considering its
distance, the way thither may not be overlong and tiresome. The Course that I
would choose should be to set out of England about the latter end of August,
and to pass round Terra del Fuego, and so stretching over toward New Holland,
coast it along that Shore till I came near to Mindanao; or first I would coast
down near the American Shore, as far as I found convenient, and then direct my
Course accordingly for the Island. By this I should avoid coming near any of
the Dutch Settlements, and he sure to meet always with a constant brisk
Easterly Trade Wind, after I was once past Terra del Fuego. Whereas in passing
about the Cape of Good Hope, after you are shot over the East-Indian Ocean, and
are come to the Islands, you must pass through the Streights of Malacca or
Sandy, or else some other Streights East from Java, where you will be sure to
meet with Country-winds, go on which side of the Equator you please; and this
would require ordinarily 7 or 8 Months for the Voyage, but the other I should
hope to perform in 6 or 7 at most. In your return from thence also you must
observe the same Rule as the Spaniards do in going from Manila to Acapulco;
only as they run toward the North Pole for variable Winds, so you must run to
the Southward, till you meet with a Wind that will carry you over to Terra del
Fuego. There are places enough to touch at for Refreshment, either going or
coming. You may touch going thither on either side of Terra Patagonica, or, if
you please, at the Gallapagoes Islands, where there is Refreshment enough; and
returning you may probably touch somewhere on New Holland, and so make some
profitable discovery in these Places without going out of your way. And to
speak my Thoughts freely, I believe it is owing to the neglect of this easy way
that all that vast Tract of Terra Australis which bounds the South Sea is yet
undiscovered: those that cross that Sea seeming to design some Business on the
Peruvian or Mexican Coast, and so leaving that at a distance. To confirm which,
I shall add what Captain Davis told me lately, That after his Departure from us
at the Haven of Ria Lexa (as is mentioned in the 8th Chap.) he went after
several Traverses, to the Gallapagoes, and that standing thence Southward for
Wind, to bring him about Terra del Fuego, in the Lat. of 27 South, about 500
leagues from Copayapo, on the Coast of Coili, he saw a small sandy Island just
by him; and that they saw to the Westward of it a long Tract of pretty high
Land, tending away toward the North West out of sight. This might probably be
the Coast of Terra Australis Incognita.

But to return to Mindanao; as to the Capacity we were then in, of settling our
selves at Mindanao, although we were not sent out of any such design of
settling, yet we were as well provided, or better, considering all
Circumstances, than if we had. For there was scarce any useful Trade, but some
or other of us understood it. We had Sawyers, Carpenters, Joyners, Brickmakers,
Bricklayers, Shoemakers, Tailors, etc. we only wanted a good Smith for great
Work; which we might have had at Mindanao. We were very well provided with
Iron, Lead, and all sorts of Tools, as Saws, Axes, Hammers, etc. We had Powder
and Shot enough, and very good small Arms. If we had designed to build a Fort,
we could have spared 8 or 10 Guns out of our Ship, and Men enough to have
managed it, and any Affair of Trade beside. We had also a great Advantage above
raw Men that are sent out of England into these places, who proceed usually too
cautiously, coldly and formally, to compass any considerable Design, which
Experience better teaches than any Rules whatsoever; besides the danger of
their Lives in so great and sudden a change of Air: whereas we were all inured
to hot Climates, hardened by many Fatigues, and, in general, daring Men, and
such as would not be easily baffled. To add one thing more, our Men were almost
tired, and began to desire a quietus est; and therefore they would gladly have
seated themselves any where. We had a good Ship too, and enough of us (beside
what might have been spared to manage our new Settlement) to bring the News
with the Effects to the Owners in England: for Captain Swan had already 5000 l.
in Gold, which he and his Merchants received for Goods sold mostly to Captain
Harris and his Men: which if he had laid but part of it out in Spice, as
probably he might have done, would have satisfied the Merchants to their Hearts
content. So much by way of digression.

To proceed therefore with our first Reception at Mindanao, Raja Laut and his
Nephew sat still in their Canoa, and would not come aboard us; because, as they
said, they had no Orders for it from the Sultan. After about half an Hour's
Discourse, they took their leaves, first inviting Captain Swan ashore, and
promising him to assist him in getting Provision; which they said at present
was scarce, but in three or four Month's time the Rice would be gathered in,
and then he might have as much as he pleased: and that in the mean time he
might secure his Ship in some convenient place, for fear of the Westerly winds,
which they said would be very violent at the latter end of this Month, and all
the next, as we found them.

We did not know the quality of these two Persons till after they were gone;
else we should have fired some Guns at their departure: When they were gone, a
certain Officer under the Sultan came aboard, and measured our Ship. A custom
derived from the Chinese, who always measure the length and breadth, and the
depth of the Hold of all Ships that come to load there; by which means they
know how much each Ship will carry. But for what reason this Custom is used
either by the Chinese, or Mindanao Men, I could never learn; unless the
Mindanaians design by this means to improve their skill in Shipping, against
they have a Trade.

Captain Swan, considering that the Season of the Year would oblige us to spend
some time at this Island, thought it convenient to make what interest he could
with the Sultan; who might afterward either obstruct, or advance his designs.
He therefore immediately provided a Present to send ashore to the Sultan, viz.
3 Yards of Scarlet Cloth, 3 Yards of broad Gold Lace, a Turkish Scimiter and a
Pair of Pistols: and to Raja Laut he sent 3 Yards of Scarlet Cloth, and 3 Yards
of Silver Lace. This Present was carried by Mr. Henry More in the Evening. He
was first conducted to Raja Laut's House; where he remained till report thereof
was made to the Sultan, who immediately gave order for all things to be made
ready to receive him.

About Nine a Clock at Night, a Messenger came from the Sultan to bring the
Present away. Then Mr. More was conducted all the way with Torches and armed
Men, till be came to the House where the Sultan was. The Sultan with eight or
ten Men of his Council were seated on Carpets, waiting his coming. The Present
that Mr. More brought was laid down before them, and was very kindly accepted
by the Sultan, who caused Mr. More to sit down by them, and asked a great many
questions of him. The discourse was in Spanish by an Interpreter. This
Conference lasted about an Hour, and then he was dismissed, and returned again to
Raja Laut's House. There was a Supper provided for him, and the Boats Crew;
after which he returned aboard.

The next Day the Sultan sent for Capt. Swan: He immediately went ashore with a
Flag flying in the Boats Head, and two Trumpets sounding all the way. When he
came ashore, he was met at his Landing by two principal Officers, guarded along
with Soldiers, and abundance of People gazing to see him. The Sultan waited for
him in his Chamber of Audience, where Captain Swan was treated with Tobacco and
Betel, which was all his Entertainment.

The Sultan sent for two English Letters for Captain Swan to read, purposely to
let him know, that our East India Merchants did design to settle here, and that
they had already sent a Ship hither. One of these Letters was sent to the
Sultan from England, by the East India Merchants. The chiefest things contained
in it, as I remember, for I saw it afterward in the Secretaries Hand, who was
very proud to show it to us, was to desire some privileges, in order to the
building of a Fort there. This Letter was written in a very fair Hand; and
between each Line, there was a Gold Line drawn. The other Letter was left by
Captain Goodlud, directed to any English Men who should happen to come thither.
This related wholly to Trade, giving an account, at what rate he had agreed
with them for Goods of the Island, and how European Goods should be sold to
them; with an account of their Weight and Measures, and their difference from
ours.

The rate agreed on for Mindanao Gold, was 14 Spanish Dollars, (which is a
current Coin all over India) the English Ounce, and 18 Dollars the Mindanao
Ounce. But for Beeswax and Clove-bark, I do not remember the rate; neither do
I well remember the rates of Europe Commodities; but I think the rate of Iron
was not above four Dollars a Hundred. Captain Goodlud's Letter concluded thus.
Trust none of them, for they are all Thieves, but Tace is Latin for a Candle.
We understood afterward that Captain Goodlud was robbed of some Goods by one
of the General's Men, and that he that robbed him was fled into the Mountains,
and could not be found while Captain Goodlud was here. But the Fellow returning
back to the City some time after our arrival here, Raja Laut brought him bound
to Captain Swan, and told him what he had done, desiring him to punish him for
it as he pleased; but Captain Swan excused himself, and said it did not belong
to him, therefore he would have nothing to do with it. However, the General
Raja Laut, would not pardon him, but punished him according to their own
Custom, which I did never see but at this time.

He was stripped stark naked in the Morning at Sunrising, and bound to a Post, so
that he could not stir Hand nor Foot, but as he was moved; and was placed with
his Face Eastward against the Sun. In the Afternoon they turned his Face
toward the West, that the Sun might still be in his Face; and thus he stood
all Day, parcht in the Sun (which shines here excessively hot) and tormented
with the Moskitos or Gnats: After this the General would have killed him, if
Captain Swan had consented to it. I did never see any put to Death; but I
believe they are barbarous enough in it: The General told us himself that he
put two Men to Death in a Town where some of us were with him; but I heard not
the manner of it. Their common way of punishing is to strip them in this
manner, and place them in the Sun; but sometimes they lay them flat on their
Backs on the Sand, which is very hot; where they remain a whole Day in the
scorching Sun, with the Moskito's biting them all the time.

This action of the General in offering Captain Swan the punishment of the
Thief, caused Captain Swan afterward to make him the same offer of his Men,
when any had offended the Mindanao Men: but the General left such Offenders to
be punished by Captain Swan, as he thought convenient. So that for the least
offense Captain Swan punished his Men, and that in the sight of the
Mindanaians; and I think sometimes only for revenge; as he did once punish his
Chief Mate Mr. Teat, he that came Captain of the Bark to Mindanao. Indeed at
that time Captain Swan had his Men as much under command as if he had been in a
King's Ship: and had he known how to use his Authority, he might have led them
to any Settlement, and have brought them to assist him in any design he had
pleased.

Captain Swan being dismissed from the Sultan, with abundance of civility, after
about two Hours Discourse with him, went thence to Raja Laut's House. Raja Laut
had then some difference with the Sultan, and therefore he was not present at
the Sultan's reception of our Captain, but waited his return, and treated him
and all his Men with boiled Rice and Fowls. He then told Captain Swan again,
and urged it to him, that it would be best to get his Ship into the River as
soon as he could, because of the usual tempestuous Weather at this time of the
Year; and that he should want no assistance to further him in any thing. He
told him also, that as we must of necessity stay here some time, so our Men
would often come ashore; and he therefore desired him to warn his Men to be
careful to give no afront to the Natives; who, he said, were very revengeful.
That their Customs being different from ours, he feared that Captain Swan's Men
might some time or other offend them, though ignorantly; that therefore he gave
him this friendly warning, to prevent it: that his House should always be open
to receive him or any of his Men, and that he knowing our Customs, would never
be offended at any thing. After a great deal of such Discourse he dismissed the
Captain and his Company, who took their leave and came aboard.

Captain Swan having seen the two Letters, did not doubt but that the English
did design to settle a Factory here: therefore he did not much scruple the
honesty of these People, but immediately ordered us to get the Ship into the
River. The River upon which the City of Mindanao stands is but small, and has
not above 10 or 11 Foot Water on the Bar at a Springtide: therefore we
lightened our Ship, and the Spring coming on, we with much ado got her into the
River, being assisted by 50 or 60 Mindanaian Fishermen, who lived at the Mouth
of the River; Raja Laut himself being aboard our Ship to direct them. We
carried her about a quarter of a Mile up, within the Mouth of the River, and
there moored her, Head and Stern in a hole, where we always rode afloat. After
this the Citizens of Mindanao came frequently aboard, to invite our Men to
their Houses, and to offer us Pagallies. 'Twas a long time since any of us had
received such Friendship, and therefore we were the more easily drawn to accept
of their kindnesses; and in a very short time most of our Men got a Comrade or
two, and as many Pagallies; especially such of us as had good Cloths, and ^ore
of Gold, as many had, who were of the number of those, that accompanied Captain
Harris over the Isthmus of Darien, the rest of us being Poor enough. Nay, the
very Poorest and Meanest of us could hardly pass the Streets, but we were even
haled by Force into their Houses, to be treated by them; although their Treats
were but mean, viz. Tobacco, or Betel-Nut, or a little sweet spiced Water. Yet
their seeming Sincerity, Simplicity, and the manner of bestowing these Gifts,
made them very acceptable. When we came to their Houses, they would always be
praising the English, as declaring that the English and Mindanaians were all
one. This they expressed by putting their two Fore-fingers close together, and
saying, that the English and Mindanaians were samo, samo, that is, all one.
Then they would draw their Fore-fingers half a Foot asunder, and say the Dutch
and they were Bugeto, which signifies so, that they were at such distance in
point of Friendship: And for the Spaniards, they would make a greater
Representation of distance than for the Dutch: Fearing these, but having felt,
and smarted from the Spaniards, who had once almost brought them under.

Captain Swan did seldom go into any House at first, but into Raja Laut's.
There he dined commonly every day; and as many of his Men as were ashore, and
had no Money to Entertain themselves, resorted thither about twelve a Clock,
where they had Rice enough boiled and well dressed, and some scraps of Fowls, or
bits of Buffaloe, dressed very nastily. Captain Swan was served a little better,
and his two Trumpeters sounded all the time that he was at Dinner. After Dinner
Raja Laut would sit and Discourse with him most part of the Afternoon. It was
now the Ramdam time, therefore the General excused himself, that he could not
Entertain our Captain with Dances, and other Pastimes, as he intended to do
when this solemn Time was past; besides, it was the very height of the wet
Season, and therefore not so proper for Pastimes.

We had now very tempestuous Weather, and excessive Rains, which so swelled the
River, that it overflowed its Banks; so that we had much ado to keep our Ship
safe: For every now and then we should have a great Tree come floating down the
River, and sometimes lodge against our Bows, to the endangering the breaking
our Cables, and either the driving us in, over the Banks, or carrying us out to
Sea; both which would have been very dangerous to us, especially being without
Ballast.

The City is about a Mile long (of no great breadth) winding with the Banks of
the River on the Right Hand going up, though it has many Houses on the other
side too. But at this time it seemed to stand as in a Pond, and there was no
passing from one House to another but in Canoas. This tempestuous rainy Weather
happened the latter end of July, and lasted most part of August.

When the bad Weather was a little assuaged, Captain Swan hired a House to put
our Sails and Goods in, while we carren'd our Ship. We had a great deal of Iron
and Lead, which was brought ashore into this House. Of these Commodities
Captain Swan sold to the Sultan or General, Eight or Ten Tuns, at the Rates
agreed on by Captain Goodlud, to be paid in Rice. The Mindanaians are no good
Accomptants; theresore the Chinese that live here, do cast up their Accounts
for them. After this, Captain Swan bought Timber Trees of the General, and set
some of our Men to Saw them into Planks, to Sheath the Ship's bottom. He had
two Whip-Saws on Board, which he brought out of England, and four or five Men
that knew the use of them, for they had been Sawyers in Jamaica.

When the Ramdam time was over, and the dry time set in a little, the General,
to oblige Captain Swan, entertained him every Night with Dances. The dancing
Women that are purposely bred up to it, and make it their Trade, I have already
described. But beside them, all the Women in general are much addicted to
Dancing. They Dance 40 or 50 at once; and that standing all round in a Ring,
joined Hand in Hand, and Singing and keeping time. But they never budge out of
their places, nor make any motion till the Chorus is Sung; then all at once
they throw out one Leg, and bawl out aloud; and sometime they only clap their
Hands when the Chorus is Sung. Captain Swan, to retaliate the General's
Favors, sent for his Violins, and some that could Dance English Dances;
wherewith the General was very well pleased. They commonly spent the biggest
part of the Night in these sort of Pastimes.

Among the rest of our Men that did use to Dance thus before the General, there
was one John Thacker, who was a Seaman bred, and could neither Write nor Read;
but had formerly learnt to Dance in the Musick-Houses about Wapping: This Man
came into the South Seas with Captain Harris, and getting with him a good
quantity of Gold, and being a pretty good Husband of his Share, had still some
left, besides what he laid out in a very good Suit of Clothes. The General
supposed by his Garb and his Dancing, that he had been of noble Extraction; and
to be satisfied of his Quality, asked of one of our Men, if he did not guess
aright of him? The Man of whom the General asked this Question told him, he was
much in the right; and that most of our Ship's Company were of the like
Extraction; especially all those that had fine Clothes; and that they came
abroad only to see the World, having Money enough to bear their Exexpences
wherever they came; but that for the rest, those that had but mean Clothes,
they were only common Seamen. After this, the General showed a great deal of
Respect to all that had good Clothes, but especially to John Thacker, till
Captain Swan came to know the Business, and marred all; undeceiving the
General, and drubbing the Nobleman: For he was so much incensed against John
Thacker, that he could never endure him afterward; though the poor Fellow knew
nothing of the Matter.

About the middle of November we began to work on our Ship's bottom, which we
found very much eaten with the Worm: For this is a horrid place for Worms. We
did not know this till after we had been in the River a Month; and then we
found our Canoas bottoms eaten like Honey-combs; our Bark, which was a single
bottom, was eaten through; so that she could not swim. But our Ship was sheathed,
and the Worm came no farther than the Hair between the sheathing Plank, and the
main Plank. We did not mistrust the General's Knavery till now: for when he
came down to our Ship, and found us ripping off the sheathing Plank, and saw
the firm bottom underneath, he shook his Head, and seemed to be discontented;
saying, he did never see a Ship with two bottoms before. We were told that in
this place, where we now lay, a Dutch Ship was earen up in two Months time, and
the General had all her Guns; and it is probable he did expect to have had
Ours: Which I do believe was the main Reason that made him so forward in
assisting us to get our Ship into the River, for when we went out again we had
no Assistance from him. We had no Worms till we came to this place: For when we
Careen'd at the Marias, the Worm had not touched us; nor at Guam, for there we
scrubb'd; nor after we came to the Island Mindanao; for at the S. E. end of the
Island we heel'd and scrubb'd also. The Mindanaians are so sensible of these
destructive Insects, that whenever they come from Sea, they immediately hale
their Ship into a dry Dock, and burn her bottom, and there let her lie dry till
they are ready to get to Sea again. The Canoas or Proes they hale up dry, and
never suffer them to be long in the Water. It is reported that those Worms
which get into a Ships bottom in the salt Water, will die in the fresh Water;
and that the fresh Water Worms will die in salt Water: but in brackish Water
both sorts will increase prodigiously. Now this place where we lay was
sometimes brackish Water, yet commonly fresh; but what sort of Worm this was I
know not. Some Men are of Opinion, that these Worms breed in the Plank; but I
am persuaded they breed in the Sea: For I have seen Millions of them swimming
in the Water, particularly in the Bay of Panama; for there Captain Davis,
Captain Swan and my self, and most of our Men, did take notice of them diverse
times, which was the reason of our Cleaning so often while we were there: and
these were the largest Worms that I did ever see. I have also seen them in
Virginia, and in the Bay of Campeachy; in the latter of which places the Worms
eat prodigiously. They are always in Bays, Creeks, Mouths of Rivers, and such
places as are near the shore; being never found far out at Sea, that I could
ever learn: yet a Ship will bring them lodged in its Plank for a great way.

Having thus ripped off all our Worm-eaten Plank, and clapped on new, by the
beginning of December 1686, our Ships bottom was sheathed and tallowed, and the
10th Day went over the Bar, and took aboard the Iron and Lead that we could not
sell, and began to fill our Water, and fetch aboard Rice for our Voyage: But C.
Swan remained ashore still, and was not yet determined when to sail, or
whither. But I am well assured that he did never intend to Cruise about Manila,
as his Crew designed; for I did once ask him, and he told me, That what he had
already done of that kind he was forced to; but now being at Liberty, he would
never more Engage in any such Design: For, said he, there is no Prince on Earth
is able to wipe off the Stain of such Actions. What other Designs he had I know
not, for he was commonly very Cross; yet he did never propose doing any thing
else, but only ordered the Provision to be got Aboard in order to Sail; and I
am confident if he had made a motion to go to any English Factory, most of his
Men would have consented to it, though probably some would have still opposed it.
However, his Authority might soon have over-sway'd those that were Refractory;
for it was very strange to see the Awe that these Men were in of him, for he
punished the most stubborn and daring of his Men. Yet when we had brought the
Ship out into the Road, they were not altogether so submissive, as while it lay
in the River, though even then it was that he punished Captain Teat.

I was at that time a Hunting with the General for Beef, which he had a long
time promised us. But now I saw that there was no Credit to be given to his
Word; for I was a Week out with him and saw but four Cows, which were so wild,
that we did not get one. There were five or six more of our Company with me;
these who were young Men, and had Dalilahs there, which made them fond of the
Place, all agreed with the General to tell Captain Swan, that there were Beeves
enough, only they were wild. But I told him the Truth, and advised him not to
be too credulous of the General's Promises. He seemed to be very angry, and
stormed behind the General's Back, but in his Presence was very mute, being a
Man of small Courage.

It was about the 20th Day of December when we returned from Hunting, and the
General designed to go again to another place to Hunt for Beef; but he stayed
till after Christmas Day, because some of us designed to go with him; and
Captain Swan had desired all his Men to be aboard that Day, that we might keep
it solemnly together: And accordingly he sent aboard a Buffaloe the Day before,
that we might have a good Dinner. So the 25th Day about 10 a Clock, Captain
Swan came aboard, and all his Men who were ashore: For you must understand that
near a third of our Men lived constantly ashore, with their Comrades and
Pagallies, and some with Women servants, whom they hired of their Masters for
Concubines. Some of our Men also had Houses, which they hired or bought, for
Houses are very cheap, for five or six Dollars. For many of them having more
Money than they knew what to do with, eased themselves here of the trouble of
telling it, spending it very lavishly, their prodigality making the People
impose upon them, to the making the rest of us pay the dearer for what we
bought, and to the endangering the like impositions upon such Englishmen as may
come here hereafter. For the Mindanaians knew how to get our Squires Gold from
them (for we had no Silver,) and when our Men wanted Silver, they would change
now and then an Ounce of Gold, and could get for it no more than 10 or 11
Dollars for a Mindanao Ounce, which they would not part with again under 18
Dollars. Yet this, and the great prices the Mindanaians set on their Goods,
were not the only way to lessen their stocks; for their Pagallies and Comrades
would often be begging somewhat of them, and our Men were generous enough, and
would bestow half an Ounce of Gold at a time, in a Ring for their Pagallies, or
in a Silver Wrist-band, or Hoop to come about their Arms, in hopes to get a
Nights Lodging with them.

When we were all aboard on Christmas Day, Captain Swan and his two Merchants;
I did expect that Captain Swan would have made some proposals, or have told us
his designs; but he only dined and went ashore again, without speaking any
thing of his Mind. Yet even then I do think that he was driving on a design, of
going to one of the Spice Islands, to load with Spice; for the Young Man before
mentioned, who I said was sent by his Uncle, the Sultan of a Spice Island near
Ternate, to invite the English to their Island, came aboard at this time, and
after some private Discourse with Captain Swan, they both went ashore together.
This Young Man did not care that the Mindanaians should be privy to what he
said. I have heard Captain Swan say that he offered to load his Ship with
Spice, provided he would build a small Fort, and leave some Men to secure the
Island from the Dutch; but I am since informed, that the Dutch have now got
possession of the Island.

The next Day after Christmas the General went away again, and five or six
Englishmen with him, of whom I was one, under pretense of going a hunting; and
we all went together by Water in his Proe, together with his Women and
Servants, to the hunting place. The General always carried his Wives and
Children, his Servants, his Money and Goods with him: so we all embarked in the
Morning, and arrived there before Night. I have already described the fashion
of their Proes, and the Rooms made in them. We were entertained in the
General's Room or Cabin. Our Voyage was not so far, but that we reached our
Port before Night.

At this time one of the General's Servants had offended, and was punished in
this manner: He was bound fast flat on his Belly, on a Bamboe belonging to the
Proe, which was so near the Water, that by the Vessel's motion, it frequently
delved under Water, and the Man along with it; and sometimes when hoisted up,
he had scarce time to blow before he would be carried under Water again.

When we had rowed about two Leagues, we entered a pretty large deep River, and
rowed up a League further, the Water salt all the way. There was a pretty large
Village, the Houses built after the Country fashion. We landed at this place,
where there was a House made ready immediately for us. The General and his
Women lay at one end of the House, and we at the other end, and in the Evening
all the Women in the Village danced before the General.

While he staid here, the General with his Men went out every Morning betimes,
and did not return till four or five a Clock in the Afternoon, and he would
often complement us, by telling us what good Trust and Confidence he had in us,
saying, that he left his Women and Goods under our Protection, and that he
thought them as secure with us six, (for we had all our Arms with us) as if he
had left 100 of his own Men to guard them. Yet for all this great Confidence,
he always left one of his principal Men, for fear some of us should be too
familiar with his Women.

They did never stir out of their own Room when the General was at Home, but as
soon as he was gone out, they would presently come into our Room, and sit with
us all Day, and ask a Thousand Questions of us concerning our English Women,
and our Customs. You may imagine that before this time, some of us had attained
so much of their Language as to understand them, and give them Answers to their
Demands. I remember that one Day they asked how many Wives the King of England
had? We told them but one, and that our English Laws did not allow of any more.
They said it was a strange Custom, that a Man should be consined to one Woman;
some of them said it was a very bad Law, but others again said it was a good
Law; so there was a great Dispute among them about it. But one of the General's
Women said positively, That our Law was better than theirs, and made them all
silent by the Reason which she gave for it. This was the War Queen, as we
called her, for she did always Accompany the General when ever he was called
out to Engage his Enemies, but the rest did not.

By this Familiarity among the Women, and by often discoursing them, we came to
be acquainted with their Customs and Privileges. The General lies with his
Wives by turns; but she by whom he had the first Son, has a double Portion of
his Company: For when it comes to her turn, she has him two Nights, whereas the
rest have him but one. She with whom he is to lie at Night, seems to have a
particular Respect shown her by the rest all the precedent Day; and for a Mark
of distinction, wears a striped silk Handkerchief about her Neck, by which we
knew who was Queen that Day.

We lay here about five or six Days, but did never in all that time see the
least sign of any Beef, which was the Business we came about; neither were we
suffered to go out with the General to see the wild Kine, but we wanted for
nothing else: However, this did not please us, and we often importuned him to
let us go out among the Cattle. At last he told us, That he had provided a Jar
of Rice-drink to be merry with us, and after that we should go with him.



The next Day we went out with the General into the Savannah, where he had near
100 Men making of a large Pen to drive the Cattle into. For that is the manner
of their Hunting, having no Dogs. But I saw not above 8 or 10 Cows, and those
as wild as Deer, so that we got none this Day: yet the next Day some of his Men
brought in 3 Heifers, which they killed in the Savannah. With these we returned
aboard, they being all that we got there.

Captain Swan was much vexed at the Generals Actions; for he promised to supply
us with as much Beef as we should want, but now either could not, or would not
make good his Promise. Besides, he failed to perform his Promise in a bargain
of Rice, that we were to have for the Iron which he sold him, but he put us off
still from time to time, and would not come to any Account. Neither were these
all his Tricks; for a little before his Son was Circumcised, (of which I spoke
in the foregoing Chapter) he pretended a great straight for Money, to defray
the Charges of that Day; and therefore desired Captain Swan to lend him about
20 Ounces of Gold; for he knew that Captain Swan had a considerable quantity of
Gold in his possession, which the General thought was his own, but indeed had
none but what belonged to the Merchants. However he lent it the General, but
when he came to an Account with Captain Swan, he told him, that it was usual at
such solemn times to make Presents, and that he received it as a Gift. He also
demanded Payment for the Victuals that our Captain and his Men did eat at his
House. These things startled Captain Swan, yet how to help himself he knew not.
But all this, with other inward troubles, lay hard on our Captain's Spirits,
and put him very much out of Humor; for his own Company also were pressing him
every Day to be gone, because, now was the height of the Easterly Monsoon, the
only Wind to carry us farther into the Indies.

About this time some of our Men, who were weary and tired with wandering, ran
away into the Country and absconded, they being assisted, as was generally
believed, by Raja Laut. There were others also, who fearing we should not go to
an English Port, bought a Canoa, and designed to go in her to Borneo: For not
long before a Mindanao Vessel came from thence, and brought a Letter directed
to the chief of the English Factory at Mindanao. This Letter the General would
have Captain Swan have opened, but he thought it might come from some of the
East India Merchants whose Affairs he would not intermeddle with, and therefore
did not open it. I since met with Captain Bowry at Achin, and telling him this
Story, he said that he sent that Letter, supposing that the English were
settled there at Mindanao, and by this Letter we also thought that there was an
English Factory at Borneo: so here was a mistake on both sides. But this Canoa,
wherewith some of them thought to go to Borneo, Captain Swan took from them,
and threatened the Undertakers very hardly. However, this did not so far
discourage them, for they secretly bought another; but their Designs taking
Air, they were again frustrated by Captain Swan.

The whole Crew were at this time under a general Disaffection, and full of
very different Projects; and all for want of Action. The main Division was
between those that had Money and those that had none. There was a great
Difference in the Humors of these; for they that had Money lived ashore, and
did not care for leaving Mindanao; whilst those that were poor lived Aboard,
and urged Capt Swan to go to Sea. These began to be Unruly as well as
Dissatisfied, and sent ashore the Merchants Iron to sell for Rack and Honey, to
make Punch, wherewith they grew Drunk and Quarelsome: Which disorderly Actions
deterred me from going Aboard; for I did ever abhor Drunkenness, which now our
Men that were Aboard abandoned themselves wholly to.

Yet these Disorders might have been crushed, if Capt. Swan had used his
Authority to Suppress, them: But he with his Merchants living always ashore,
there was no Command; and therefore every Man did what he pleased and
encouraged each other in his Villainies. Now Mr. Harthop, who was one of Captain
Swan's Merchants, did very much importune him to settle his Resolutions, and
declare his Mind to his Men; which at last he consented to do. Therefore he
gave warning to all his Men to come Aboard the 13th day of January, 1687.

We did all earnestly expect to hear what Captain Swan would propose, and
therefore were very willing to go Aboard. But unluckily for him, two days
before this Meeting was to be, Captain Swan sent Aboard his Gunner^ to fetch
something ashore out of his Cabin. The Gunner rummaging to find what he was
sent for, among other things took out the Captain's Journal, from America to
the Island Guam, and laid down by him. This Journal was taken up by one John
Read, a Bristol man, whom I have mentioned in my 4th Chapter. He was a pretty
Ingenious young Man, and of a very civil carriage and behavior. He was also
accounted a good Artist, and kept a Journal, and was now prompted by his
curiosity, to peep into Captain Swan's Journal, to see how it agreed with his
own; a thing very usual among Seamen that keep Journals, when they have an
opportunity, and especially young Men, who have no great experience. At the
first opening of the Book he light on a place in which Captain Swan had
inveighed bitterly against most of his Men, especially against another John
Reed a Jamaica man. This was such stuff as he did not seek after: But hitting
so pat on this subject, his curiosity led him to pry farther; and therefore
while the Gunner was busy, he conveyed the Book away, to look over it at his
leisure. The Gunner having dispatched his business, locked up the Cabbin-door,
not missing the Book, and went ashore. Then John Reed showed it to his
Namesake, and to the rest that were aboard, who were by this time the biggest
part of them ripe for mischief; only wanting some fair pretense to set
themselves to work about it. Therefore looking on what was written in this
Journal to be matter sufficient for them to accomplish their Ends, Captain
Teat, who as I said before, had been abused by Captain Swan, laid hold on this
opportunity to be revenged for his Injuries, and aggravated the matter to the
height; persuading the Men to turn out Captain Swan from being Commander, in
hopes to have commanded the Ship himself. As for the Seamen they were easily
persuaded to any thing; for they were quite tired with this long and tedious
Voyage, and most of them despaired of ever getting home, and therefore did not
care what they did, or whither they went. It was only want of being busied in
some Action that made them so uneasy; therefore they consented to what Teat
proposed, and immediately all that were aboard bound themselves by Oath to turn
Captain Swan out, and to conceal this design from those that were ashore, until
the Ship was under Sail; which would have been presently, if the Surgeon or his
Mate had been aboard; but they were both ashore, and they thought it no
Prudence to go to Sea without a Surgeon: Therefore the next Morning they sent
ashore one John Cookworthy, to hasten off either the Surgeon or his Mate, by
pretending that one of the Men in the Night broke his Leg by falling into the
Hold. The Surgeon told him that he intended to come aboard the next day with
the Captain, and would not come before; but sent his Mate, Herman Coppinger.

This Man sometime before this, was sleeping at his Pagallies, and a Snake
twisted himself about his Neck; but after wards went away without hurting him.
In this Country it is usual to have the Snakes come into the Houses, and into
the Ships too; for we had several came aboard our Ship when we lay in the
River. But to proceed, Herman Coppinger provided to go aboard; and the next
day, being the time appointed for Captain Swan and all his Men to meet aboard,
I went aboard with him, neither of us mistrusted what was designing by those
aboard, till we came thither. Then we found it was only a trick to get the
Surgeon off; for now, having obtained their Desires, the Canoa was sent ashore
again immediately, to desire as many as they could meet to come aboard; but not
to tell the Reason, left Captain Swan should come to hear of it.

The 13th day in the Morning they weighed, and fired a Gun: Capt. Swan
immediately sent aboard Mr. Nelly, who was now his chief Mate, to see what the
matter was: To him they told all their Grievances, and showed him the Journal.
He persuaded them to stay till the next day, for an Answer from Captain Swan
and the Merchants. So they came to an Anchor again, and the next Morning Mr.
Harthop came aboard: He persuaded them to be reconciled again, or at least to
stay and get more Rice: But they were deaf to it, and weighed again while he
was aboard Yet at Mr. Harthop's Persuasion they promised to stay till 2 a Clock
in the Afternoon for Captain Swan, and the rest of the Men, if they would come
aboard; but they suffered no Man to go ashore, except one William Williams that
had a wooden Leg, and another that was a Sawyer.

If Capt. Swan had yet come aboard, he might have dashed all their designs; but
he neither came himself, as a Captain of any Prudence and Courage would have
done, nor sent till the time was expired. So we left Captain Swan and about 36
Men ashore in the City, and 6 or 8 that run away; and about 16 we had buried
there, the most of which died by Poison. The Natives are very expert at
Poisoning, and do it upon small occasions: Nor did our Men want for giving
Offense, through their general Rogueries, and sometimes by dallying too
familiarly with their Women, even before their Faces. Some of their Poisons are
slow and lingering; for we had some now aboard who were Poisoned there; but
died not till some Months after.

CHAP. XIV.
They depart from the River of Mindanao. Of the time lost or gained in sailing
round the World: With a Caution to Seamen, about the allowance they are to take
for the difference of the Suns declination. The South Coast of Mindanao.
Chambongo Town an Harbor, with its Neighboring Keys. Green Turtle. Ruins of a
Spanish Fort. The Westermost point of Mindanao. Two Proes of the Sologues laden
from Manila. An Isle to the West of Sebo. Walking Canes. Isle of Batts, very
large; and numerous Turtle and Manatee. A dangerous Shoal. They sail by Panay
belonging to the Spaniards, and others of the Philipine Islands. Isle of
Mindora. Two Barks taken. A further account of the Isle Luconia, and the City
and Harbor of Manila. They go off Pulo Condore to lie there. The Shoals of
Pracel, etc. Pulo Condore. The Tar-tree. The Mango. Grape-tree. The Wild or
Bastard Nutmeg. Their Animals. Of the Migration of the Turtle from place to
place. Of the Commodious Situation of Pulo Condore; its Water, and its
Cochinchinese Inhabitants. Of the Malayan Tongue. The Custom of prostituting
their Women in these Countries, and in Guinea. The Idolatry here, at Tunquin,
and among the Chinese Seamen, and of a Procession at Fort St. George. Change of
Time in compassing of the World. They refit their Ship. Two of them dye of
Poison they took at Mindanao. They take in Water, and a Pilot for the Bay of
Siam. Pulo Uby; and Point of Cambodia. Two Cambodian Vessels. Isles in the Bay
of Siam. The tight Vessels and Seamen of the Kingdom of Champa. Storms. A
Chinese Jonk from Palimbam in Sumatra. They come again to Pulo Condore. A
bloody Fray with a Malayan Vessel. The Surgeon's and the Author's desires of
leaving their Crew.

THE 14th day of January, 1687, at 3 of the Clock in the Afternoon, we sailed
from the River of Mindanao, designing to cruise before Manila.

It was during our stay at Mindanao, that we were first made sensible of the
change of time, in the course of our Voyage. For having Traveled so far
Westward, keeping the same Course with the Sun, we must consequently have
gained something insensibly in the length of the particular Days, but have lost
in the tale, the bulk, or number of the Days or Hours. According to the
different Longitudes of England and Mindanao, this Isle being West from the
Lizzard, by common Computation, about 210 Degrees, the difference of time at
our Arrival at Mindanao ought to be about 14 Hours: and so much we should have
anticipated our reckoning, having gained it by bearing the Sun company. Now the
natural Day in every particular place must be consonant to it self: but this
going about with, or against the Suns course, will of necessity make a
difference in the Calculation of the civil Day between any two places.
Accordingly, at Mindanao, and all other places in the East Indies, we found
them reckoning a Day before us, both Natives and Europeans; for the Europeans
coming Eastward by the Cape of Good Hope, in a Course contrary to the Sun and
us, wherever we met they were a full Day before us in their Accounts. So
among the Indian Mahometans here, their Friday, the Day of their Sultan's going
to their Mosques, was Thursday with us; though it were Friday also with those
who came Eastward from Europe. Yet at the Ladrone Islands, we found the
Spaniards of Guam keeping the same Computation with our selves; the reason of
which I take to be, that they settled that Colony by a Course Westward from
Spain; the Spaniards going first to America, and thence to the Ladrones and
Philippines. But how the reckoning was at Manila, and the rest of the Spanish
Colonies in the Philippine Islands, I know not; whether they keep it as they
brought it, or corrected it by the Accounts of the Natives, and of the
Portugueze, Dutch and English, coming the contrary way from Europe.

One great Reason why Seamen ought to keep the difference of time as exact as
they can, is, that they may be the more exact in their Latitudes. For our
Tables of the Suns declination, being calculated for the Meridians of the
places in which they were made, differ about 12 Minutes from those parts of the
World that lie on their opposite Meridians, in the Months of March and
September; and in proportion to the Suns declination, at other times of the
Year also. And should they run farther as we did, the difference would still
increase upon them, and be an occasion of great Errors. Yet even able Seamen
in these Voyages are hardly made sensible of this, though so necessary to be
observed, for want of duly attending to the reason of it, as it happened among
those of our Crew; who after we had past 180 Degrees, began to decrease the
difference of declination, whereas they ought still to have increased it, for
it all the way increased upon us.

We had the Wind at N. N. E, fair clear Weather, and a brisk Gale. We coasted
to the Westward, on the South Side of the Island of Mindanao, keeping within 4
or 5 Leagues of the Shore. The Land from hence tends away W. by S. It is of a
good height by the Sea, and very woody, and in the Country we saw high Hills.

The next Day we were abrest of Chambongo; a Town in this Island, and 30
Leagues from the River of Mindanao. Here is said to be a good Harbor, and a
great Settlement, with plenty of Beef and Buffaloe. It is reported that the
Spaniards were formerly fortified here also: There are two shoals lie off this
place, 2 or 3 Leagues from the Shore. From hence the Land is more low and even;
yet there are some Hills in the Country.

About 6 Leagues before we came to the West End of the Island Mindanao, we fell
in with a great many small low Islands or Keys, and about two or three Leagues
to the Southward of these Keys, there is a long Island stretching N. E. and S.
W. about 12 Leagues. This Island is low by the Sea on the North-side, and has a
Ridge of Hills in the middle, running from one end to the other. Between this
Isle and the small Keys, there is a good large Channel: Among the Keys also
there is a good depth of Water, and a violent Tide; but on what point of the
Compass it flows, I know not, nor how much it rises and falls.

The 17th day we anchored on the East Side of all these Keys, in 8 fathom
Water, clean Sand. Here are plenty of green Turtle, whose Flesh is as sweet as
any in the West Indies: but they are very shy. A little to the Westward of
these Keys, on the Island Mindanao, we saw abundance of Coco-nut Trees:
Therefore we sent our Canoa ashore, thinking to find Inhabitants, but found
none, nor sign of any; but great Tracts of Hogs, and great Cattle; and close by
the Sea there were Ruins of an old Fort. The Walls thereof were of a good
height, built with Stone and Lime; and by the Workmanship seemed to be
Spanish. From this place the Land trends W. N. W. and it is of an indifferent
height by the Sea. It run on this point of the Compass 4 or 5 Leagues, and
then the Land trends away N. N. W. 5 or 6 Leagues farther, making with many
bluff Points.

We weighed again the 14th day, and went through between the Keys; but met such
uncertain Tides, that we were forced to anchor again. The 22d day we got about
the Westermost Point of all Mindanao, and stood to the Northward, plying under
the Shore, and having the Wind at N. N. E. a fresh Gale. As we sailed along
further, we found the Land to trend N. N. E. On this part of the Island the
Land is high by the Sea, with full bluff Points, and very woody. There are some
small Sandy Bays, which afford Streams of fresh Water.

Here we met with two Prows belonging to the Sologues, one of the Mindanaiin
Nations beforementioned. They came from Manila laden with Silks and Calicoes.
We kept on this Western part of the Island steering Northerly, till we came
abrest of some other of the Philippine Islands, that lay to the Northward of
us; then steered away toward them; but still keeping on the West side of them,
and we had the Winds at N. N. E.

The 3d of February we anchored in a good Bay on the West side of the Island,
in Lat. 9 d. 55 min. where we had 13 Fathom-water, good soft Oaze. This Island
has no Name that we could find in any Book, but lies on the West side of the
Island Sebo. It is about 8 or 10 Leagues long, mountainous and woody. At this
place Captain Read, who was the same Captain Swan had so much railed against in
his Journal, and was now made Captain in his room (as Captain Teat was made
Master, and Mr. Henry More Quartermaster) ordered the Carpenters to cut down
our Quarter Deck to make the Ship snug, and the fitter for sailing. When that
was done we heeled her, scrubbed her Bottom, and tallowed it. Then we filled
all our Water, for here is a delicate small run of Water.

The Land was pretty low in this Bay, the Mould black and fat, and the Trees of
several Kinds, very thick and tall. In some places we found plenty of Canes,
such as we use in England for Walking-Canes. These were short-jointed, not
above two Foot and a half, or two Foot ten Inches the longest, and most of them
not above two Foot. They run along on the Ground like a Vine; or taking hold of
the Trees, they climb up to their very tops. They are 15 or 20 Fathom long, and
much of a bigness from the Root, till within 5 or 6 Fathom of the end. They are
of a pale green Color, clothed over with a Coat of short thick hairy
Substance, of a dun Color; but it comes off by only drawing the Cane through
your Hand. We did cut many of them, and they proved very tough heavy Canes.

We saw no Houses, nor sign of Inhabitants; but while we lay here, there was a
Canoa with 6 Men came into this Bay; but whither they were bound, or from
whence they came, I know not. They were Indians, and we could not understand
them.

In the middle of this Bay, about a Mile from the Shore, there is a small low
woody Island, not above a Mile in Circumference; our Ship rode about a mile
from it. This Island was the Habitation of an incredible number of great Batts,
with Bodies as big as Ducks, or large Fowl, and with vast Wings: For I saw at
Mindanao one of this sort, and I judge that the Wings stretched out in length,
could not be less assunder than 7 or 8 Foot from tip to tip; for it was much
more than any of us could fathom with our Arms extended to the utmost. The
Wings are for Substance like those of other Batts, of a Dun or Mouse color.
The Skin or Leather of them has Ribs running along it, and draws up in 3 or 4
Folds; and at the joints of those Ribs and the extremities of the Wings, there
are sharp and crooked Claws, by which they may hang on any thing. In the
Evening as soon as the Sun was set, these Creatures would begin to take their
flight from this Island, in swarms like Bees, directing their flight over to
the Main Island; and whither afterward I know not. Thus we should see them
rising up from the Island till Night hindered our sight; and in the Morning as
soon as it was light, we should see them returning again like a Cloud, to the
small Island, till Sun rising. This course they kept constantly while we lay
here, affording us every Morning and Evening an Hour's Diversion in gazing at
them, and talking about them; but our Curiosity did not prevail with us to go
ashore to them, our selves and Canoas being all the day time taken up in
business about our Ship. At this Isle also we found plenty of Turtle and
Manatee, but no Fish.

We stayed here till the 10th of February, 1687. and then having completed our
Business, we sailed hence with the Wind at North. But going out we struck on a
Rock, where we lay two Hours: It was very smooth Water, and the Tide of Flood,
or else we should there have lost our Ship. We struck off a great piece of our
Rudder, which was all the damage that we received, but we more narrowly mist
losing our Ships this time, than in any other in the whole Voyage. This is a
very dangerou^ Shoal, because it does not break, unless probably it may appear
in foul Weather. It lies about two mile to the Westward, without the small Batt
Island. Here we found the Tide of Flood setting to the Southward, and the Ebb
to the Northward.

After we were past this Shoal, we Coasted along by the rest of the Philippine
Islands, keeping on the West Side of them. Some of them appeared to be very
Mountainous dry Land. We saw many Fires in the Night as we passed by Panay, a
great Island settled by Spaniards, and by the Fires up and down it seems to be
well settled by them; for this is a Spanish Custom, whereby they give Notice of
any Danger or the like from Sea; and it is probable they had seen our Ship the
day before. This is an unfrequented Coast, and it is rare to have any Ship seen
there. We touched not at Panay, nor any where else; though we saw a great many
small Islands to the Westward of us, and some Shoals, but none of them laid
down in our Draughts.

The 18th day of Feb. we anchored at the N. W. end of the Island Mindora, in 10
Fathom-water, about 3 quarters of a Mile from the Shore. Mindora is a large
Island; the middle of it lying in Lat 13. about 40 Leagues long, stretching N.
W. and S. E. It is High and Mountainous, and not very Woody. At this Place
where we anchored the Land was neither very high nor low. There was a small
Brook of Water, and the Land by the Sea was very Woody, and the Trees high and
tall, but a League or two farther in, the Woods are very thin and small. Here
we saw great tracks of Hogs and Beef, and we saw some of each, and hunted them;
but they were wild, and we could kill none.

While we were here, there was a Canoa with 4 Indians came from Manila. They
were very shy of us a while: but at last, hearing us speak Spanish, they came
to us, and told us, that they were going to a Friar, that lived at an Indian
Village toward the S. E. end of the Island. They told us also, that the
Harbor of Manila is seldom or never without 20 or 30 Sail of Vessels, most
Chinese, some Portugueze, and some few the Spaniards have of their own. They
said, that when they had done their business with the Friar they would return
to Manila, and hoped to be back again at this place in 4 Days time. We told
them, that we came for a Trade with the Spaniards at Manila, and should be glad
if they would carry a Letter to some Merchant there, which they promised to do.
But this was only a pretense of ours, to get out of them what intelligence we
could as to their Shipping, Strength, and the like, under Color of seeeking a
Trade; for our business was to pillage. Now if we had really designed to have
Traded there, this was as fair an opportunity as Men could have desired: for
these Men could have brought us to the Friar that they were going to, and a
small Present to him would have engaged him to do any kindness for us in the
way of Trade: for the Spanish Governors do not allow of it, and we must Trade
by stealth.

The 21st Day we went from hence with the wind at E. N. E. a small gale. The
23d Day in the Morning we were fair by the S. E. end of the Island Luconia, the
Place that had been so long desired by us. We presently saw a Sail coming from
the Northward, and making after her we took her in 2 Hours time. She was a
Spanish Bark, that came from a place called Pangasanam, a small Town on the N.
end of Luconia, as they told us; propably the same with Pongassinay, which lies
on a Bay at the N. W. side of the Island. She was bound to Manila but had no
Goods aboard; and therefore we turned her away.

The 23d. we took another Spanish Vessel that came from the same place as the
other. She was laden with Rice and Cotton-Cloth, and bound for Manila also.
These Goods were purposely for the Acapulco Ship: The Rice was for the Men to
live on while they lay there, and in their return: and the Cotton-cloth was to
make Sail. The Master of this Prize was Boatswain of the Acapulco Ship which
escaped us at Guam, and was now at Manila. It was this Man that gave us the
Relation of what Strength it had, how they were afraid of us there, and of the
accident that happened to them, as is before mentioned in the 10th Chapter. We
took these two Vessels within 7 or 8 Leagues of Manila.

Luconia I have spoken of already: but I shall now add this further account of
it. It is a great Island, taking up between 6 and 7 degrees of Lat. in length,
and its breadth near the middle is about 60 Leagues, but the ends are narrow.
The North-end lies in about 19 d. North Lat. and the S. end in about 12 d. 30
m. This great Island has abundance of small Keys or Islands lying about it;
especially at the North-end. The South Side fronts toward the rest of the
Philippine Islands: Of these that are its nearest Neighbors, Mindora, lately
mentioned, is the chief, and gives name to the Sea or Straight that parts it
and the other Islands from Luconia: being called the Streights of Mindora.

The Body of the Island Luconia is composed of many spacious plain Savannahs,
and large Mountains. The North-end seems to be more plain and even, I mean
freer from Hills, than the South-end: but the Land is all along of a good
height. It does not appear so flourishing and green as some of the other
Islands in this Range; especially that of St. John, Mindanao, Batt Island, etc.
yet in some depiction of an island near Manila A Prospect of ye Coa^t of ye I
L^ near Manila, at ^ L off Shore (...) bearing East.
depiction of the islands of Pulo Condor [the Con Dao Islands of Vietnam] (...)
the Islands Pulo Condor appear at 8 L distance bearing South.
depiction of the islands and harbor of Pulo Condore [the Con Dao Islands of
Vietnam] depiction of the Bashee Islands [Batanes Islands of the Philippines]
The BASHEE Islands
places it is very Woody. Some of the Mountains of this Island afford Gold, and
the Savannahs are well stockt with herds of Cattle, especially Buaffaloes.
These Cattle, are in great plenty all over the East Indies; and therefore it is
very probable that there were many of these here even before the Spaniards came
hither. But now there are also plenty of other Cattle, as I have been told, as
Bullocks, Horses, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, etc. brought hither by the Spaniards.

It is pretty well inhabited with Indians, most of them, if not all, under the
Spaniards, who now are masters of it. The Native Indians do live together in
Towns; and they have Priests among them to instruct them in the Spanish
Religion.

Manila the chief, or perhaps the only City, lies at the foot of a ridge of
high Hills, facing upon a spacious harbor near the S. W. point of the Island,
in about the Lat. of 14 d. North. It is environed with a high strong Wall, and
very well fortified with Forts and Breast-works. The Houses are large, strongly
built, and covered with Pan-tile. The Streets are large and pretty regular;
with a Parade in the midst, after the Spanish fashion. There are a great many
fair Buildings, beside Churches and other Religious Houses; of which there are
not a few.

The Harbor is so large, that some hundreds of Ships may ride here: and is
never without many, both of their own and strangers. I have already given you
an account of the two Ships going and coming between this place and Acapulco.
Besides them, they have some small Vessels of their own; and they do allow the
Portuguese to trade here, but the Chinese are the chiefest Merchants, and they
drive the greatest Trade; for they have commonly 20 or 30, or 40 Jonks in the
Harbor at a time, and a great many Merchants constantly residing in the City,
beside Shopkeepers, and Handy-crafts-men in a bundance. Small Vessels run up
near the Town but the Acapulco Ships and others of greater bur then, lie a
league short of it, where there is a strong Fort also, and Storehouses to put
Goods in.

I had the major part of this relation 2 or 3 years after this time, from Mr.
Coppinger our Surgeon; for he made a Voyage hither from Porto Nova, a Town on
the Coast of Coromandel; in a Portuguese Ship, as I think. Here he found 10 or
12 of Captain Swan's men; some of those that we left at Mindanao. For after we
came from thence, they brought a Proe there, by the Instigation of an Irish
man, who went by the name of John Fitzgerald, a person that spoke Spanish very
well; and so in this their Proe they came hither. They had been here but 18
months when Mr. Coppinger arrived here, and Mr. Fitzgerald had in this time
gotten a Spanish Mustesa Woman to Wife, and a good Dowry with her. He then
professed Physic and Surgery, and was highly esteemed among the Spaniards for
his supposed knowledge in those Arts: for being always troubled with sore Shins
while he was with us, he kept some Plasters and Salves by him; and with these
he set up upon his bare natural stock of knowledge, and his experience in
Kibes. But then he had a very great stock of Confidence withal, to help out the
other, and being an Irish Roman Catholic, and having the Spanish Language, he
had a great advantage of all his Consorts; and he alone lived well there of
them all. We were not within sight of this Town, but I was shown the Hills that
over-looked it, and drew a draft of them as we lay off at Sea; which I have
caused to be engraven among a few others that I took my self: See the Table.

The time of the year being now too far spent to do any thing here, it was
concluded to sail from hence to Pulo Condore, a little parcel of Islands, on
the Coast of Cambodia, and carry this Prize with us, and there careen if we
could find any convenient place for it, designing to return hither again by the
latter end of May, and wait for the Acapulco Ship that comes about that time.
By our Drafts (which we were guided by, being strangers to these parts) this
seemed to us then to be a place out of the way, where we might lie snug for a
while, and wait the time of returning for our Prey. For we avoided as much as
we could the going to lie by at any great place of Commerce, lest we should
become too much exposed, and perhaps be assaulted by a Force greater than our
own.

So having set our Prisoners ashore, we sailed from Luconia the 26th Day of
Feb. with the Wind E. N. E. and fair Weather, and a brisk Gale. We were in Lat.
14 d. N. when we began to steer away for Pulo Condore, and we steered S. by W.
In our way thither we went pretty near the Shoals of Pracel, and other Shoals
which are very dangerous. We were very much afraid of them, but escaped them
without so much as seeing them, only at the very South-end of the Pracel Shoals
we saw 3 little sandy Islands or spots of Sand, standing just above Water
within a Mile of us.

It was the 13th Day of March before we came in sight of Pulo Condore, or the
Island Condore, as Pulo signifies. The 14th Day about Noon we Anchored on the
North-side of the Island, against a sandy Bay 2 Mile from the Shore, in 10
Fathom clean hard Sand, with both Ship and Prize. Pulo Condore is the Principal
of a heap of Islands, and the only inhabited one of them. They lie in lat. 8d.
40 m. North, and about 20 Leagues South and by East from the Mouth of the River
of Cambodia. These Islands lie so near together, that at a distance they appear
to be but one Island.

Two of these Islands are pretty large, and of a good height, they may be seen
14 or 15 Leagues at Sea; the rest are but little Spots. The biggest of the two
(which is the inhabited one) is about 4 or 5 Leagues long, and lies East and
West. It is not above 3 Mile broad at the broadest place, in most places not
above a Mile wide. The other large Island is about 3 Mile long, and half a Mile
wide. This Island stretches N. and S. It is so conveniently placed at the
West End of the biggest Island, that between both there is formed a very
commodious Harbor. The entrance of this Harbor is on the North-side, where
the two Islands are near a mile asunder. There are 3 or 4 small Keys, and a
good deep Channel between them and the biggest Island. Toward the South-end of
the Harbor the two Islands do in a manner close up, leaving only a small
Passage for Boats and Canoas. There are no more Islands on the North-side, but
5 or 6 on the South Side of the great Island. See the Table.

The Mold of these Islands for the biggest part is blackish, and pretty deep,
only the Hills are somewhat stony. The Eastern part of the biggest Island is
sandy, yet all clothed with Trees of diverse sorts. The Trees do not grow so
thick as I have seen them in some Places, but they are generally large and
tall, and fit for any use.

There is one sort of Tree much larger than any other on this Island, and which
I have not seen any where else. It is about 3 or 4 Foot Diameter in the Body,
from whence is drawn a sort of clammy Juice, which being boiled a little
becomes perfect Tar; and if you boil it much it will become hard as Pitch. It
may be put to either use; we used it both ways, and found it to be very
serviceable. The way that they get this Juice, is by cuting a great gap
horizontally in the Body of the Tree half through, and about a Foot from the
Ground; and then cutting the upper part of the Body aslope inwardly downward,
till in the middle of the Tree it meet with the traverse cutting or plain. In
this plain horizontal semicircular stump, they make a hollow like a Basin, that
may contain a Quart or two. Into this hole the Juice which drains from the
wounded upper part of the Tree falls; from whence you must empty it every day.
It will run thus for some Months, and then dry away, and the Tree will recover
again.

The Fruit Trees that Nature has bestowed on these Isles are Mangoes; and
Trees bearing a sort of Grape, and other Trees bearing a kind of wild or
bastard Nutmegs. These all grow wild in the Woods, and in very great plenty.

The Mangoes here grow on Trees as big as Apple Trees: Those at Fort St. George
are not so large. The Fruit of these is as big as a small Peach; but long and
smaller toward the top: It is of a yellowish color when ripe; it is very
juicy, and of a pleasant smell, and delicate taste. When the Mango is young
they cut them in two pieces, and pickle them with Salt and Vinegar, in which
they put some Cloves of Garlic. This is an excellent Sauce, and much esteemed;
it is called Mango-Achar. Achar I presume signifies Sauce. They make in the
East Indies, especially at Siam and Pegu, several sorts of Achar, as of the
young tops of Bamboes, etc. Bambo-Achar and Mango-Achar are most used. The
Mangoes were ripe when we were there, (as were also the rest of these Fruits)
and they have then so delicate a Fragrancy, that we could smell them out in the
thick Woods if we had but the wind of them, while we were a good way from them,
and could not see them; and we generally found them out this way. Mangoes are
common in many Places of the East Indies; but I did never know any grow wild
only at this Place. These, though not so big as those I have seen at Achin and
at Maderas or Fort St. George, are yet every whit as pleasant as the best sort
of their Garden Mangoes.

The Grape-tree grows with a strait Body, of a Diameter about a Foot or more,
and has but few Limbs or Boughs. The Fruit grows in Clusters, all about the
Body of the Tree, like the Jack, Durian, and Cacao Fruits. There are of them
both red and white. They are mueh like such Grapes as grow on our Vines, both
in shape and color; and they are of a very pleasant Winy taste. I never saw
these but on the two biggest of these Islands; the rest had no Tar-trees,
Mangoes, Grape-trees, nor Wild Nutmegs.

The Wild Nutmeg-tree is as big as a Walnut-tree; but it does not spread so
much. The Boughs are gross, and the Fruit grows among the Boughs, as the
Walnut, and other Fruits. This Nutmeg is much smaller than the true Nutmeg, and
longer also. It is enclosed with a thin Shell, and a sort of Mace, encircling
the Nut, within the Shell. This bastard Nutmeg is so much like the true Nutmeg
in shape, that at our first arrival here we thought it to be the true one; but
it has no manner of smell nor taste.

The Animals of these Islands, are some Hogs, Lizards and Guanoes; and some of
those Creatures mentioned in Chap. XI. which are like, but much bigger than the
Guano.

Here are many sorts of Birds, as Parrots, Parakites, Doves and Pigeons. Here
are also a sort of wild Cocks and Hens: They are much like our tame Fowl of
that kind; but a great deal less, for they are about the bigness of a Crow. The
Cocks do crow like ours, but much more small and shrill; and by their crowing
we do first find them out in the Woods, where we shoot them. Their flesh is
very white and sweet.

There are a great many Limpits and Muscles, and plenty of green Turtle.

And upon this mention of Turtle again, I think it not amiss to add some
reasons to strengthen the opinion that I have given concerning these Creatures
removing from place to place. I have said in Chapter 5th, that they leave their
common feeding places, and go to places a great way from thence to lay, as
particularly to the Island Ascension. Now I have discoursed with some since
that Subject was printed, who are of opinion, that when the laying time is
over, they never go from thence, but lie somewhere in the Sea about the Island,
which I think is very improbable: for there can be no food for them there, as I
could soon make appear; as particularly from hence, that the Sea about the Isle
of Ascension is so deep as to admit of no anchoring but at one place, where
there is no sign of Grass: and we never bring up with our sounding Lead any
Grass or Weeds out of very deep Seas, but Sand, or the like, only. But if this
be granted, that there is food for them, yet I have a great deal of reason to
believe that the Turtle go from hence; for after the laying time you shall
never see them, and wherever Turtle are, you will see them rise, and hold
their Head above water to breath, once in 7 or 8 minutes, or at longest in 10
or 12. And if any Man does but consider, how Fish take their certain Seasons of
the year to go from one Sea to another, this would not seem strange; even Fowls
also having their seasons to remove from one place to another.

These Islands are pretty well watered with small Brooks of fresh Water, that
run flush into the Sea for 10 Months in the Year. The latter end of March they
begin to dry away, and in April you shall have none in the Brooks, but what is
lodged in deep Holes; but you my dig Wells in some places. In May, when the
Rain comes, the Land is again replenished with Water, and the Brooks run out
into the Sea.

These Islands lie very commodiously in the way to and from Japan, China,
Manila, Tunquin, Cochinchina, and in general all this most Easterly Coast of
the Indian Continent; whether you go through the Streights of Malacca, or the
Streights of Sunda, between Samatra and Java: and one of them you must pass in
the common way from Europe, or other parts of the East Indies; unless you mean
to fetch a great Compass round most of the East India Islands, as we did. Any
Ship in distress may be refreshed and recruited here very conveniently; and
besides ordinary Accommodations, be furnished with Masts, Yards, Pitch and Tar.
It might also be a convenient place to usher in a Commerce with the
neighboring Country of Cochinchina; and Forts might be built to secure a
Factory; particularly at the Harbor, which is capable of being well fortified.
This place therefore being upon all these Accounts so valuable, and withal so
little known, I have here inserted a Draft of it, which I took during our stay
there.

The Inhabitants of this Island are by Nation Cochinchinese, as they told us,
for one of them spoke good Malayan: which Language we learnt a smattering of,
and some of us so as to speak it pretty well, while we lay at Mindanao; and
this is the common Tongue of Trade and Commerce (though it be not in several of
them the Native Language) in most of the East India Islands, being the Lingua
Franca, as it were, of these Parts. I believe it is the vulgar Tongue at
Malacca, Sumatra, Java, and Borneo; but at Celebes, the Philippine Islands, and
the Spice Islands, it seems borrowed for the carrying on of Trade.

The Inhabitants of Pulo Condore are but a small People in Stature, well enough
shaped, and of a darker Color than the Mindanayans. They are pretty long
Visaged; their Hair is black and straight, their Eyes are but small and black,
their Noses of a mean bigness, and pretty high, their Lips thin, their Teeth
white, and little Mouths. They are very civil People, but extraordinary poor.
Their chiefest Employment is to draw the Juice of those Trees that I have
described, to make Tar. They preserve it in wooden Troughs; and when they have
their Cargo, they transport it to Cochinchina, their Mother Country. Some
others of them employ themselves to catch Turtle, and boil up their Fat to Oil,
which they also transport home. These People have great large Nets, with wide
Mashes to catch the Turtle. The Jamaica Turtlers have such; and I did never see
the like Nets but at Jamaica and here.

They are so free of their Women, that they would bring them aboard, and offer
them to us; and many of our Men hired them for a small matter. This is a Custom
used by several Nations in the East Indies, as at Pegu, Siam, Cochinchina, and
Cambodia, as I have been told. It is used at Tunquin also to my Knowledge; for
I did afterward make a Voyage thither, and most of our Men had Women aboard
all the time of our abode there. In Africa, also, on the Coast of Guinea, our
Merchants, Factors, and Seamen that reside there, have their black Misses. It
is accounted a piece of Policy to do it; for the chief Factors and Captains of
Ships have the Great Men's Daughters offered them, the Mandarins or Noblemens at
Tunquin, and even the King's Wives in Guinea; and by this sort of Alliance the
Country people are engaged to a greater Friendship: And if there should arise
any difference about Trade, or any thing else, which might provoke the Natives
to seek some treacherous Revenge, (to which all these Heathen Nations are very
prone) then these Dalilahs would certainly declare it to their White Friends,
and so hinder their Countrymens Designs.

These People are Idolaters: but their manner of Worship I know not. There are
a few scattering Houses and Plantations on the great Island, and a small
Village an the South Side of it; where there is a little Idol Temple, and an
Image of an Elephant, about 5 foot high, and in bigness proportionable, placed
on one side of the Temple; and a Horse, not so big, placed on the other side of
it: both standing with their Heads toward the South. The Temple it self was
low and ordinary, built of Wood, and thatched, like one of their Houses; which
are but very meanly.

The Images of the Horse and the Elephant were the most general Idols that I
observed in the Temples of Tunquin, when I traveled there. There were other
Images also, of Beasts, Birds and Fish. I do not remember I saw any Humane
Shape there; nor any such monstrous Representations as I have seen among the
Chinese. Wherever the Chinese Seamen or Merchants come (and they are very
numerous all over these Seas) they have always hideous Idols on board their
Jonks or Ships, with Altars, and Lamps burning before them. These Idols they
bring ashore with them: And beside those they have in common, every Man has
one in his own House. Upon some particular solemn Days I have seen their
Bonzies, or Priests, bring whole Armfuls of painted Papers, and burn them with
a great deal of Ceremony, being very careful to let no Piece escape them. The
same Day they killed a Goat which had been purposely fatting a Month before;
this they offer or present before their Idol, and then dress it and feast
themselves with it. I have seen them do this in Tunquin, where I have at the
same time been invited to their Feasts; and at Bancouli, in the Isle of
Sumatra, they sent a Shoulder of the sacrificed Goat to the English, who eat of
it, and asked me to do so too; but I refused.

When I was at Maderas, or Fort St. George, I took notice of a great Ceremony
used for several Nights successively by the Idolaters inhabiting the Suburbs:
Both Men and Women (these very well clad) in a great multitude went in solemn
Procession with lighted Torches, carrying their Idols about with them. I knew
not the meaning of it. I observed some went purposely carrying Oil to sprinkle
into the Lamps, to make them burn the brighter. They began their Round about 11
a Clock at Night, and having paced it gravely about the Streets till 2 or 3 a
Clock in the Morning, their Idols were carried with much Ceremony into the
Temple by the Chief of the Procession, and some of the Women I saw enter the
Temple, particularly. Their Idols were different from those of Tunquin,
Cambodia, etc. being in Humane Shape.

I have said already that we arrived at these Islands the 14th day of March,
1687. The next day we searched about for a place to careen in; and the 16th day
we entered the Harbor, and immediately provided to careen. Some Men were set to
fell great Trees to saw into Plank; others went to unrigging the Ship; some
made a House to put our Goods in, and for the Sail-maker to work in. The
Country People resorted to us, and brought us of the Fruits of the Island, with
Hogs, and sometimes Turtle; for which they received Rice in exchange, which we
had a Ship-load of, taken at Manila. We bought of them also a good quantity of
their pitchy Liquor, which we boiled, and used about our Ship's bottom. We
mixed it first with Lime, which we made here; and it made an excellent Coat,
and stuck on very well.

We staid in this Harbor from the 16th day of March till the 16th of April; in
which time we made a new Suit of Sails of the Cloth that was taken in the
Prize. We cut a spare Main-top-mast, and sawed Plank to sheath the Ship's
Bottom; for she was not sheathed all over at Mindanao, and that old Plank that
was left on then we now ripped off, and clapped on new.

While we lay here 2 of our Men died, who were poisoned at Mindanao, they told
us of it when they found themselves poisoned, and had lingered ever since. They
were opened by our Doctor, according to their own Request before they died, and
their Livers were black, light and dry, like pieces of Cork.

Our Business being finished here, we left the Spanish Prize taken at Manila,
and most of the Rice, taking out enough for our selves; and on the 17th day we
went from hence to the place where we first anchored, on the North-side of the
great Island, purposely to water; for there was a great Stream when we first
came to the Island, and we thought it was so now. But we found it dried up,
only it stood in Holes, 2 or 3 Hogsheads, or a Tun in a Hole: Therefore we did
immediately cut Bamboos, and made Spouts, through which we conveyed the Water
down to the Seaside; by taking it up in Bowls, and pouring it into these
Spouts or Troughs. We conveyed some of it thus near half a Mile. While we were
filling our Water, Captain Read engaged an old Man, one of the Inhabitants of
this Island, the same, who, I said, could speak the Malayan Language, to be his
Pilot to the Bay of Siam; for he had often been telling us, that he was well
acquainted there, and that he knew some Islands there, where there were
Fishermen lived, who he thought could supply us with Salt-fish to eat at Sea;
for we had nothing but Rice to eat. The Easterly Monsoon was not yet done;
therefore it was concluded to spend some time there, and then take the
advantage of the beginning of the Western Monsoon, to return to Manila again.

The 21st day of April 1687, we sailed from Pulo Condore, directing our Course
W. by S. for the Bay of Siam. We had fair Weather, and a fine moderate Gale of
Wind at E. N. E.

The 23d day we arrived at Pulo Ubi, or the Island Ubi. This Island is about 40
Leagues to the Westward of Pulo Condore; it lies just at the entrance of the
Bay of Siam, at the S. W. point of Land, that makes the Bay; namely, the point
of Cambodia. This Island is about 7 or 8 Leagues round, and it is higher Land
than any of Pulo Condore Isles. Against the South-East part of it there is a
small Key, about a Cables length from the main Island. This Pulo Ubi is very
woody, and it has good Water on the North-side, where you may anchor; but the
best anchoring is on the East Side against a small Bay; then you will have the
little Island to the Southward of you.

At Pulo Ubi we found two small Barks laden with Rice. They belonged to
Cambodia, from whence they came not above two or three Days before, and they
touched here to fill Water. Rice is the general Food of all these Countries,
therefore it is transported by Sea from one Country to another, as Corn in
these parts of the World. For in some Countries they produce more than enough
for themselves, and send what they can spare to those places where there is but
little.

The 24th Day we went into the Bay of Siam: This is a large deep Bay, of which
and of this Kingdom I shall at present speak but little, because I design a
more particular account of all this Coast, to wit, of Tunquin, Cochinchina,
Siam, Champa, Cambodia, and Malacca, making all the most Easterly part of the
Continent of Asia, lying South of China; but to do it in the Course of this
Voyage, would too mueh swell this Volume: and I shall choose therefore to give a
separate Relation of what I know or have learnt of them, together with the
neighboring Parts of Sumatra, Jova, etc. where I have spent some time.

We run down into the Bay of Siam, till we came to the Islands that our Pulo
Condore Pilot told us of, which lie about the middle of the Bay: But as good a
Pilot as he was, he run us aground,; yet we had no damage. Captain Read went
ashore at these Islands, where he found a small Town of Fishermen; but they had
no Fish to sell, and so we returned empty.

We had yet fair Weather, and very little Wind; so that being often becalmed,
we were till the 13th day of May before we got to Pulo Ubi again. There we
found two small Vessels at an Anchor on the East Side: They were laden with
Rice and Laquer, which is used in Japanning of Cabinets. One of these come from
Champa, bound to the Town of Malacca, which belongs to the Dutch, who took it
from the Portugueze: and this shows that they have a Trade with Champa. This
was a very pretty neat Vessel, her bottom very clean and curiously coated; she
had about 40 Men all armed with Cortans, or broad Swords, Lances, and some
Guns, that went with a Swivel upon their Gunnal. They were of the Idolaters,
Natives of Champa, and some of the briskest, most sociable, without fearfulness
or shyness, and the most neat and dextrous about their Shipping, of any such I
have met with in all my Travels. The other Vessel came from the River of
Cambodia, and was bound toward the Streights of Malacca. Both of them stopped
here, for the Westerly Winds now began to blow, which were against them, being
somewhat bleated.

We anchored also on the East Side, intending to fill Water. While we lay here
we had very violent Wind at S. W. and a strong Current setting right to
Windward. The fiercer the Wind blew, the more strong the Current set against
it. This Storm lasted till the 20th day, and then it began to abate.

The 21st day of May we went back from hence toward Pulo Condore. In our way
we overtook a great Jonk that came from Palimbam, a Town on the Island Sumatra:
She was full laden with Pepper which they bought there, and was bound to Siam:
but it blowing so hard, she was afraid to venture into that Bay, and therefore
came to Pula Condore with us, where we both anchored May the 24th. This Vessel
was of the Chinese make, full of little Rooms or Partitions, like our
Well-boats. I shall describe them in the next Chapter. The Men of this Jonk
told us, that the English were settled on the Island Sumatra, at a place called
Sillabar; and the first knowledge we had that the English had any settlement on
Sumatra was from these.

When we came to an Anchor, we saw a small Bark at an Anchor near the Shore;
therefore Captain Read sent a Canoa aboard her, to know from whence they came;
and supposing that it was a Malaya Vessel, he ordered the Men not to go aboard,
for they are accounted desperate Fellows, and their Vessels are commonly full
of Men, who all wear Cressets, or little Daggers by their sides. The Canoas
Crew not minding the Captain's Orders went aboard, all but one Man that stayed
in the Canoa. The Malayans, who were about 20 of them, seeing our Men all
armed, thought that they came to take their Vessel; therefore at once, on a
Signal given, they drew out their Cressets, and stabbed 5 or 6 of our Men
before they knew what the matter was. The rest of our Men leapt overboard,
some into the Canoa, and some into the Sea, and so got away. Among the rest,
one Daniel Wallis leapt into the Sea, who could never swim before nor since;
yet now he swam very well a good while before he was taken up. When the Canoas
came aboard, Captain Read manned two Canoas, and went to be revenged on the
Malayans; but they seeing him coming, did cut a Hole in their Vessel's bottom,
and went ashore in their Boat. Capt. Read followed them, but they run into the
Woods and hid themselves. Here we stayed ten or eleven Days, for it blew very
hard all the time. While we stayed here Herman Coppinger our Surgeon went
ashore, intending to live here; but Captain Read sent some Men to fetch him
again. I had the same Thoughts, and would have gone ashore too, but waited for
a more convenient place. For neither he nor I, when we were last on board at
Mindanao, had any knowledge of the Plot that was laid to leave Capt. Swan, and
run away with the Ship; and being sufficiently weary of this mad Crew, we were
willing to give them the slip at any place from whence we might hope to get a
passage to an English Factory. There was nothing else of Moment happened while
we stayed here.

CHAP. XV.
They leave Pulo Condore, designing for Manila, but are driven off from thence,
and from the Isle of Prata, by the Winds, and brought upon the Coast of China.
Isle of St. John, on the Coast of the Province of Canton; its Soil and
Productions, China Hogs, etc. The Inhabitants; and of the Tartars forcing the
Chinese to cut off their Hair. Their Habits, and the little Feet of their
Women. China-ware, China-roots, Tea, etc. A Village at St. John's Island, and
of their Husbandry of their Rice. A Story of a Chinese Pagoda, or Idol-Temple,
and Image. Of the China Jonks, and their Rigging. They leave St. John's and the
Coast of China. A most outrageous Storm. Corpus Sant, a Light, or Meteor
appearing in Storms. The Piscadores, or Fishers Islands near Formosa: A
Tartarian Garrison, and Chinese Town on one of these Islands. They anchor in
the Harbor near the Tartars Garrison, and treat with the Governor. Of Amoy in
the Province of Fokieu, and Macao a Chinese and Portuguese Town near Canton in
China. The Habits of a Tartarian Officer and his Retinue. Their Presents,
excellent Beef. Samciu, a sort of Chinese Arack, and Hocciu a kind of Chinese
Mum, and the Jars it is bottled in. Of the Isle of Formosa, and the five
Islands; to which they give the Names of Orange, Monmouth, Grafton, Bashee, and
Goat-Islands, in general, the Bashee-Islands. A Digression concerning the
different depths of the Sea near high or low Lands. The Soil, etc. as before.
The Soil, Fruits and Animals of these Islands. The Inhabitants and their
Clothing. Rings of a yellow Metal like Gold. Their Houses built on remarkable
Precipices. Their Boats and Employments. Their Food, of Goat Skins, Entrails,
etc. Parcht Locusts. Bashee, or Sugar-cane Drink. Of their Language and
Original, Lances and Buffaloe Coats. No Idols, nor civil Form of Government. A
young Man buried alive by them; supposed to be for Theft. Their Wives and
Children, and Husbandry. Their Manners, Entertainments, and Traffic. Of the
Ships first Intercourse with these People, and Bartering with them. Their
Course among the Islands; their stay there, and provision to depart. They are
driven off by a violent Storm, and return. The Natives Kindness to 6 of them
left behind. The Crew discouraged by those Storms, quit their design of
Cruising off Manila for the Acapulco Ship; and it is resolved to fetch a Compass
to Cape Comorin, and so for the Red Sea.

HAving filled our Water, cut our Wood, and got our Ship in a Sailing posture,
while the blustering hard Winds lasted, we took the first opportunity of a
settled Gale to Sail toward Manila. Accordingly June the 4th, 1687. we loosed
from Pulo Condore, with the Wind at S. W. fair Weather at a brisk Gale. The
Pepper Jonk bound to Siam remained there, waiting for an Easterly Wind; but one
of his Men, a kind of a bastard Portuguese, came aboard our Ship, and was
entertained for the sake of his knowledge in the several Languages of these
Countries. The Wind continued in the S. W. but 24 hours, or a little more, and
then came about to the North, and then to the N. E.; and the Sky became
exceeding clear. Then the Wind came at East, and lasted betwixt E. and S. E.
for 8 or 10 Days. Yet we continued plying to Windward, expecting every Day a
shift of Wind, because these Winds were not according to the Season of the Year.

We were now afraid lest the Currents might deceive us, and carry us on the
Shoals of Pracel, which were near us, a little to the N. W. but we passed on to
the Eastward, without seeing any sign of them; yet we were kept much to the
Northward of our intended course: and the Easterly Winds still continuing, we
despaired of getting to Manila; and therefore began to project some new design;
and the result was, to visit the Island Prata, about the Lat. of 20 Degrees. 40
Min. North; and not far from us at this time.

It is a small low Island, environed with Rocks clear round it, by report. It
lies so in the way between Manila and Canton, the head of a Province, and a
Town of great Trade in China, that the Chinese do dread the Rocks about it,
more than the Spaniards did formerly dread Bermudas; for many of their Jonks
coming from Manila have been lost there, and with abundance of Treasure in
them; as we were informed by all the Spaniards that ever we converst with in
these parts. They told us also, that in these Wrecks most of the Men were
drowned, and that the Chinese did never go thither to take upon any of the
Treasure that was lost there, for fear of being lost themselves. But the danger
of the place did not daunt us; for we were resolved to try our Fortunes there,
if the Winds would permit; and we did beat for it 5 or 6 Days: but at last were
forced to leave that Design also for want of Winds; for the S. E. Winds
continuing, forced us on the Coast of China.

It was the 25th Day of June when we made the Land; and running in toward the
Shore we came to an Anchor the same Day, on the N. E. end of St. John's Island.

This Island is in Lat. about 22 d. 30 min. North, lying on the S. Coast of the
Province of Quantung or Canton in China. It is of an indifferent height, and
pretty plain, and the Soil fertile enough. It is partly woody, partly Savannahs
or Pasturage for Cattle; and there is some moist arable Land for Rice. The
skirts or outer part of the Island, especially that part of it which borders on
the main Sea, is woody: The middle part of it is good thick grassy Pasture,
with some Groves of Trees; and that which is cultivated Land is low wet Land,
yielding plentiful Crops of Rice; the only Grain that I did see here. The tame
Cattle which this Island affords, are China Hogs, Goats, Buffaloes, and some
Bullocks. The Hogs of this Island are all black; they have but small Heads,
very short thick Necks, great Bellies, commonly touching the Ground, and short
Legs. They Eat but little Food, yet they are most of them very fat; probably
because they Sleep much. The tame Fowls are Ducks, and Cocks and Hens. I saw no
wild Fowl but a few small Birds.

The Natives of this Island are Chinese. They are subject to the Crown of
China, and consequently at this time to the Tartars. The Chinese in general are
tall, strait-bodied, raw-boned Men. They are long Visaged, and their Foreheads
are high; but they have little Eyes. Their Noses are pretty large, with a
rising in the middle. Their Mouths are of a mean size, pretty thin Lips. They
are of an ashy Complexion; their Hair is black, and their Beards thin and long,
for they pluck the Hair out by the Roots, suffering only some few very long
straggling Hairs to grow about their Chin in which they take great pride, often
combing them, and sometimes tying them up in a knot, and they have such Hairs
too growing down from each side of their upper Lip like Whiskers. The ancient
Chinese were very proud of the Hair of their Heads, letting it grow very long,
and stroking it back with their Hands curiously, and then winding the plats all
together round a Bodkin, thrust through it at the hinder part of the Head; and
both Men and Women did thus. But when the Tartars conquered them, they broke
them of this custom they were fond of, by main force; insomuch that they
resented this Imposition worse than their subjection, and rebelled upon it: but
being still worsted, were forced to acquiesce; and to this day they follow the
fashion of their Masters the Tartars, and shave all their Heads, only reserving
one lock, which some tie up, others let it hang down to a great or small length
as they please. The Chinese in other Countries still keep their old custom, but
if any of the Chinese is found wearing long Hair in China, he forfeits his
Head; and many of them have abandoned their Country to preserve their liberty
of wearing their Hair, as I have been told by themselves.

The Chinese have no Hats, Caps, or Turbans; but when they walk abroad, they
carry a small Umbrello in their Hands, wherewith they fence their Head from the
Sun or the Rain, by holding it over their Heads. If they walk but a little way,
they carry only a large Fan made of Paper, or Silk, of the same fashion as
those our Ladies have, and many of them are brought over hither; one of these
every Man carries in his Hand if he do but cross the Street, skreening his Head
with it, if he has not an Umbrello with him.

The common Apparel of the Men, is a loose Frock and Breeches. They seldom were
Stockings, but they have Shoes, or a sort of Slippers rather. The Men's Shoes
are made diversely: The Women have very small Feet, and consequently but little
Shoes; for from their Infancy their Feet are kept swathed up with Bands, as
hard as they can possibly endure them; and from the time they can go till they
have done growing they bind them up every night. This they do purposely to
hinder them from growing, esteeming little Feet to be a great Beauty. But by
this unreasonable Custom they do in a manner lose the use of their Feet, and
instead of going they only stumble about their Houses, and presently squat down
on their Breeches again, being, as it were, confined to sitting all Days of
their Lives. They seldom stir abroad, and one would be apt to think, that, as
some have conjectured, their keeping up their fondness for this Fashion were a
Stratagem of the Men's, to keep them from gadding and gossipping about, and
confine them at home. They are kept constantly to their work, being fine
Needle-Women, and making many curious Embroideries, and they make their own
Shoes; but if any Stranger be desirous to bring away any for Novelty's sake, he
must be a great Favorite to get a pair of Shoes, of them, though he give twice
their value. The poorer sort of Women trudge about Streets, and to the Market,
without Shoes or Stockings; and these cannot afford to have little Feet, being
to get their living with them.

The Chinese, both Men and Women, are very ingenious; as may appear by the many
curious things that are brought from thence, especially the Porcelaine, or
China Earthen Ware. The Spaniards of Manila, that we took on the Coast of
Luconia, told me, that this Commodity is made of Conch-shells; the inside of
which looks like Mother of Pearl. But the Portuguese lately mentioned, who had
lived in China, and spoke that and the neighboring Languages very well, said,
That it was made of a fine sort of Clay that was dug in the Province of Canton.
I have often made enquiry about it, but could never be well satisfied in it:
But while I was on the Coast of Canton I forgot to inquire about it. They make
very fine Lacquer-ware also, and good Silks; and they are curious at Painting
and Carring.

China affords Drugs in great abundance; especially China-Root; but this is not
^culiar to that Country alone; for there is much of this Root growing at
Jamaica, particularly at 16 mile walk, and in the Bay of Honduras it is very
plentiful. There is great store of Sugar made in this Country; and Tea in
abundance is brought from thence; being much used there, and in Tunquin and
Cochinchina as common drinking; Women sitting in the Streets, and selling
Dishes of Tea hot and ready made; they call it Chau, and even the poorest
People sip it. But the Tea at Tonqueen or Cochinchina seems not so good, or of
so pleasant a bitter, or of so fine a color, or such virtue as this in China;
for I have drank of it in these Countries: unless the fault be in their way of
making it, for I made none there my self; and by the high red color it looks
as if they made a Decoction of it, or kept it stale. Yet at Japan I was told
there is a great deal of pure Tea, very good.

The Chinese are very great Gamesters, and they will never be tired with it,
playing night and day, till they have lost all their Estates; then it is usual
with them to hang themselves. This was frequently done by the Chinese Factors
at Manila, as I was told by Spaniards that lived there. The Spaniards
themselves are much addicted to Gaming, and are very expert at it; but the
Chinese are too subtle for them, being in general a very cunning People.

But a particular Account of them and their Country would fill a Volume; nor
does my short Experience of them qualify me to say much of them. Wherefore I
confine my self chiefly to what I observed at St. John's Island, where we lay
some time, and visited the shore every day to buy Provision, as Hogs, Fowls,
and Buffaloe. Here was a small Town standing in a wet swampy Ground, with many
filthy Ponds amongst the Houses, which were built on the Ground as ours are,
not on Posts as at Mindanao. In these Ponds were plenty of Ducks; the Houses
were small and low, and covered with Thatch, and the inside were but ill
furnished, and kept nastily: and I have been told by one who was there, that
most of the Houses in the City of Canton it self are but poor and irregular.

The Inhabitants of this Village seem to be most Husbandmen: They were at this
time very busy in Sowing their Rice which is their chiefest Commodity. The Land
in which they choose to Sow the Rice is low and wet, and when Plowed the Earth
was like a mass of Mud. They plow their Land with a small Plow, drawn by one
Buffaloe, and one Man both holds the Plow, and drives the Beast. When the Rice
is ripe and gathered in, they tread it out of the Ear with Buffaloes, in a
large round place made with a hard floor fit for that purpose, where they chain
3 or 4 of these Beasts, one at the tail of the other, and driving them round in
a ring, as in a Horse-mill, they so order it that the Buffaloes may tread upon
it all.

I was once ashore at this Island, with 7 or 8 English Men more, and having
occasion to stay some time, we killed a Shote, or young Porker, and roasted it
for our Dinners. While we were busy dressing of our Pork, one of the Natives
came and sat down by us; and when the Dinner was ready, we cut a good piece and
gave it him, which he willingly received. But by Signs he begged more, and
withal pointed into the Woods; yet we did not understand his meaning, nor much
mind him, till our Hunger was pretty well assuaged; although he did still make
Signs, and walking a little way from us, he beckoned to us to come to him;
which at last I did, and 2 or 3 more. He going before, led the way in a small
blind Path, through a Thicket, into a small Grove of Trees, in which there was
an old Idol Temple about 10 foot square: The Walls of it were about 6 Foot
high, and 2 Foot thick, made of Bricks. The Floor was paved with broad Bricks,
and in the middle of the Floor stood an old rusty Iron Bell on its Brims. This
Bell was about two Foot high, standing flat on the Ground; the Brims on which
it stood were about 16 Inches diameter. From the brims it did taper away a
little toward the Head, much like our Bells; but that the Brims did not turn
out so much as ours do. On the Head of the Bell there were 3 Iron Bars as big
as a Man's Arm, and about 10 Inches long from the top of the Bell, where the
ends joined as in a Center, and seemed of one Mass with the Bell, as if Cast
together. These Bars stood all Parallel to the Ground, and their further ends,
which stood Triangularly and opening from each other at equal Distances, like
the Fliers of our Kitchen-Jacks, were made exactly in the shape of the Paw of
some monstrous Beast, having sharp Claws on it. This it seems was their God;
for as soon as our zealous Guide came before the Bell, he fell flat on his Face
and beckoned to us, seeming very desirous to have us do the like. At the inner
side of the Temple^ against the Walls, there was an Altar of white hewn Stone.
The Table of the Altar was about 3 Foot long, 16 Inches broad, and 3 Inches
thick It was raised about two Foot from the Ground, and supported by 3 small
Pillars of the same white Stone. On this Altar there were several small Earthen
Vessels; one of them was full of small Sticks that had been burned at one end.
Our Guide made a great many Signs for us to fetch and to leave some of our Meat
there, and seemed very importunate, but we refused. We left him there, and went
aboard; I did see no other Temple nor Idol here.

While we lay at this Place, we saw several small China Jonks, Sailing in the
Lagune between the Islands and the Main, one came and anchored by us. I and
some more of our Men went aboard to view her: She was built with a square flat
Head as well as Stern, only the Head or forepart was not so broad as the
Stern. On her Deck she had little thacht Houses like Hovels, covered with
Palmeto Leaves, and raised about 3 Foot high, for the Seamen to creep into. She
had a pretty large Cabin, wherein there was an Altar and a Lamp burning, I did
but just look in, and saw not the Idol. The Hold was divided in many small
Partitions, all of them made so tight, that if a Leak should Spring up in any
one of them, it could go no farther, and so could do but little Damage, but
only to the Goods in the bottom of that Room where the Leak springs up. Each of
these Rooms belong to one or two Merchants, or more; and every Man freights his
Goods in his own Room; and probably Lodges there, if he be on Board himself.
These Jonks have only two Masts, a Mainmast and a Foremast. The foremast has
a square Yard and a square Sail, but the Mainmast has a Sail narrow aloft,
like a Sloops-Sail, and in fair Weather they use a Top-sail, which is to hale
down on the Deck in foul weather, Yard and all; for they do not go up to furl
it. The Mainmast in their biggest Jonks seemed to me as big as any third-rate
Man of Wars Mast in England, and yet not pieced as ours, but made of one grown
Tree; and in all my Travels I never saw any single Tree-masts so big in the
Body, and so long, and yet so well tapered, as I have seen in the Chine^e Jonks.

Some of our Men went over to a pretty large Town on the Continent of China,
where we might have furnished our Selves with Provision, which was a thing we
were always in want of, and was our chief Business here; but we were afraid to
lie in this Place any longer, for we had some signs of an approaching Storm:
this being the time of the Year in which Storms are expected on this Coast; and
here was no safe Riding. It was now the time of the Year for the S. W. Monsoon,
but the Wind had been whistling about from one part of the Compass to another
for two or three Days, and sometimes it would be quite calm. This caused us to
put to Sea, that we might have Sea-room at least; for such flattering Weather
is commonly the forerunner of a Tempest.

Accordingly we weighed Anchor, and set out; yet we had very little Wind all
the next night. But the Day ensuing, which was the 4th day of July, about 4 a
clock in the afternoon, the Wind came to the N. E. and freshned upon us, and
the Sky looked very black in that quarter, and the black Clouds began to rise
apace and moved toward us; having hung all the morning in the Horizon. This
made us take in our Topsails, and the Wind still increasing, about 9 a clock
we rift our Main-sail and Foresail; at 10 we furled our Fore-sail, keeping
under a Main-sail and Mizen. At 11 a clock we furled our Main-sail, and
ballasted our Mizen; at which time it began to rain, and by 12 a clock at night
it blew exceeding hard, and the Rain poured down as through a Sieve. It
thundered and lightened prodigiously, and the Sea seemed all of a Fire about us;
for every Sea that broke sparkled like Lightning. The violent Wind raised the
Sea presently to a great height, and it ran very short, and began to break in
on our Deck. One Sea struck away the Rails of our Head, and our Sheet-Anchor,
which was stowed with one Flook or bending of the Iron, over the Ships Gunal,
and lasht very well down to the side, was violently washed off, and had like to
have struck a hole in our Bow, as it lay beating against it. Then we were
forced to put right before the Wind to stow our Anchor again; which we did with
much ado: but afterward we durst not adventure to bring our Ship to the Wind
again, for fear of foundring, for the turning the Ship either to or fro from
the Wind is dangerous in such violent Storms. The fierceness of the Weather
continued till 4a clock that morning; in which time we did cut away two Canoas
that were towing astern.

After four a clock the Thunder and the Rain abated, and then we saw a Corpus
Sant at our Main-top-mast head, on the very top of the truck of the Spindle.
This sight rejoiced our Men exceedingly; for the height of the Storm is
commonly over when the Corpus Sant is seen aloft; but when they are seen lying
on the Deck, it is generally accounted a bad Sign.

A Corpus Sant is a certain small glittering light; when it appears as this
did, on the very top of the Mainmast or at a Yard-arm, it is like a Star; but
when it appears on the Deck, it resembles a great Glowworm. The Spaniards have
another Name for it, (though I take even this to be a Spanish or Portuguese
Name, and a corruption only of Corpus Sanctum) and I have been told that when
they see them, they presently go to Prayers, and bless themselves for the happy
sight. I have heard some ignorant Seamen discoursing how they have seen them
creep, or as they say, travel about in the Scuppers, telling many dismal
Stories that happened at such times: but I did never see any one stir out of the
place where it was first fixed, except upon Deck, where every Sea washes it
about: Neither did I ever see any but when we have had hard Rain as well as
Wind; and therefore do believe it is some Jelly: but enough of this.

We continued scudding right before Wind and Sea from 2 till 7 a Clock in the
Morning, and then the Wind being much abated, we set our Mizen again, and
brought our Ship to the Wind, and lay under a Mizen till 11. Then it fell flat
calm, and it continued so for about 2 Hours: but the Sky looked very black and
rueful, especially in the S. W. and the Sea tossed us about like an Egg-shell,
for want of Wind. About one a Clock in the Afternoon the Wind sprung up at S.
W. out of the quarter from whence we did expect it: therefore, we presently
brail'd up our Mizen, and wore our Ship: but we had no sooner put our Ship
before the Wind, but it blew a Storm again, and rained very hard; though not so
violently as the Night before: but the Wind was altogether as boisterous, and
so continued till 10 or 11 a Clock at Night. All which time we scudded, or run
before the Wind very swift, though only with our bare Poles, that is, without any
Sail abroad. Afterward the Wind died away by degrees, and before Day we had
but little Wind, and sine clear Weather.

I was never in such a violent Storm in all my Life^ so said all the Company.
This was near the chang^ of the Moon: it was 2 or 3 days before the change^ The
6th day in the Morning, having fine handsom^ Weather, we got up our Yards
again, and began to dry our Selves and our Clothes, for we were all well sopt.
This Storm had deadned the Hearts of our Men so much, that instead of going to
buy more Provision at the same place from whence we came before the Storm, or
of seeking any more for the Island Prata, they thought of going somewhere to
shelter before the Full Moon, for fear of another such Storm at that time: For
commonly, if there is any very bad Weather in the Month, it is about 2 or 3
Days before or after the Full, or Change of the Moon.

These Thoughts, I say, put our Men on thinking where to go, and the Drafts or
Sea-plats being first consulted, it was concluded to go to certain Islands
lying in Lat. 23 d. N. called Piscadores. For there was not a Man aboard that
was any thing acquainted on these Coasts; and therefore all our dependence was
on the Drafts, which only pointed out to us where such and such Places or
Islands were, without giving us any account, what Harbor, Roads, or Bays there
were; or the Produce, Strength, or Trade of them: these we were forced to seek
after our selves.

The Piscadores are a great many inhabited Islands, lying near the Island
Formosa, between it and China, in or near the Lat. of 23 degrees. N. Lat. almost as
high as the Tropic of Cancer. These Piscadore Islands are moderately high, and
appear much like our Dorsetshire and Wiltshire-Downs in England. They produce
thick short Grass, and a few Trees. They are pretty well watered, and they feed
abundance of Goats, and some great Cattle. There are abundance of Mounts and
old Fortifications on them: but of no use now, whatever they have been.

Between the 2 Eastermost Islands there is a very good Harbor, which is never
without Jonks Riding in it: And on the West Side of the Eastermost Island there
is a large Town and Fort commanding the Harbor. The Houses are but low, yet
well built, and the Town makes a sine Prospect. This is a Garrison of the
Tartars, wherein are also 3 or 400 Soldiers; who live here 3 years, and then
they are removed to some other Place.

On the Island, on the West Side of the Harbor, close by the Sea, there is a
small Town of Chinese, and most of the other Islands have some Chinese living
on them, more or less.

Having, as I said before, concluded to go to these Islands, we steered away
for them, having the Wind at W. S. W. a small gale. The 20th day of July we had
first sight of them, and steered in among them; finding no place to anchor in
till we came into the Harbor beforementioned. We blundering in, knowing
little of our way, and we admired to see so many Jonks going and coming, and
some at an Anchor, and so great a Town as the Neighboring Eastermost Town, the
Tartarian Garrison; for we did not expect, nor desire, to have seen any People,
being in care to lie concealed in these Seas; however, seeing we were here, we
boldly run into the Harbor, and presently sent ashore our Canoa to the Town.

Our People were met by an Officer at their Landing; and our Quartermaster,
who was the chiefest Man in the Boat, was conducted before the Governor and
examined, of what Nation we were, and what was our Business here. He answered,
That we were English, and were bound to Amoy, or Anhay, which is a City
standing on a Navigable River in the Province of Fokien in China, and is a
place of vast Trade, there being a huge multitude of Ships there, and in
general on all these Coasts, as I have heard of several that have been there.
He said also, that having received some Damage by a Storm, we therefore put in
here to refit, before we could adventure to go farther; and that we did intend
to lie here till after the full Moon, for fear of another Storm. The Governor
told him, that we might better refit our Ship at Amoy than here, and that he
heard that two English Vessels were arrived there already; and that he should
be very ready to assist us in any thing; but we must not expect to Trade there,
but must go to the places allowed to entertain Merchant-Strangers, which were
Amoy and Macao. Macao is a Town of great Trade also, lying in an Island at the
very Mouth of the River of Canton. It Is fortified and garrisoned by a large
Portuguese Colony, but yet under the Chinese Governor, whose People inhabit
one Moiety of the Town, and lay on the Portuguese what Tax they please; for
they dare not disoblige the Chinese, for fear of losing their Trade. However,
the Governor very kindly told our Quartermaster, that whatsoever we wanted,
if that place could furnish us, we should have it. Yet that we must not come
ashore on that Island, but he would send aboard some of his Men, to know what
we wanted, and they should also bring it off to us. That nevertheless we might
go on shore on other Islands to buy Refreshments of the Chinese. After the
Discourse was ended, the Governor dismissed him, with a small Jar of Flower, and
3 or 4 large Cakes of very fine Bread, and about a dozen Pine-Apples and
Water-Melons (all very good in their kind) as a Present to the Captain.

The next day an eminent Officer came aboard, with a great many Attendants. He
wore a black Silk Cap of a particular make, with a Plume of black and white
Feathers, standing up almost round his Head behind, and all his outside Clothes
were black Silk, He had a loose black Coat, which reached to his Knees, and his
Breeches were of the same; and underneath his Coat he had two Garments more, of
other colored Silk. His Legs were covered with small black limber Boots. All
his Attendants were in a very handsome garb of black Silk, all wearing those
small black Boots and Caps. These Caps were like the Crown of a Hat made of
Palmeto-leaves, like our Straw-hats; but without brims, and coming down but to
their Ears. These had no Feathers, but had an oblong Button on the top, and
from between the Button and the Cap, there fell down all round their Head as
low as the Cap reached, a sort of course Hair like Horse-hair, dyed (as I
suppose) of a light red color.

The Officer brought aboard, as a present from the Governor, a young Heifer,
the fattest and kindliest Beef, that I did ever taste in any Foreign Country:
'Twas small yet full grown; 2 large Hogs, 4 Goats, 2 Baskets of fine Flower, 20
great flat Cakes of fine well tasted Bread, 2 great Jars of Arack, (made of
Rice as I judged) called by the Chinese, Sam Shu; and 55 Jars of Hoc Shu, as
they call it, and our Europeans from them. This is a strong Liquor, made of
Wheat as I have been told. It looks like Mum, and tastes much like it, and is
very pleasant and hearty. Our Seamen love it mightily, and will lick their Lips
with it: for scarce a Ship goes to China, but the Men come home fat with
soaking this Liquor, and bring store of Jars of it home with them. It is put
into small white thick Jars, that hold near a quart: The double Jars hold about
two quarts. These Jars are small below, and thence rise up with a pretty full
belly, closing in pretty short at top, with a small thick mouth. Over the mouth
of the Jar they put a thin Chip cut round, just so as to cover the mouth, over
that a piece of Paper, aid over that they put a great lump of Clay, almost as
big as the Bottle or Jar it self, with a hollow in it, to admit the neck of the
Bottle, made round, and about 4 inches long; this is to preserve the Liquor. If
the Liquor take any vent it will be sour presently, so that when we buy any of
it, of the Ships from China returning to Maderas, or Fort St. George, where it
is then sold, or o the Chinese themselves, of whom I have bought it at Achin,
and Bencouli in Sumatra, if the Clay be cracked, or the Liquor motherly, we make
them take it again. A quart Jar there is worth Sixpence. Besides this Present
from the Governor, there was a Captain of a Jonk sent two Jars of Arack, and
abundance of Pine-apples, and Water-melons.

Captain Read sent ashore, as a Present to the Governor, a curious Spanish
Silver-hilted Rapier, an English Carbine, and a Gold Chain, and when the
Officer went ashore, three Guns were fired. In the Afternoon the Governor sent
off the same Officer again, to complement the Captain for his Civility, and
promised to retaliate his kindness before we departed; but we had such
blustering Weather afterward, that no Boat could come aboard.

We stayed here till the 29th Day, and then sailed from hence with the Wind at
S. W. and pretty fair Weather. We now directed our course for some Islands we
had chosen to go to, that lie between Formosa and Luconia. They are laid down
in our Plots without any name, only with a figure of 5, denoting the number of
them. It was supposed by us, that these Islands had no Inhabitants, because
they had not any name by our Hydrographers. Therefore we thought to lie there
secure, and be pretty near the Island Luconia, which we did still intend to
visit.

In going to them we sailed by the South West end of Formosa, leaving it on our
Larboard-side. This is a large Island; the South-end is in Lat. 21 d. 20 m. and
the North-end in the 25 d. 10 m. North Lat. the Longitude of this Isle is laid
down from 142 d. 5 m. to 143 d. 16 m. reckoning East from the Pike of
Tenariffe, so that it is but narrow; and the Tropic of Cancer crosses it. It is
a High and Woody Island, and was formerly well inhabited by the Chinese, and
was then frequently visited by English Merchants, there being a very good
Harbor to secure their Ships. But since the Tartars have conquered China, they
have spoiled the Harbor, (as I have been informed) to hinder the Chinese that
were then in Rebellion, from Fortifying themselves there; and ordered the
Foreign Merchants to come and Trade on the Main.

The sixth day of August we arrived at the five Islands that we were bound to,
and anchored on the East Side of the Northermost Island, in 15 Fathom, a
Cable's length from the Shore. Here, contrary to our Expectation, we found
abundance of Inhabitants in sight; for there were 3 large Towns all within a
League of the Sea; and another larger Town than any of the three, on the
backside of a small Hill close by also, as we found afterward. These Islands
lie in Lat. 20 d. 20 m. North Lat. by my Observation, for I took it there, and
I find their Longitude according to our Drafts, to be 141 d. 50 m. These
Islands having no particular Names in the Drafts, some or other of us made use
of the Seamens privilege, to give them what Names we pleased. Three of the
Islands were pretty large; the Westermost is the biggest. This the Dutchmen who
were among us called the Prince of Orange's Island, in honor of his present
Majesty. It is about 7 or 8 Leagues long, and about two Leagues wide; and it
lies almost N. and S. The other two great Islands are about 4 or 5 Leagues to
the Eastward of this. The Northermost of them, where we first anchored, I
called the Duke of Grafton's Isle, as soon as we landed on it; having married
my Wfe out of his Dutchess's Family, and leaving her at Arlington-house, at my
going Abroad. This Isle is about 4 Leagues long, and one League and a half
wide, stretching North and South. The other great Island onr Seamen called the
Duke of Monmouth's Island. This is about a League to the Southward of Grafton
Isle. It is about 3 Leagues long, and a League wide, lying as the other.
Between Monmouth and the South end of Orange Island, there are two small
Islands of a roundish Form, lying East and West. The Easter-most Island of the
two, our Men unanimously called Boshee Island, from a Liquor which we drank
there plentifully every day, after we came to an Anchor at it. The other, which
is the smallest of all, we called Goat Island, from the great number of Goats
there; and to the Northward of them all, are two high Rocks.

Orange Island, which is the biggest of them all, is not Inhabited. It is high
Land, flat and even on the top, with steep Cliffs against the Sea; for
which-Reason we could not go ashore there, as we did on all the rest.

I have made it my general Observation, That where the Land is fenced with
steep Rocks and Cliffs against the Sea, there the Sea is very deep, and seldom
affords Anchor-ground; and on the other side where the Land falls away with a
declivity into the Sea, (although the Land be extraordinary high within,) yet
there are commonly good Soundings, and consequently Anchoring; and as the
visible declivity of the Land appears near, or at the edge of the Water,
whether pretty steep, or more stoping, so we commonly find our Anchorground to
be, more or less deep or steep; therefore we come nearer the Shore, or anchor
farther off, as we see convenient; for there is no Coast in the World, that I
know, or have heard of, where the Land is of a continual height, without some
small Valleys or Declivities, which lie intermixed with the high Land. They are
the subsidings of Valleys or low Lands, that make Dents in the Shore and
Creeks, small Bays, and Harbors, or little Coves, etc. which afford good
anchoring, the surface of the Earth being there lodged deep under Water. Thus
we find many good Harbors on such Coasts, where the Land bounds the Sea with
steep Cliffs, by reason of the Declivities, or subsiding of the Land between
these Cliffs: But where the Declension from the Hills, or Cliffs, is not within
Land, between Hill and Hill, but, as on the Coast of Chili and Peru, the
Declivity is toward the Main Sea, or into it, the Coast being perpendicular, or
very steep from the neighboring Hills, as in those Countries from the Andes,
that run along the Shore, there is a deep Sea, and few or no Harbors, or
Creeks. All that Coast is too steep for anchoring, and has the fewest Roads
sit for Ships of any Coast I know, The Coasts of Gallicia, Portugal, Norway and
Newsoundland, etc. are Coasts like the Peruvian, and the high Islands of the
Archipelago; but yet not so scanty of good Harbors; for where there are short
Ridges of Land, there are good Bays at the extremities of those Ridges, where
they plunge into the Sea; as on the Coast of Caraccos, etc. The Island of John
Fernando, and the Island St. Helena, etc. are such high Land with deep Shore:
and in general, the plunging of any Land under Water, seems to be in proportion
to the rising of its continuous part above Water, more or less steep; and it
must be a bottom almost level, or very gently declining, that affords good
Anchoring, Ships being soon driven from their Moorings on a steep Bank;
Therefore we never strive to anchor where we see the Land high, and bounding
the Sea with steep Cliffs; and for this reason, when we came in sight of States
Island near Terra del Fuego, before we entered into the South Seas, we did not
so much as think of anchoring after we saw what Land it was, because of the
steep Cliffs which appeared against the Sea: Yet there might be little Harbors
or Coves for Shallops, or the like, to anchor in, which we did not see or
search after.

As high steep Cliffs bounding on the Sea have this ill consequence, that they
seldom afford anchoring; so they have this benefit, that we can see them far
off, and sail close to them, without danger: for which reason we call them Bold
Shores; whereas low Land, on the contrary, is seen but a little way, and in
many places we dare not come near it, for fear of running aground before we see
it. Besides, there are in many places Shoals thrown out by the course of great
Rivers, that from the low Land fall into the Sea.

This which I have said, that there is usually good anchoring near low Lands,
may be illustrated by several Instances. Thus on the South side of the Bay of
Campeachy, there is mostly low Land, and there also is good anchoring all along
Shore; and in some Places to the Eastward of the Town of Campeachy, we shall
have so many Fathom as we are Leagues off from Land; that is, from 9 or 10
Leagues distance, till you come within 4 Leagues: and from thence to Land it
grows but shallower. The Bay of Honduras also is low Land, and continues mostly
so, as we past along from thence to the Coasts of Portobel, and Cartagena, till
we came as high as Santa Martha; afterward the Land is low again, till you
come toward the Coast of Caraccos, which is a high Coast and bold Shore. The
Land about Surinam on the same Coast is low and good anchoring, and that over
on the Coast of Guinea is such also. And such too is the Bay of Panama, where
the Pilot-Book orders the Pilot always to sound, and not to come within such a
depth, be it by Night or Day. In the same Seas, from the high Land of Guitimala
in Mexico, t^ California, there is mostly low Land and good Anchoring. In the
Main of Asia, the Coast of China, the Bay of Siam and Bengal, and all the Coast
of Coromandel, and the Coast about Malacca, and against it the Island Sumatra,
on that side, are mostly low anchoring Shores. But on the West Side of Sumatra,
the Shore is high and bold; so most of the Islands lying to the Eastward of
Sumatra; as the Islands Borneo, Celebes, Gilolo, and abundance of Islands of
less note, lying scattering up and down those Seas, are low Land and have good
anchoring about them, with many Shoals scattered to and fro among them; but the
Islands lying against the East-Indian Ocean, especially the West-sides of them,
are high Land and steep, particularly the West-parts, not only of Sumatra, but
also of Java, Timer, etc. Particulars are endless; but in general, it is seldom
but high Shores and deep Waters; and on the other side, low Land and shallow
Seas, are found together.

But to return from this Digression, to speak of the rest of these Islands.
Monmouth and Grafton Isles are very hilly, with many of those steep inhabited
Precipies on them, that I shall describe particularly. The two small Islands
are flat and even; only the Bashee Island has one steep scraggy Hill, but Goat
Island is all flat and very even.

The Mold of these Islands in the Valley, is blackish in some places, but in
most red. The Hills are very rocky: The Valleys are well watered with Brooks of
fresh Water, which run into the Sea in many different places. The Soil is
indifferent fruitful, especially in the Valleys; producing pretty great plenty
of Trees (though not very big) and thick Grass. The sides of the Mountains have
also short Grass; and some of the Mountains have Mines within them, for the
Natives told us, That the yellow Metal they showed us, (as I shall speak more
particularly) came from these Mountains; for when they held it up they would
point toward them.

The Fruit of the Islands are a few Plantains, Bonanoes, Pine-apples, Pumkins,
Sugarcanes, etc. and there might be more if the Natives would, for the Ground
seems fertile enough. Here are great plenty of Potatoes, and Yames, which is
the common Food for the Natives, for Bread-kind: For those few Plantains they
have, are only used as Fruit. They have some Cotton growing here of the small
Plants.

Here are plenty of Goats, and abundance of Hogs; but few Fowls, either wild or
tame. For this I have always observed in my Travels, both in the East and West
Indies, that in those Places where there is plenty of Grain, that is, of Rice
in one, and Maiz in the other, there are also found great abundance of Fowls;
but on the contrary, few Fowls in those Countries where the Inhabitants feed on
Fruits and Roots only. The few wild Fowls that are here, are Parakites, and
some other small Birds. Their tame Fowl are only a few Cocks and Hens.

Monmouth and Grafton Islands are very thick inhabited; and Bashee Island has
one Town on it. The Natives of these Islands are short squat People; they are
generally round visaged, with low Foreheads, and thick Eyebrows; their Eyes
of a hazel color, and small, yet bigger than the Chinese; short low Noses, and
their Lip and Mouths middle proportioned, Their Teeth are white; their Hair is
black, and thick, and lank, which they wear but short; it will just cover their
Ears, and so it is cut round very even. Their Skins are of a very dark copper
color.

They wear no Hat, Cap, nor Turbat, nor any thing to keep off the Sun. The Men
for the biggest part have only a small Clout to cover their Nakedness; some of
them have Jackets made of Plantainleaves, which were as rough as any
Bear's-skin: I never saw such rugged Things. The Women have a short Petticoat
made of Cotton, which comes a little below their Knees. It is a thick sort of
stubborn Cloth, which they make themselves of their Cotton. Both Men and Women
do wear large Earrings, made of that yellow Metal before mentioned. Whether it
were Gold or no I cannot positively say: I took it to be so, it was heavy, and
of the color of our paler Gold. I would fain have brought away some to have
satisfied my Curiosity; but I had nothing wherewith to buy any. Captain Read
bought two of these Rings with some Iron, of which the People are very greedy;
and he would have bought more, thinking he was come to a very fair Market, but
that the paleness of the Metal made him and his Crew distrust its being right
Gold. For my part, I should have ventured on the purchase of some, but having
no property in the Iron, of which we had great store on board, sent from
England, by the Merchants along with Captain Swan, I durst not barter it away.

These Rings when first polished look very gloriously, but time makes them
fade, and turn to a pale yellow. Then they make a soft Paste of red Earth, and
smearing it over their Rings, they cast them into a quick Fire, where they
remain till they be red hot; then they take them out and cool them in Water,
and rub off the Past; and they look again of a glorious Color and Luster.

These People make but small low Houses. The sides which are made of small
Posts, watled with Boughs, are not above 4 foot and a half high: the Ridge-pole
is about 7 or 8 foot high. They have a Fireplace at one end of their Houses,
and Boards placed on the Ground to lie on. They inhabit together in small
Villages built on the sides and tops of rocky Hills, 3 or 4 rows of Houses one
above another, and on such steep Precipices, that they go up to the first Row
with a wooden Ladder, and so with a Ladder still from every Story up to that
above it, there being no way to ascend. The Plain on the first Precipice may be
so wide, as to have room both for a Row of Houses that stand all along on the
Edge or Brink of it, and a very narrow Street running along before their Doors,
between the Row of Houses and the foot of the next Precipice; the Plain of
which is in a manner level to the tops of the Houses below, and so for the
rest. The common Ladder to each Row or Street comes up at a narrow Passage left
purposely about the middle of it; and the Street being bounded with a Precipice
also at each end, it is but drawing up the Ladder, if they be assaulted, and
then there is no coming at them from below, but by climbing up as against a
perpindicular Wall: And that they may not be assaulted from above, they take
care to build on the side of such a Hill, whose backside hangs over the Sea, or
is some high, steep, perpendicular Precipice, altogether inaccessible. These
Precipices are natural; for the Rocks seem too hard to work on; nor is there
any sign that Art has been employed about them. On Bashee Island there is one
such, and built upon, with its back next the Sea. Grafton and Monmouth Isles
are very thick set with these Hills and Towns; and the Natives, whether for
fear of Pirates, or Foreign Enemies, or Factions among their own Clans, care
not for Building but in these Fastnesses; which I take to be the Reason that
Orange Isle, though the largest, and as Fertile as any, yet being Level, and
exposed, has no Inhabitants. I never saw the like Precipices and Towns.

These People are pretty Ingenious also in building Boats. Their small Boats
are much like our Deal Yalls, but not so big; and they are built with very
narrow Plank, pinned with wooden Pins, and some Nails. They have also some
pretty large Boats, which will carry 40 or 50 Men. These they Row with 12 or 14
Oars of a side. They are built much like the small ones, and they Row doubled
Banked; that is, two Men setting on one Bench, but one Rowing on one side, the
other on the other side of the Boat. They understand the use of Iron, and work
it themselves. Their Bellows are like those at Mindanao.

The common Employment for the Men is Fishing; but I did never see them catch
much: Whether it is more plenty at other times of the Year I know not. The
Women do manage their Plantations.

I did never see them kill any of their Goats or Hogs for themselves, yet they
would beg the Panches of the Goats that they themselves did sell to us: And if
any of our surly Seamen did heave them into the Sea, they would take them up
again and the Skins of the Goats also. They would not meddle with Hogs-guts, if
our Men threw away any beside what they made Chitterlings and Sausages of. The
Goat Skins these People would carry ashore, and making a Fire they would singe
off all the Hair, and afterward let the Skin lie and Perch on the Coals, till
they thought it eatable; and then they would know it, and tear it in pieces
with their Teeth, and at last swallow it. The Paunches of the Goats would make
them an excellent Dish; they dressed it in this manner. They would turn out all
the chopped Grass and Crudities found in the Maw into their Pots, and set it over
the Fire, and stir it about often: This would Smoke and Puff, and heave up as
it was Boiling; wind breaking out of the Ferment, and making a very savory
Stink. While this was doing, if they had any Fish, as commonly they had 2 or 3
small Fish, these they would make very clean (as hating Nastiness belike) and
cut the Flesh from the Bone, and then mince the Flesh as small as possibly they
could, and when that in the Pot was well boiled, they would take it up, and
strewing a little Salt into it, they would eat it, mixed with their raw minced
Flesh. The Dung in the Maw would look like so much boiled Herbs mine'd very
small; and they took up their Mess with their Fingers, as the Moors do their
Pilaw, using no Spoons.

They had another Dish made of a sort of Locusts, whose Bodies were about an
Inch and an half long, and as thick as the top of one's little Finger; with
large thin Wings, and long and small Legs. At this time of the Year these
Creatures came in great Swarms to devour their Potato-leaves, and other Herbs;
and the Natives would go out with small Nets, and take a Quart at one sweep.
When they had enough, they would carry them home, and Parch them over the Fire
in an earthen Pan; and then their Wings and Legs would fall off, and their
Heads and Backs would turn red like boiled Shrimps, being before brownish.
Their Bodies being full, would eat very moist, their Heads would crackle in
one's Teeth. I did once eat of this Dish, and liked it well enough; but their
other Dish my Stomach would not take.

Their common Drink is Water; as it is of all other Indians: Beside which they
make a sort of Drink with the Juice of the Sugar-cane, which they boil, and put
some small black sort of Berries among it. When it is well boiled, they put it
into great Jars, and let it stand 3 or 4 days and work. Then it settles, and
becomes clear, and is presently fit to drink. This is an excellent Liquor, and
very much like English Beer, both in Color and Taste. It is very strong, and I
do believe very wholesome: For our Men, who drank briskly of it all day for
several Weeks, were frequently drunk with it, and never sick after it. The
Natives brought a vast deal of it every day to those aboard and ashore: For
some of our Men were ashore at work on Bashee Island; which Island they gave
that Name to from their drinking this Liquor there; that being the Name which
the Natives called this Liquor by: and as they sold it to our Men very cheap,
so they did not spare to drink it as freely. And indeed from the plenty of this
Liquor, and their plentiful use of it, our Men called all these Islands, the
Bashee Islands.

What Language these People do speak I know not: for it had no affinity in
sound to the Chinese, which is spoke much through the Teeth; nor yet to the
Malayan Language. They called the Metal that their Earrings were made of
Bullawan, which is the Mindana word for Gold; therefore propably they may be
related to the Philippine Indians; for that is the general Name for Gold among
all those Indians. I could not learn from whence they have their Iron; but it
is most likely they go in their great Boats to the North end of Luconia, and
Trade with the Indians of that Island for it. Neither did I see any thing
beside Iron, and pieces of Buffaloes Hides, which I could judge that they
bought of Strangers: Their Clothes were of their own Growth and Manufacture.

These Men had Wooden Lances, and a few Lances headed with Iron; which are all
the Weapons that they have. Their Armor is a piece o^ Buffaloe-hide, shaped
like our Carters Frocks, being without Sleeves, and sowed both sides together,
with holes for the Head and the Arms to come forth. This Buff-Coat reaches down
to their Knees: It is close about their Shoulders, but below it is 3 Foot wide,
and as thick as a Board.

I could never perceive them to Worship any thing, neither had they any Idols;
neither did they seem to observe any one day more than other. I could never
perceive that one Man was of greater Power than another; but they seemed to be
all equal; only every Man Ruling in his own House, and the Children Respecting
and Honoring their Parents.

Yet it is probable that they have some Law, or Custom, by which they are
governed; for while we lay here we saw a young Man buried alive in the Earth;
and 'twas for Theft, as far as we could understand from them. There was a great
deep hole dug, and abundance of People came to the Place to take their last
Farewell of him: Among the rest, there was one Woman who made great
Lamentation, and took off the condemned Person's Earrings. We supposed her to
be his Mother. After he had taken his leave of her and some others, he was put
into the Pit, and covered over with Earth. He did not struggle, but yielded
very quietly to his Punishment; and they crammed the Earth close upon him, and
stifled him.

They have but one Wife, with whom they live and agree very well; and their
Children live very Obediently under them. The Boys go out a Fishing with their
Fathers; and the Girls live at home with their Mothers: And when the Girls
are grown pretty strong, they send them to their Plantations, to dig Hames and
Potatoes; of which they bring home on their Heads every day enough to serve the
whole Family; for they have no Rice nor Maize.

Their Plantations are in the Valleys, at a good distance from their Houses;
where every Man has a certain spot of Land, which is properly his own. This he
manageth himself for his own use; and provides enough, that he may not be
beholding to his Neighbor.

Notwithstanding the seeming nastiness of their Dish of Goats Maw, they are in
their Persons a very neat cleanly People, both Men and Women: And they are
withal the quietest and civilest People that I did ever meet with. I could
never perceive them to be angry with one another. I have admired to see 20 or
30 Boats aboard our Ship at a time, and yet no difference among them; but all
civil and quiet, endeavoring to help each other on occasion: No noise, nor
appearance of distaste: and although sometimes cross Accidents would happen,
which might have set other Men together by the Ears, yet they were not moved by
them. Sometimes they will also drink freely, and warm themselves with their
Drink; yet neither then could I ever perceive them out of Humor. They are not
only thus civil among themselves, but very obliging and kind to Strangers; nor
were their Children rude to us, as is usual. Indeed the Women, when we came to
their Houses, would modesty beg any Rags, or small pieces of Cloth, to swaddle
their young ones in, holding out their Children to us; and begging is usual
among all these wild Nations. Yet neither did they beg so importunely as in
other Places; nor did the Men ever beg any thing at all. Neither, except once
at the first time that we came to an Anchor (as I shall relate) did they steal
any thing; but dealt justly, and with great sincerity with us; and make us very
welcome to their Houses with Bashee drink. If they had none of this Liquor
themselves, they would buy a Jar of Drink of their Neighbors, and sit down
with us: for we could see them go and give a piece or two of their Gold for
some Jars of Bashee. And indeed among Wild Indians, as these seem to be, I
wondered to see buying and selling, which is not so usual; nor to converse so
freely, as to go aboard Stranger's Ships with so little caution: Yet their own
small Trading may have brought them to this. At these Entertainments, they and
their Family, Wife and Children drank out of small Callabashes: and when by
themselves, they drink about from one to another; but when any of us came among
them, then they would always drink to one of us.

They have no sort of Coin; but they have small Crumbs of the Metal before
described, which they bind up very safe in Plantain Leaves, or the like. This
Metal they exchange for what they want, giving a small quantity of it, about 2
or 3 Grains, for a Jar of Drink, that would hold 5 or 6 Gallons. They have no
Scales, but give it by guess. Thus much in general.

To proceed therefore with our Affairs, I have said before, that we anchored
here the 6th day of August. While we were furling our Sails, there came near
100 Boats of the Natives aboard, with 3 or 4 Men in each; so that our Deck was
full of Men. We were at first afraid of them, and therefore got up 20 or 30
small Arms on our Poop, and kept 3 or 4 Men as Sentinels, with Guns in their
Hands, ready to fire on them if they had offered to molest us. But they were
pretty quiet, only they picked up such old Iron that they found on our Deck, and
they also took out our Pump-Bolts, and Linch-Pins out of the Carriages of our
Guns, before we perceived them. At last, one of our Men perceived one of them
very busy getting out one of our Linch Pins; and took hold of the fellow, who
immediately bawled out, and all the rest presently leaped overboard, some into
their Boats, others into the Sea; and they all made away for the Shore. But
when we perceived their Fright, we made much of him that was in hold, who stood
Trembling all the while; and at last we gave him a small piece of Iron, with
which he immediately leapt overboard and swam to his Consorts; who hovered
about our Ship to see the Issue. Then we beckned to them to come aboard again,
being very loath to lose a Commerce with them. Some of the Boats came aboard
again, and they were always very Honest and Civil afterward.

We presently after this sent a Canoa ashore, to see their manner of living,
and what Provision they had: The Canoa's Crew were made very welcome with
Bashee drink, and saw abundance of Hogs, some of which they bought, and
returned aboard. After this the Natives brought aboard both Hogs and Goats to
us in their own Boats; and every day we should have 15 or 20 Hogs and Goats in
Boats aboard by our side. These we bought for a small matter; we could buy a
good fat Goat for an old Iron Hoop, and a Hog of 70 or 80 pound weight for 2 or
3 pound of Iron. Their drink also they brought off in Jars, which we bought for
old Nails, Spikes, and Leaden Bullets. Beside the forementioned Commodities,
they brought aboard' great quantities of Yams and Potatoes; which we purchased
for Nails, Spikes, or Bullets, It was one Man's work to be all day cutting out
Bars of Iron into small pieces with a cold Chisel: And these were for the great
Purchases of Hogs and Goats, which they would not sell for Nails, as their
Drink and Roots. Woe never let them know what Store we have, that they may value
it the more. Every morning, as soon as it was light, they would thus come aboard
with their Commodities; which we bought as we had occasion. We did commonly
furnish our selves with as many Goats and Roots as served us all the day; and
their Hogs we bought in large Quantities, as we thought convenient; for we
salted them. Their Hogs were very sweet; but I never saw so many Meazled ones.

We filled all our Water at a curious Brook close by us in Grafton's Isle,
where we first anchored. We stayed there about three or four days, before we
went to other Islands. We sailed to the Southward, passing on the East Side of
Grafton Island, and then passed through between that and Monmouth Island; but we
found no Anchoring till we came to the North end of Monmouth Island, and there
we stopped during one Tide. The Tide runs very strong here, and sometimes makes a
short chopping Sea. Its course among these Islands is S. by E. and N. by W. The
Flood sets to the North, and Ebb to the South, and it rises and falls 8 Foot.

When we went from hence, we coasted about 2 Leagues to the Southward, on the
West side of Monmouth Island; and finding no Anchor-ground, we stood over to
the Bashee Island, and came to an Anchor on the North East part of it, against
a small sandy Bay, in 7 fathom clean hard Sand, and about a quarter of a Mile
from the Shore. Here is a pretty wide Channel between these two Islands, and
Anchoring all over it. The Depth of Water is 12, 14, and 16 Fathom.

We presently built a Tent ashore, to mend our Sails in, and stayed all the
rest of our time here, viz. from the 13th day of August till the 26th day of
September. In which time we mended our Sails, and scrubb'd our Ships bottom
very well; and every day some of us went to their Towns, and were kindly
entertained by them. Their Boats also came aboard with their Merchandise to
sell, and lay aboard all Day; and if we did not take it off their Hands one
day, they would bring the same again the next.

We had yet the Winds at S. W. and S. S. W. mostly fair Weather. In October we
did expect the Winds to shift to the N. E. and therefore we provided to sail
(as soon as the Eastern Monsoon was settled) to cruize off of Manila.
Accordingly we provided a stock of Provision. We salted 70 or 80 good fat Hogs,
and bought Yams and Potatoes good store to eat at Sea.

About the 24th day of September, the Winds shifted about to the East, and from
thence to the N. E. fine fair Weather. The 25th it came at N. and began to grow
fresh, and the Sky began to be clouded; and the Wind freshned on us.

At 12 a clock at night it blew a very fierce Storm. We were then riding with
our best Bower a Head and though our Yards and Topmast were down, yet we
drove. This obliged us to let go our Sheet-Anchor, veering out a good scope of
Cable, which stopped us till 10 or 11 a clock the next day. Then the Wind came on
so fierce, that she drove again, with both Anchors ahead. The Wind was now at
N. by W. and we kept driving till 3 or 4 a clock in the afternoon: and it was
well for us that there were no Islands, Rocks, or Sands in our way, for if
there had, we must have been driven upon them. We used our utmost Endeavors to
stop here, being loath to go to Sea, because we had six of our Men ashore, who
could not get off now. At last we were driven out into deep Water, and then it
was in vain to wait any longer: Therefore we hove in our Sheet Cable, and got
up our Sheet Anchor, and cut away our best Bower, (for to have heaved her up
then would have gone near to have foundred us) and so put to Sea. We had very
violent Weather the night ensuing, with very hard Rain, and we were forced to
scud with our bare Poles till 3 a Clock in the morning. Then the Wind
slackened, and we brought our Ship to, under a mizen, and lay with our Head to
the Westward. The 27th day the Wind abated much, but it rained very hard all
day, and the Night ensuing. The 28th day the Wind came about to the N. E. and
it cleared up, and blew a hard Gale, but it stood not there, for it shifted
about to the Eastward, thence to the S. E. then to the South, and at last
settled at S. W. and then we had a moderate Gale and fair Weather.

It was the 29th day when the Wind came to the S. W. Then we made all the Sail
we could for the Island again. The 30th day we had the Wind at West, and saw
the Islands; but could not get in before night. Therefore we stood off to the
Southward till two a Clock in the morning; then we tackt, and stood in all the
morning, and about 12 a clock, the 1st day of October, we anchored again at the
place from whence we were driven.

Then our six Men were brought aboard by the Natives, to whom we gave 3 whole
Bars of Iron, for their kindness and civility, which was an extraordinaay
Present to them. Mr. Robert Hall was one of the Men that was left ashore. I
shall speak more of him hereafter. He and the rest of them told me, that after
the Ship was out of sight, the Natives began to be more kind to them than they
had been before, and persuaded them to cut their Hair short, as theirs was,
offering to each of them if they would do it, a young Woman to Wife, and a
small Hatchet, and other Iron Utensils, fit for a Planter, in Dowry; and withal
showed them a piece of Land for them to manage They were courted thus by
several of the Town where they then were: but they took up their head quarters
at the House of him with whom they first went ashore. When the Ship appeared in
sight again, then they importuned them for some Iron, which is the chief thing
that they covet, even above their Earrings. We might have bought all their
Earrings, or other Gold they had, with our Iron-bars, had we been assured of
its goodness; and yet when it was touched and compar^d with other Gold, we
could not discern any difference, though it looked so pale in the lump; but the
seeing them polish it so often, was a new discouragement.

This last Storm put our Men quite out of heart: for although it was not
altogether so fierce as that which we were in on the Coast of China, which was
still fresh in Memory, yet it wrought more powerfully, and frighted them from
their design of cruising before Manila, fearing another Storm there. Now every
Man wished himself at home, as they had done an hundred times before: But
Captain Read, and Captain Teat the Master, persuaded them to go toward Cape
Comorin, and then they would tell them more of their Minds, intending doubtless
to cruize in the Red Sea; and they easily prevailed with the Crew.

The Eastern Monsoon was now at hand, and the best way had been to go through
the Streights of Malacca: but Captain Teat said it was dangerous, by reason of
many Islands and Shoals there, with which none of us were acquainted. Therefore
he thought it best to go round on the East Side of all the Philippine Islands,
and so keeping South toward the Spice Islands, to pass out into the East Indian
Ocean about the Island Timor.

This seemed to be a very tedious way about, and as dangerous altogether for
Sholes; but not for meeting with English or Dutch Ships, which was their
greatest Fear. I was well enough satisfied, knowing that the farther we went,
the more Knowledge and Experience I should get, which was the main Thing that I
regarded; and should also have the more variety of Places to attempt an Escape
from them, being fully resolved to take the first opportunity of giving them
the slip.

CHAP. XVI
They depart from the Bashee Islands, and passing by some others, and the N.
End of Luconia. St. John's Isle, and other of the Phillipines. They stop at the
two Isles near Mindanao; where they re-fit their Ship, and make a Pump after
the Spanish fashion. By the young Prince of the Spice Island they have News of
Captain Swan, and his Men, left at Mindanao: The Author proposes to the Crew to
return to him; but in vain: The Story of his Murder at Mindanao. The
Clove-Islands. Ternate. Tidore, etc. The Island Celebes, and Dutch Town of
Macasser. They Coast along the East side of Celebes, and between it and other
Islands and Sholes, with great difficulty. Shy Turtle. Vast Cockles. A wild
Vine of great Virtue for Sores. Great Trees; one excessively big. Beacons
instead of Buoys on the Sholes. A Spout: a Description of them, with a Story of
one. Uncertain Tornadoes. Turtle. The Island Bouton, and its chief Town and
Harbor Callasusung. The Inhabitants. Visits given and received by the Sultan.
His Device in the Flag of his Proe: His Guards, Habit, and Children. Their
Commerce. Their different esteem (as they pretend) of the English and Dutch.
Maritime Indians sell others for Slaves. Their Reception in the Town. A Boy
with 4 rows of Teeth. Parakites. Crockadores, a sort of White Parrots. They
pass among other inhabited Islands, Omba, Pentare, Timore, etc. Sholes.
New-Holland: laid down too much Northward. Its Soil, and Dragon-trees. The poor
winking Inhabitants: their Feathers, Habit, Food, Arms, etc. The way of
fetching Fire out of Wood. The Inhabitants on the Islands. Their Habitations,
Unfitness for Labor, etc. The great Tides here. They design for the Island
Cocos, and Cape Comorin.

THE third Day of October 1687. we sailed from these Islands, standing to the
Southward; intending to sail through among the Spice Islands. We had fair
Weather, and the Wind at West. We first steered S. S. W. and passed close by
certain small Islands that lie just by the North-end of the Island Luconia. We
left them all on the West of us, and past on the East Side of it, and the rest
of the Philippine Islands, coasting to the Southward.

The N. East End of the Island Luconia appears to be good Champion Land, of an
indifferent height, plain and even for many Leagues; only it has some pretty
high Hills standing upright by themselves in these Plains; but no ridges of
Hills, or chains of Mountains joining one to another. The Land on this side
seems to be most Savannah, or Pasture: The S. E part is more Mountainous and
Woody.

Leaving the Island Luconia, and with it our Golden Projects, we sailed on to
the Southward, passing on the East side of the rest of the Philippine Islands.
These appear to be more Mountainous, and less Woody, till we came in sight of
the Island St. John; the first of that name I mentioned: the other I spoke of
on the Coast of China. This I have already described to be a very woody Island.
Here the Wind coming Southerly, forced us to keep farther from the Islands.

The 14 day of October we came close by a small low woody Island, that lies
East from the S. E. end of Mindanao, distant from it about 20 Leagues. I do not
find it set down in any Sea-Chart.

The 15th day we had the Wind at N. E. and we steered West for the Island
Mindanao, and arrived at the S. E. end again on the 16th day. There we went in
and anchored between two small Islands, which lie in about 5 d. 10 m. North
Lat. I mentioned them when we first came on this Coast. Here we found a fine
small Cove, on the N. W. end of the Eastermost Island, fit to careen in, or
hale ashore; so we went in there, and presently unrigg'd our Ship, and provided
to hale our Ship ashore, to clean her bottom. These Islands are about 3 or 4
Leagues from the Island Mindanao; they are about 4 or 5 Leagues in
Circumference, and of a pretty good height. The Mold is black and deep; and
there are two small Brooks of fresh Water.

They are both plentifully stored with great high Trees; therefore our
Carpenters were sent ashore to cut down some of them for our use; for here they
made a new Boltsprit, which we did set here also, our old one being very
saulty. They made a new Fore-yard too, and a Fore-top-mast: And our Pumps being
faulty, and not serviceable, they did cut a Tree to make a Pump. They first
squared it, then sawed it in the middle, and then hollowed each side exactly.
The two hollow sides were made big enough to contain a Pump-box in the midst of
them both, when they were joined together; and it required their utmost Skill
to close them exactly to the making a tight Cylinder for the Pump-box; being
unaccustomed to such Work. We learnt this way of Pump-making from the
Spaniards; who make their Pumps that they use in their Ships in the South-Seas
after this manner; and I am confident that there are no better Hand-pumps in
the World than they have.

While we lay here, the young Prince that I mentioned in the 13th Chapter, came
aboard. He understanding that we were bound farther to the Southward, desired
us to transport him and his Men to his own Island. He showed it to us in our
Draft, and told us the Name of it; which we put down in our Draft, for it was
not named there; but I quite forgot to put it into my Journal.

This Man told us, that not above six days before this, he saw Captain Swan,
and several of his Men that we left there, and named the Names of some of them,
who, he said, were all well, and that now they were at the City of Mindanao;
but that they had all of them been out with Raja Laut, fighting under him in
his Wars against his Enemies the Alfoores; and that most of them fought with
undaunted Courage; for which they were highly honored and esteemed, as well by
the Sultan, as by the General Raja Laut; that now Capt. Swan intended to go
with his Men to Fort St. George, and that in order thereto, he had proffered
forty Ounces of Gold for a Ship; but the Owner and he were not yet agreed; and
that he feared that the Sultan would not let him go away till the Wars were
ended.

All this the Prince told us in the Malayan Tongue, which many of us had
learnt; and when he went away he promised to return to us again in 3 days time,
and so long Captain Read promised to stay for him (for we had now almost
finished our Business) and he seemed very glad of the opportunity of going with
us.

After this I endeavored to persuade our Men, to return with the Ship to the
River of Mindanao, and offer their Service again to Captain Swan. I took an
opportunity when they were filling of Water, there being then half the Ships
Company ashore; and I found all these very willing to do it. I desired them to
say nothing, till I had tried the Minds of the other half, which I intended to
do the next day; it being their turn to fill Water then; But one of these Men,
who seemed most forward to invite back Captain Swan, told Captain Read and
Captain Teat of the Project, and they presently dissuaded the Men from any such
Designs. Yet fearing the worst, they made all possible haste to be gone.

I have since been informed, that Captain Swan and his Men stayed there a great
while afterward; and that many of the Men got passage from thence in Dutch
Sloops to Ternate, particularly Mr. Rofy, and Mr. Nelly. There they remained a
great while, and at last got to Batavia (where the Dutch took their Journals
from them) and so to Europe; and that some of Captain Swan's Men died at
Mindanao; of which number Mr. Harthrope, and Mr. Smith, Captain Swan's
Merchants were two. At last Captain Swan and his Surgeon going in a small Canoa
aboard of a Dutch Ship then in the Road, in order to get passage to Europe,
were overset by the Natives at the Mouth of the River; who waited their coming
purposely to do it, but unsuspected by them; where they both were killed in the
Water. This was done by the General's Order, as some think, to get his Gold,
which he did immediately seize on. Others say, it was because the General's
House was burnt a little before, and Captain Swan was suspected to be the
Author of it; and others say, That it was Captain Swan's Threats occasioned his
own Ruin; for he would often say passionately, that he had been abused by the
General, and that he would have satisfaction for it; saying also, that now he
was well acquainted with their Rivers, and knew how to come in at any time;
that he also knew their manner of Fighting, and the Weakness of their Country;
and therefore he would go away, and get a Band of Men to assist him, and
returning thither again, he would spoil and take all that they had, and their
Country too. When the General had been informed of these Discourses, he would
say, What, is Captain Swan made of Iron, and able to resist a whole Kingdom? Or
does he think that we are afraid of him, that he speaks thus? Yet did he never
touch him, till now the Mindanayans killed him. It is very probable there might
be somewhat of Truth in all this; for the Captain was passionate, and the
General greedy of Gold. But whatever was the occasion, so he was killed, as
several have assured me, and his Gold seized on, and all his Things; and his
Journal also from England, as far as Cape Corrientes on the Coast of Mexico.
This Journal was afterward sent away from thence by Mr. Moody (who was there
both a little before and a little after the Murder) and he sent it to England
by Mr. Goddard, Chief Mate of the Defense.

But to our purpose: Seeing I could not persuade them to go to Captain Swan
again, I had a great desire to have had the Prince's Company: But Captain Read
was afraid to let his fickle Crew lie long. That very day that the Prince had
promised to return to us, which was November 2. 1687. we sailed hence,
directing our course South-West, and having the Wind at N. W.

This Wind continued till we came in sight of the Island Celebes; then it
veered about to the W. and to the Southward of the West. We came up with the N.
E. end of the Island Celebes the 9th day, and there we found the Current
setting to the Westward so strongly, that we could hardly get on the East Side
of that Island.

The Island Celebes is a very large Island, extended in length from North to
South, about 7 degrees of Lat. and in breadth it is about 3 degrees. It lies
under the Equator, the North-end being in Lat. 1 d. 30 m. North, and the
South-end in Lat. 5 d. 30 m. South, and by common account the North-point in
the Bulk of this Island, lies nearest North and South, but at the North-East
end there runs out a long narrow Point, stretching N. E. about 30 Leagues; and
about 30 Leagues to the Eastward of this long Slipe, is the Island Gilolo, on
the West Side of which are 4 small Islands, close by it, which are very well
stored with Cloves. The two chiefest are Ternate and Tidore; and as the Isle of
Ceylon is reckoned the only place for Cinnamon, and that of Banda for Nutmegs,
so these are thought by some to be the only Clove-Islands in the World; but
this is a great Error, as I have already shown.

At the South-end of the Island C^lebes there is a Sea or Gulf, of about 7 or
8 Leagues wide, and 40 or 50 long, which runs up the Country almost directly to
the North; and this Gulf has several small Islands along the middle of it. On
the West Side of the Island, almost at the South-end of it, the Town of
Macasser is seated. A Town of great Strength and Trade, belonging to the Dutch.

There are great Inlets and Lakes on the East Side of the Island; as also
abundance of small Islands, and Sholes lying scattered about it. We saw a high
peeked Hill at the N. end: but the Land on the East Side is low all along; for
we cruized almost the length of it. The Mold on this side is black and deep,
and extraordinary fat and rich, and full of Trees: And there are many Brooks of
Water run out into the Sea. Indeed all this East Side of the Island seems to be
but one large Grove of extraordinary great high Trees.

Having with much ado got on this East Side, coasting along to the Southward,
and yet having but little Wind, and even that little against us, at S. S. W.
and sometimes Calm, we were a long time going about the Island.

The 22d day we were in Lat. 1 d. 20 m. South, and being about 3 Leagues from
the Island standing to the Southward, with a very gentle Land-Wind, about 2 or
3 a Clock in the Morning, we heard a clashing in the Water, like Boats rowing:
and fearing some sudden Attack, we got up all our Arms, and stood ready to
defend our selves. As soon as it was day, we saw a great Proe, built like the
Mindanayan Proes, with about 60 Men in her: and 6 smaller Proes. They lay still
about a Mile to windward of us, to view us; and probably designed to make a
Prey of us when they first came out; but they were now afraid to venture on us.

At last we showed them Dutch Colors, thinking thereby to allure them to come
to us: for we could not go to them; but they presently rowed in toward the
Island, and went into a large Opening; and we saw them no more; nor did we ever
see any other Boats or Men, but only one fishing Canoa, while we were about
this Island; neither did we see any House on all the Coast.

About 5 or 6 Leagues to the South of this place, there is a great Range of
both large and small Islands; and many Shoals also that are not laid down in
our Drafts; which made it extremely troublesome for us to get through. But we
past between them all and the Island Celebes, and anchored against a sandy Bay
in 8 Fathom sandy Ground, about half a Mile from the main Island; being then in
Lat. 1 d. 50 m. South.

Here we stayed several Days, and sent out our Canoas a striking of Turtle
every Day; for here is great plenty of them; but they were very shy, as they
were generally wherever we found them in the East India Seas. I know not the
reason of it, unless the Natives go very much a striking here: for even in the
West Indies they are shy in places that are much disturbed: And yet on
New-Holland we found them shy, as I shall relate; though the Natives there do not
molest them.

On the Sholes without us we went and gathered Shellfish at low Water. There
were a monstrous sort of Cockles; the Meat of one of them would suffice 7 or 8
Men. It was very good wholesome Meat. We did also beat about in the Woods on the
Island, but found no Game. One of our Men who was always troubled with sore
Legs, found a certain Vine that supported it self by clinging about other
Trees. The Leaves reach 6 or 7 Foot high, but the Strings or Branches 11 or 12.
It had a very green Leaf, pretty broad and roundish, and of a thick Substance.
These Leaves pounded small and boiled with Hogs Lard, make an excellent Salve.
Our Men, knowing the Virtues of it, stockt themselves here: there was scarce a
Man in the Ship but got a Pound or two of it; especially such as were troubled
with old Ulcers, who found great benefit by it. This Man that discovered these
leaves here had his first knowledge of them in the Isthmus of Darien, he having
had his Receipt from one of the Indians there: and he had been ashore in diverse
places since, purposely to seek these Leaves, but did never find any but here.
Among the many vast Trees hereabouts, there was one exceeded all the rest. This
Captain Read caused to be cut down, in order to make a Canoa, having lost our
Boats, all but one small one, in the late Storms; so 6 lusty Men, who had been
Logwood-cutters in the Bays of Campeachy and Honduras (as Captain Read himself,
and many more of us had) and so were very expert at this work, undertook to
fell it^ taking their turn, 3 always cutting together; and they were one whole
Day, and half the next before they got it down. This Tree, though it grew in a
Wood, was yet 18 Foot in circumference, and 44 Foot of clean Body, without Knot
or Branch: and even there it had no more than one or two Branches, and then ran
clean again 10 Foot higher; there it spread it self into many great Limbs and
Branches, like an Oak, very green and flourishing: yet it was perished at the
Heart, which marred it for the Service intended.

So leaving it, and having no more Business here, we weighed, and went from
hence the next Day, it being the 29th Day of November. While we lay here we had
some Tornadoes, one or two every Day, and pretty fresh Land-winds which were at
West. The Sea-breezes were small and uncertain, sometimes out of the N. E. and
so veering about to the East and South-East. We had the Wind at North East when
we weighed, and we steered off S. S. W. In the Afternoon we saw a Shole ahead
of us, and altered our Course to the S. S. E. In the Evening, at 4 a Clock, we
were close by another great Shole; therefore we tackt, and stood in for the
Island Celebes again, for fear of running on some of the Sholes in the Night.
By Day a Man might avoid them well enough, for they had all Beacons on them,
like Huts built on tall Posts, above High Water Mark, probably set up by the
Natives of the Island Celebes, or those of some other neighboring Islands; and
I never saw any such elsewhere. In the Night we had a violent Tornado out of
the S. W. which lasted about an Hour.

The 30th day we had a fresh Land Wind, and steered away South, passing between
the 2 Shoals, which we saw the Day before. These Shoals lie in Lat. 3 d. South,
and about 10 Leagues from the Island Celebes. Being past them, the Wind died
away; and we lay becalmed till the Afternoon: Then we had a hard Tornado out of
the South West, and toward the Evening, we saw two or three Spouts, the first
I had seen since I came into the East Indies; in the West Indies I had often
met with them. A Spout is a small Ragged piece or part of a Cloud hanging down
about a Yard; seemingly from the blackest part thereof. Commonly it hangs down
sloping from thence; or sometimes appearing with a small bending, or elbow in
the middle. I never saw any hang perpendicularly down. It is small at the lower
end, seeming no bigger than ones Arm, but it is fuller toward the Cloud, from
whence it proceeds.

When the surface of the Sea begins to work; you shall see the Water, for about
100 paces in circumference, foam and move gently round till the whirling motion
increases: and then it flies upward in a Pillar, about 100 Paces in compass at
the bottom, but lessening gradually upwards to the smallness of the Spout it
self, there where it reaches the lower end of the Spout, through which the
rising Seawater seems to be conveyed into the Clouds. This visibly appears by
the Clouds increasing in bulk and blackness. Then you shall presently see the
Cloud drive along, although before it seemed to be without any motion: the
Spout also keeping the same course with the Cloud, and still sucking up the
Water as it goes along, and they make a Wind as they go. Thus it continues for
the space of half an Hour, more or less, until the sucking is spent, and then
breaking off, all the Water which was below the Spout, or pendulous piece of
Cloud, falls down again into the Sea, making a great noise with its fall and
clashing motion in the Sea.

It is very dangerous for a Ship to be under a Spout when it breaks, therefore
we always endeavored to shun it, by keeping at a distance, if possibly we can.
But for want of Wind to carry us away, we are often in great fear and danger;
for it is usually calm when Spouts are at work, except only just where they
are. Therefore Men at Sea, when they see a Spout coming, and know not how to
avoid it, do sometimes fire Shot out of their great Guns into it, to give it
air or vent, that so it may break; but I did never hear that it proved to be of
any benefit.

And now being on this Subject, I think it not amiss to give you an account of
an accident that happened to a Ship once on the Coast of Guinea, some time in
or about the Year 1674. One Captain Records of London, bound for the Coast of
Guinea, in a Ship of 300 Tuns, and 16 Guns, called the Blessing; when he came
into the Lat. 7 or 8 degrees North, he saw several Spouts, one of which came
directly toward the Ship, and he having no Wind to get out of the way of the
Spout, made ready to receive it by furling his Sails. It came on very swift,
and broke a little before it reached the Ship; making a great noise, and
raising the Sea round it, as if a great House, or some such thing, had been
cast into the Sea. The fury of the Wind still lasted, and took the Ship on the
Starboardbow with such violence, that it snapt off the Boltsprit and Foremast
both at once, and blew the Ship all along, ready to over-set it, but the Ship
did presently right again, and the Wind whirling round, took the Ship a second
time with the like fury as before, but on the contrary side, and was again like
to over-set her the other way. The Mizen-mast felt the fury of this second
Blast, and was snapt short off, as the Foremast and Boltsprit had been before.
The Mainmast, and Maintop-mast received no damage, for the fury of the Wind,
(which was presently over) did not reach them. Three Men were in the Fore-top
when the Foremast broke, and one on the Boltsprit, and fell with them into the
Sea, but all of them were saved. I had this Relation from Mr. John. Canby, who
was then Quartermaster and Steward of her; one Abraham Wise was Chief Mate,
and Leonard Jefferies Second Mate.

We are usually very much afraid of them: Yet this was the only damage that
ever I heard done by them. They seem terrible enough; the rather because they
come upon you while you lie becalmed, like a Log in the Sea, and cannot get out
of their way: But though I have seen, and been beset by them often, yet the
Fright was always the greatest of the harm.

December the 1st, we had a gentle Gale at E. S. E. we steered South; and at
noon I was by Observation in Lat. 3 d. 34 m. South. Then we saw the Island
Bouton, bearing South West, and about 10 Leagues distant. We had very uncertain
and unconstant Winds: The Tornadoes came out of the S. W. which was against us;
and what other Winds we had were so faint, that they did us little kindness;
but we took the advantage of the smallest Gale, and got a little way every day.
The 4th day at noon I was by Observation in Lat. 4 d. 30 m. South.

The 5th day we got close by the N. W. end of the Island Bouton, and in the
Evening, it being fair Weather, we hoised out our Canoa, and sent the Moskito
Men, of whom we had 2 or 3; to strike Turtle, for here are plenty of them; but
they being shy, we chose to strike them in the night (which is customary in the
West Indies also) for every time they come up to breathe, which is once in 8 or
10 minutes, they blow so hard, that one may hear them at 30 or 40 yards
distance; by which means the Striker knows where they are, and may more easily
approach them than in the day; for the Turtle sees better than he hears; but,
on the contrary, the Manatee's hearing is quickest.

In the morning they returned with a very large Turtle, which they took near
the Shore; and withal an Indian of the Island cameaboard with them. He spoke
the Malayan Language; by which we did understand him. He told us, that 2
Leagues farther to the Southward of us, there was a good Harbor, in which we
might Anchor: So having a fair Wind, we got thither by noon.

This Harbor is in Lat. 4 d. 54 m. South; lying on the East Side of the Island
Bouton. Which Island lies near the S. E. end of the Island Celebcs, distant
from it about 3 or 4 leagues. It is of a long form, stretching S. W. and N. E.
about 25 Leagues long, and 10 broad. It is pretty high Land, and appears pretty
even, and flat, and very woody.

There is a large Town within a League of the anchoring place, called
Callasusung, being the chief, if there were more; which we knew not. It is
about a Mile from the Sea, on the top of a small Hill, in a very fair Plain,
encompassed with Coconut Trees. Without the Trees there is a strong Stone Wall,
clear round the Town. The Houses are built like the Houses at Mindanao; but
more neat: And the whole Town was very clean and delightsome.

The Inhabitants are small, and well shaped. They are much like the Mindanaians
in shape, color, and habit; but more neat and tight. They speak the Malayan
Language, and are all Mahometans. They are very obedient to the Sultan, who is
a little Man, about 40 or 50 years old, and has a great many Wives and
Children.

About an hour after we came to an Anchor, the Sultan sent a Messenger aboard,
to know what we were, and what our Business. We gave him an account, and he
returned ashore, and in a short time after he came aboard again, and told us,
That the Sultan was very well pleased when he heard that we were English; and
said, That we should have any thing that the Island afforded; and that he
himself would come aboard in the morning. Therefore the Ship was made clean,
and every thing put in the best order to receive him.

The 6th day in the morning betimes a great many Boats and Canoas came aboard,
with Fowls, Eggs, Plantains, Potatoes, etc. but they would dispose of none till
they had order for it from the Sultan, at his coming. About 10 a clock the
Sultan came aboard in a very neat Proe, built after the Mindanao Fashion. There
was a large white Silk Flag at the head of the Mast, edged round with a deep
red for about 2 or 3 Inches broad, and in the middle there was neatly drawn a
Green Griffon, trampling on a winged Serpent, that seemed to struggle to get
up, and threatened his Adversary with open Mouth, and with a long Sting that was
ready to be darted into his Legs. Other East-Indian Princes have their Devices
also.

The Sultan with 3 or 4 of his Nobles, and 3 of his Sons, sat in the House of
the Proe. His Guards were 10 Musketeers, 5 standing on one side of the Proe,
and 5 on the other side, and before the door of the Proe-house stood one with a
great broad Sword and a Target, and 2 more such at the after part of the House;
and in the Head and Stern of the Proe stood 4 Musketeers more, 2 at each end.

The Sultan had a Silk Turbat, laced with narrow Gold Lace by the sides, and
broad Lace at the end: which hung down on one side the Head, after the
Mindanayan Fashion. He had a Sky colored Silk pair of Breeches, and a piece of
red Silk thrown cross his Shouldiers, and hanging loofe about him; the greatest
part of his Back and Waist appearing naked. He had neither Stocking nor Shoe.
One of his Sons was about 15 or 16 year old, the other two were young things;
and they were always in the arms of one or other of his Attendants.

Captain Read met him at the side, and led him into his small Cabin, and fired
five Guns for his welcome. As Soon as he came aboard he gave leave to his
Subjects to traffic with us; and then our People bought what they had a mind
to. The Sultan seemed very well pleased to be visited by the English; and said
he had coveted to have a sight of Englishmen, having heard extraordinary
Characters of their just and honorable Dealing: But he exclaimed against the
Dutch (as all the Mindanayans, and all the Indians we met with do) and wished
them at a greater distance.

For Macasser is not very far from henee, one of the chiefest Towns that the
Dutch have in those parts. From thence the Dutch comes sometimes hither to
purchase Slaves. The Slaves that these People get here and sell to the Dutch,
are some of the idolatrous Natives of the Island, who not being under the
Sultan, and having no Head, live straggling in the Country, flying from one
place to another to preserve themselves from the Prince and his Subjects, who
hunt after them to make them Slaves. For the Civilized Indians of the Maritime
Places, who Trade with Foreigners, if they cannot reduce the inland People to
the Obedience of their Prince, they catch all they can of them and sell them
for Slaves; accounting them to be but as Savages, just as the Spaniards do the
poor Americans.

After two or three Hours discourse, the Sultan went ashore again, and 5 Guns
were fired at his departure also. The next day he sent for Captain Read to come
ashore, and he with 7 or 8 Men, went to wait on the Sultan. I could not slip an
opportunity of seeing the Place; and so accompanied them. We were met at the
landing place by two of the chief Men, and guided to a pretty neat House, where
the Sultan waited our coming. The House stood at the farther end of all the
Town beforementioned, which we past through; and abundance of People were
gazing on us as we past by. When we came near the House, there were 40 poor
naked Soldiers with Muskets made a Lane for us to pass through. This House was
not built on Posts, as the rest were, after the Mindanayan way; but the Room in
which we were entertained was on the Ground, covered with Mats to sit on. Our
Entertainment was Tobacco and Betelnut, and young Coco-nuts; and the House was
beset with Men, and Women and Children, who thronged to get near the Windows to
look on us.

We did not tarry above an hour before we took our leaves and departed. This
Town stands in a sandy Soil; but what the rest of the Island is I know not, for
none of us were ashore but at this Place.

The next day the Sultan came aboard again, and presented Capt. Read with a
little Boy, but he was too small to be serviceable on board; and so Captain
Read returned Thanks, and told him he was to little for him. Then the Sultan
sent for a bigger Boy, which the Captain accepted. This Boy was a very pretty
tractable Boy; but what was wonderful in him, he had two Rows of Teeth, one
within another on each Jaw. None of the other People were so, nor did I ever
see the like. The Captain was presented also with 2 He-goats, and was promised
some Buffaloe, but I do believe that they have but few of either on the Island.
We did not see any Buffaloe, nor many Goats, neither have they much Rice, but
their chiefest Food is Roots. We bought here about a thousand pound Weight of
Potatoes. Here our Men bought also abundance of Crockadores, and fine large
Parakites, curiously colored, and some of them the finest I ever saw.

The Crockadore is as big as a Parrrot, and shaped much like it, with such a
Bill; but it is as white as Milk, and has a bunch of Feathers on his head like
a Crown. At this place we bought a Proe also of the Mindanaian make, for our
own use, which our Carpenters afterward altered, and made a delicate Boat fit
for any Service. She was sharp at both ends, but we sawed off one, and made
that end flat, fast ening a Rudder to it, and she rowed and sailed incomparably.

We stayed here but till the 12th day, because it was a bad Harbor and foul
Ground, and a bad time of the year too, for the Tornadoes began to come in
thick, and strong. When we went to weigh our Anchor, it was hooked in a Rock,
and we broke our Cable, and could not get our Anchor, though we strove hard for
it; so we went away and left it there. We had the Wind at N. N. E. and we
steered toward the S. E. and fell in with 4 or 5 small Islands, that lie in
5d. 40 m. South Lat. and about 5 or 6 Leagues from Callasusung Harbor. These
Islands appeared very green with Coco-nut Trees, and we saw two or three Towns
on them, and heard a Drum all night; for we were got in among Shoals, end could
no get out again till the next day. We knew not whether the Drum were for for
fear of us, or that they were making merry, as it is usual in these parts to do
all the Night, singing and dancing till Morning.

We found a pretty strong Tide here, the Flood setting to the Southward, and
the Ebb to the Northward. These Sholes, and many other that are not laid down
in our Drafts, lie on the South West side of the Islands where we heard the
Drum, about a League from them. At last we past between the Islands, and tried
for a Passage on the East side. We met with diverse Sholes on this side also,
but found Channels to pass through; so we steered away for the Island Timor,
intending to pass out by it. We had the Winds commonly at W. S. W. and S. W.
hard Gales, and rainy Weather.

The 16th day we got clear of the Shoals, and steered S. by E. with the Wind at
W. S. W. but veering every half hour, sometimes at S. W. and then again at W.
and sometimes at N. N. W. bringing much Rain, with Thunder and Lightning.

The 20th day we passed by the Island Omba, which is a pretty high Island,
lying in Lat. 8 d. 20 m. and not above 5 or 6 Leagues from the N. E. part of
the Island Timor. It is about 13 or 14 Leagues long, and 5 or 6 Leagues wide.

About 7 or 8 Leagues to the West of Omba, is another pretty large Island, but
it had no Name in our Plats; yet by the Situation it should be that, which in
some Maps is called Pentare. We saw on it abundance of Smoaks by day, and Fires
by night, and a large Town on the North-side of it, not far from the Sea; but
it was such bad Weather that we did not go ashore. Between Omba and Pentare,
and in the mid Channel, there is a small low sandy Island, with great Sholes on
either side; but there is a very good Channel close by Pentare, between that
and the Sholes about the small Isle. We were three Days beating off and on, not
having a Wind, for it was at South South West.

The 23d day in the Evening, having a small Gale at North, we got through,
keeping close by Pentare. The Tide of Ebb here set out to the Southward, by
which we were helped through, for we had but little Wind. But this Tide, which
did us a kindness in setting us through, had like to have ruined us afterward;
for there are two small Islands lying at the South-end of the Channel we came
through, and toward these Islands the Tide hurried us so swiftly, that we very
narrowly escaped being driven ashore; for the little Wind we had before at
North dying away, we had not one breath of Wind when we came there, neither was
there any Anchor-Ground. But we got out our Oars and rowed, yet all in vain;
for the Tide set wholly on one of the small Islands, that we were forced with
might and main Strength to bear off the Ship, by thrusting with our Oars
against the Shore, which was a steep Bank, and by this means we presently drove
away clear of Danger; and having a little Wind in the Night at North, we
steered away S. S. W. In the Morning again we had the Wind at W. S. W. and
steered S. and the Wind coming to the W. N. W. we steered S. W. to get clear of
the S. W. end of the Island Timor. The 29th day we saw the N. W. point of Timor
S. E. by E. distant about 8 Leagues.

Timor is a long high mountainous Island stretching N. E. and S. W. It is about
70 Leagues long, and 15 or 16 wide, the middle of the Island is in Lat. about 9
d. South. I have been informed that the Portuguese do trade to this Island; but
I know nothing of its produce besides Coire for making Cables; of which there
is mention Chap. X.

The 27th day we saw two small Islands which lie near the S. W. end of Timor.
They bear from us S. E. We had very hard Gales of Wind, and still with a great
deal of Rain; the Wind at W. and W. S. W.

Being now clear of all the Islands, we stood off South, intending to touch at
New Holland, a part of Terra Australis Incognita, to see what that Country
would afford us. Indeed, as the Winds were, we could not now keep our intended
Course (which was first westerly, and then northerly) without going to New
Holland, unless we had gone back again among the Islands: But this was not a
good time of the Year to be among any Islands to the South of the Equator,
unless in a good Harbor.

The 31st day we were in Lat. 13 d. 20 m. still standing to the Southward, the
Wind bearing commonly very hard at W. we keeping upon it under two Courses, and
our Mizen, and sometimes a Maintop-sail Rift. About 10 a Clock at Night we
tackt and stood to the Northward, for fear of running on a Shoal, which is laid
down in our Drafts in Lat. 13 d. 50 m. or thereabouts: It bearing S. by W. from
the East End of Timor; and so the Island bore from us by our Judgments and
Reckoning. At 3 a Clock we tackt again, and stood S. by W. and S. S. W.

sharp, and stood to the Southward, passing close by it, and sounded again, but
found no Ground.

This Shole is laid down in our Drafts not above 16 or 20 Leagues from New
Holland; but we did run afterward 60 Leagues due South before we fell in with
it; and I am very confident, that no part of New Holland hereabouts lies so far
Northerly by 40 Leagues, as it is laid down in our Drafts. For if New Holland
were laid down true, we must of necessity have been driven near 40 Leagues to
the Westward of our Course; but this is very improbable, that the Current
should set so strong to the Westward, seeing we had such a constant Westerly
Wind. I grant, that when the Monsoon shifts first, the Current does not
presently shift, but runs afterward near a Month; but the Monsoon had been
shifted at least two Months now. But or the Monsoons and other Winds, and of
the Currents, elsewhere, in their proper place. As to these here, I do rather
believe that the Land is not laid down true, than that the Current deceived us;
for it was more probable we should have been deceived before we met with the
Shole, than afterward; for on the Coast of New Holland we found the Tides
keeping their constant Course; the Flood running N. by E. and the Ebb S. by E.

The 4th day of January, 1688. we fell in with the Land of New Holland in the
Lat. of 16 d. 50 m. having, as I said before, made our Course due South from
the Shole that we past by the 31st day of December. We ran in close by it, and
finding no convenient anchoring, because it lies open to the N. W. we ran along
shore to the Eastward, steering N. E. by E. for so the Land lies. We steered
thus about 12 Leagues; and then came to a Point of Land, from whence the Land
trends East and Southerly, for 10 or 12 Leagues; but how afterward I know not.
About 3 Leagues to the Eastward of this Point, there is a pretty deep Bay, with
abundance of Islands in it, and a very good place to anchor in, or to hale
ashore. About a League to the Eastward of that Point we anchored January the
5th, 1688. 2 Mile from the Shore, in 29 Fathom, good hard Sand, and clean Ground.

New Holland is a very large Tract of Land. It is not yet determined whether it
is an Island or a main Continent; but I am certain that it joins neither to
Asia, Africa, nor America. This part of it that we saw is all low even Land,
with sandy Banks against the Sea, only the Points are rocky, and so are some of
the Islands in this Bay.

The Land is of a dry sandy Soil, destitute of Water, except you make Wells;
yet producing diverse sorts of Trees; but the Woods are not thick, nor the Trees
very big. Most of the Trees that we saw are Dragon-trees, as we supposed; and
these too are the largest Trees of any there. They are about the bigness of our
large Apple Trees, and about the same height: and the Rind is blackish, and
somewhat rough. The Leaves are of a dark color; the Gum distills out of the
Knots or Cracks that are in the Bodies of the Trees. We compared it with some
Gum Dragon, or Dragon's Blood, that was aboard, and it was of the some color
and taste. The other sorts of Trees were not known by any of us. There was
pretty long Grass growing under the Trees; but it was very thin. We saw no
Trees that bore Fruit or Berries.

We saw no sort of Animal, nor any Track of Beast, but once; and that seemed to
be the Tread of a Beast as big as a great Mastiff-Dog. Here are a few small
Land-birds, but none bigger than a Blackbird; and but few Sea-fowls. Neither is
the Sea very plentifully stored with Fish, unless you reckon the Manatee and
Turtle as such. Of these Creatures there is plenty; but they are extraordinary
shy; though the Inhabitants cannot trouble them much; having neither Boats nor
Iron.

The Inhabitants of this Country are the miserablest People in the world. The
Hodmadods of Monomatapa, though a nasty People, yet for Wealth are Gentlemen to
these; who have no Houses and skin Garments, Sheep, Poultry, and Fruits of the
Earth, Ostrich Eggs, etc. as the Hodmadods have: And setting aside their Humane
Shape, they differ but little from Brutes. They are tall, strait bodied, and
thin, with small long Limbs. They have great Heads, round Foreheads, and great
Brows. Their Eyelids are always half closed, to keep the Flies out of their
Eyes; they being so troublesome here, that no fanning will keep them from
coming to ones Face; and without the assistance of both Hands to keep them off,
they will creep into ones Nostrils, and Mouth too, if the Lips are not shut
very close: So that from their Infancy being thus annoyed with these Insects,
they do never open their Eyes, as other People: And therefore they cannot see
far, unless they hold up their Heads, as if they were looking at somewhat over
them.

They have great Bottle Noses, pretty full Lips, and wide Mouths. The two
Fore-teeth of their Upper-jaw are wanting in all of them, Men and Women, Old
and Young; whether they draw them out, I know not: Neither have they any
Beards. They are long visaged, and of a very unpleasing Aspect, having no one
graceful Feature in their Faces. Their Hair is black, short and curled, like
that of the Negroes; and not long and lank like the common Indians. The color
of their Skins, both of their Faces and the rest of their Body, is coal black,
like that of the Negroes of Guinea.

They have no sort of Clothes, but a piece of the Rind of a Tree tied like a
Girdle about their Waists, and a handful of long Grass, or 3 or 4 small green
Boughs full of Leaves, thrust under their Girdle, cover their Nakedness,

They have no Houses, but lie in the open Air, without any covering; the Earth
being their Bed, and the Heaven their Canopy. Whether they cohabit one Man to
one Woman, or promiscuously, I know not: but they do live in Companies, 20 or
30 Men, Women, and Children together. Their only Food is a small sort of Fish,
which they get by making Wares of Stone across little Coves or Branches of the
Sea; every Tide bringing in the small Fish, and there leaving them for a Prey
to these People, who constantly attend there to search for them at Low Water.
This small Fry I take to be the top of their Fishery: They have no Instruments
to catch great Fish, should they come; and such seldom stay to be left behind
at Low Water: Nor could we catch any Fish with our Hooks and Lines all the
while we lay there. In other places at Low Water they seek for Cockles,
Muscles, and Periwincles: Of these Shellfish there are fewer still; so that
their chiefest dependence is upon what the Sea leaves in their Wares; which, be
it much or little, they gather up, and march to the places of their abode.
There the old People that are not able to stir abroad by reason of their Age,
and the tender Infants, wait their return; and what Providence has bestowed on
them, they presently broil on the Coals, and eat it in common. Sometimes they
get as many Fish as makes them a plentiful Banquet; and at other times they
scarce get every one a taste: But be it little or much that they get, every one
has his part, as well the young and tender, the old and feeble, who are not
able to go abroad, as the strong and lusty. When they have eaten they lie down
till the next Low Water, and then all that are able march out, be it Night or
Day, rain or shine, it is all one; they must attend the Wares, or else they must
fast: For the Earth affords them no Food at all. There is neither Herb, Root,
Pulse, nor any sor of Grain fort them to eat, that we saw; nor any sort of Bird
or Beast that they can catch, having no Instruments wherewithal to do so.

I did not perceive that they did worship any thing. These poor Creatures have
a sort of Weapon to defend their Ware, or fight with their Enemies, if they
have any that will interfere with their poor Fishery. They did at first
endeavor with their Weapons to frighten us; who lying ashore deterred them
from one of their Fishing-places. Some of them had wooden Swords, others had a
sort of Lances. The Sword is a piece of Wood shaped somewhat like a Cutlass.
The Lance is a long strait Pole, sharp at one end, and hardened afterward by
heat. I saw no Iron, nor any other sort of Metal; therefore it is probable they
use Stone-Hatchets, as some Indians in America do, described in Chap. IV.

How they get their Fire I know not; but, probably, as Indians do, out of Wood.
I have seen the Indians of Bon-Airy do it, and have my self tried the
Experiment: They take a flat piece of Wood that is pretty soft, and make a
small dent in one side of it, then they take another hard round Stick, about
the bigness of ones little Finger, and sharpening it at one end like a Pencil,
they put that sharp end in the hole or dent of the flat soft piece, and then
rubbbing or twirling the hard piece between the Palms of their Hands, they
drill the soft piece till it smoaks, and at last takes fire.

These People speak somewhat through the Throat, but we could not understand one
word that they said. We anchored, as I said before, January the 5th, and seeing
Men walking on the Shore, we presently sent a Canoa to get some Acquaintance
with them: for we were in hopes to get some Provision among them. But the
Inhabitants, seeing our Boat coming, run away and hid themselves. We searched
afterward 3 Days in hopes to find their Houses; but found none: yet we saw
many places where they had made Fires. At last, being out of hopes to find
their Habitations, we searched no farther: but left a great many Toys ashore,
in such places where we thought that they would come. In all our search we
found no Water, but old Wells on the sandy Bays.

At last we went over to the Islands, and there we found a great many of the
Natives: I do believe there were 40 on one Island, Men, Women, and Children.
The Men at our first coming ashore, threatened us with their Lances and Swords;
but they were frightened by firing one Gun, which we fired purposely to scare
them. The Island was so small that they could not hide themselves: but they
were much disordered at our Landing, especially the Women and Children: for we
went directly to their Camp. The lustiest of the Women snatching up their
Infants ran away howling, and the little Children run after squeaking and
bawling; but the Men stood still. Some of the Women, and such People as could
not go from us, lay still by a Fire, making a doleful noise, as if we had been
coming to devour them: but when they saw we did not intend to harm them they
were pretty quiet, and the rest that fled from us at our first coming, returned
again. This their place of Dwelling was only a Fire, with a few Boughs before
it, set up on that side the Winds was of.

After we had been here a little while, the Men began to be familiar, and we
clothed some of them, designing to have had some service of them for it: for
we found some Wells of Water here, and intended to carry 2 or 3 Barrels of it
aboard. But it being somewhat troublesome to carry to the Canoas, we thought to
have made these men to have carried it for us, and therefore we gave them some
Clothes; to one an old pair of Breeches, to another a ragged Shirt, to the
third a Jacket that was scarce worth owning; which yet would have been very
acceptable at some places where we had been, and so we thought they might have
been with these People. We put them on them, thinking that this finery would
have brought them to work heartily for us; and our Water being filled in small
long Barrels, about 6 Gallons in each, which were made purposely to carry Water
in, we brought these our new Servants to the Wells, and put a Barrel on each of
their Shoulders for them to carry to the Canoa. But all the signs we could make
were to no purpose, for they stood like Statues, without motion, but grinn'd
like so many Monkies, staring one upon another: For these poor Creatures seem
not accustomed to carry Burdens; and I believe that one of our Ship-boys of 10
years old, would carry as much as one of them. So we were forced to carry our
Water our selves, and they very fairly put the Clothes off again, and laid them
down, as if Clothes were only to work in. I did not perceive that they had any
great liking to them at first, neither did they seem to admire any thing that
we had.

At another time our Canoa being among these Islands seeking for game, espied a
drove of these Men swimming from one Island to another; for they have no Boats,
Canoas, or Bark-logs. They took up Four of them, and brought them aboard; two
of them were middle aged, the other two were young Men about 18 or 20 Years
old. To these we gave boiled Rice, and with it Turtle and Manatee boiled. They
did greedily devour what we gave them, but took no notice of the Ship, or any
thing in it, and when they were set on Land again, they ran away as fast as
they could. At our first coming, before we were acquainted with them, or they
with us, a Company of them who lived on the Main, came just against our Ship,
and standing on a pretty high Bank, threatened us with their Swords and Lances,
by shaking them at us; at last the Captain ordered the Drum to be beaten, which
was done of a sudden with much vigor, purposely to scare the poor Creatures.
They hearing the noise, ran away as fast as they could drive, and when they ran
away in haste, they would cry Gurry, Gurry, speaking deep in the Throat. Those
Inhabitants also that live on the Main, would always run away from us; yet we
took several of them. For, as I have already observed, they had such bad Eyes,
that they could not see us till we came close to them. We did always give them
Victuals, and let them go again, but the Islanders, after our first time of
being among them did not stir for us.

When we had been here about a week, we haled our Ship into a small sandy Cove,
at a Springtide, as far as she would float; and at low Water she was left dry,
and the Sand dry without us near half a mile; for the Sea rises and falls
here about 5 fathom. The Flood runs North by East, and the Ebb South by West.
All the Neep-tides we lay wholly a-ground, for the Sea did not come near us by
about a hundred yards. We had therefore time enough to clean our Ships bottom,
which we did very well. Most of our Men lay ashore in a Tent, where our sails
were mending; and our Strikers brought home Turtle and Manatee every day, which
was our constant Food.

While we lay here, I did endeavor to persuade our Men to go to some English
Factory; but was threatened to be turned ashore, and left here for it. This made
me desist, and patiently wait for some more convenient place and opportunity to
leave them than here: Which I did hope I should accomplish in a short time;
because they did intend, when they went from hence, to bear down toward Cape
Comorin. In their way thither they designed also to visit the Island Cocos,
which lies in Lat. 12 d. 12 m. North, by our Drafts; hoping there to find of
that Fruit; the Island having its Name from thence.

CHAP. XVII.
Leaving New-Holland they pass by the Island Cocos, and touch at another woody
Island near it. A Land Animal like large Crawfish. Coco-Nuts, floating in the
Sea. The Island Triste, bearing Coco's, yet over-flown every Springtide. They
Anchor at a small Island near that of Nassaw. Hog Island, and others. A Proe
taken, belonging to Achin. Nicobar Island, and the rest called by that Name.
Ambergrease, good and bad. The Manners of the Inhabitants of these Islands.
They Anchor at Nicobar Isle. Its Situation, Soil, and pleasant mixture of its
Bays, Trees, etc. The Melory Tree and Fruit, used for Bread. The Natives of
Nicobar Island, their Form, Habit, Language, Habitations; no form of Religion
or Government: Their Food and Canoas. They clean the Ship. The Author projects
and gets leave to stay ashore here, and with him two Englishmen more, the
Portuguese, and 4 Malayans of Achin. Their first Rencounters with the Natives.
Of the common Traditions concerning Cannibals, or Man-Eaters. Their
Entertainment ashore. They buy a Canoa to transport them over to Achin; but
overset her at first going out. Having recruited and improved her, they set out
again for the East side of the Island. They have a War with the Islanders; but
Peace being re-established, they lay in Stores, and make Preparations for their
Voyage.

MArch the 12th, 1688, we sailed from New-Holland, with the Wind at N. N. W.
and fair weather. We directed our Course to the Northward, intending, as I
said, to touch at the Island Cocos: But we met with the Winds at N. W. W. N. W.
and N. N. W. for several days; which obliged us to keep a more easterly course
than was convenient to find that Island. We had soon after our setting out very
bad weather, with much Thunder and Lightning, Rain and high blustering Winds.

It was the 26th day of March before we were in the Lat. of the Island Cocos,
which is in 12 d. 12 m. and then, by Judgment, we were 40 or 50 Leagues to the
East of it; and the Wind was now at S. W. Therefore we did rather choose to bear
away toward some Islands on the West side of Sumatra, than to beat against the
Wind for the Island Cocos. I was very glad of this, being in hopes to make my
escape from them to Sumatra, or some other Place.

We met nothing of remark in this Voyage, beside the catching 2 great Sharks,
till the 28th day. Then we fell in with a small woody Island, in Lat. 10 d. 30
m. Its Longitude from New-Holland, from whence we came, was, by my account, 12
d. 6 m. West. It was deep Water about the Island, and therefore no Anchoring;
but we sent two Canoas ashore; one of them with the Carpenters, to cut a Tree
to make another Pump; the other Canoa went to search for fresh Water, and found
a fine small Brook near the S. W. point of the Island; but there the Sea fell
in on the Shore so high, that they could not get it off. At noon both our
Canoas returned aboard; and the Carpenters brought aboard a good Tree, which
they afterward made a Pump with, such a one as they made at Mindanao. The
other Canoa brought aboard as many Boobies and Men of War Birds, as sufficed
all the Ships Company, when they were boiled. They got also a sort of
Land-Animal, somewhat resembling a large Craw-fish, without its great Claws.
These Creatures lived in holes in the dry sandy Ground, like Rabbits. Sir
Francis Drake in his Voyage round the World makes mention of such that he found
at Ternate, or some other of the Spice Islands, or near them. They were very
good sweet Meat, and so large that two of them were more than a Man could eat;
being almost as thick as ones Leg. Their Shells were of a dark brown, but red
when boiled.

This Island is of a good height, with steep Cliffs against the S. and S. W.
and a sandy Bay on the North-side; but very deep water steep to the shore. The
Mold is blackish, the Soil fat, producing large Trees of diverse sorts.

About one a clock in the Afternoon we made sail from this Island, with the
Wind at S. W. and we steered N. W. Afterward the Winds came about at N. W. and
continued between the W. N. W. and the N. N. W. several days. I observed, that
the Winds blew for the most part out of the West, or N. W. and then we had
always rainy Weather, with Tornadoes, and much Thunder and Lightning; but when
the Wind came any way to the Southward it blew but faint, and brought fair
weather.

We met nothing of remark till the 7th day of April, and then, being in Lat. 7
d. S. we saw the Land of Sumatra at a great distance, bearing North. The 8th
day we saw the East End of the Island Sumatra very plain; we being then in Lat.
6 d. 8. The 10th day, being in Lat. 5 d. 11 m. and about 7 or 8 Leagues from
the Island Sumatra, on the West side of it, we saw abundance of Coco-nuts
swimming in the Sea; and we hoysed out our Boat, and took up some of them; as
also a small Hatch, or Scuttle rather, belonging to some Bark. The Nuts were
very sound, and the Kernel sweet, and in some the Milk or Water in them, was
yet sweet and good.

The 12th day we came to a small Island called Triste, in Lat. (by Observation)
4 d. South; it is about 14 or 15 Leagues to the West of the Island Sumatra.
From hence to the Northward there are a great many small uninhabited Islands,
lying much at the same distance from Sumatra. This Island Triste is not a mile
round, and so low, that the Tide flows clear over it. It is of a sandy Soil,
and full of Coco-nut Trees. The Nuts are but small; yet sweet enough, full, and
more ponderous than I ever felt any of that bigness; notwithstanding that every
Springtide the Salt Water goes clear over the Island.

We sent ashore our Canoas for Coco-nuts, and they returned aboard laden with
them three times. Our Strikers also went out and struck some Fish, which was
boiled for Supper. They also killed 2 young Aligators, which was salted for the
next day.

I had no Opportunity at this place to make my Escape as I would have done, and
gone over hence to Sumatra, could I have kept a Boat to me. But there was no
compassing this; and so the 15th day we went from hence, steering to the
Northward on the West side of Sumatra. Our Food now was Rice, and the Meat of
the Coco-nuts rasped, and steeped in Water; which made a sort of Milk, into
which we did put our Rice, making a pleasant Mess enough. After we parted from
Triste we saw other small Islands, that were also full of Coco-nut Trees.

The 19th day, being in Lat. 3 d. 25 m. S. the S. W. point of the Island Nassaw
bore N. about 5 mile did. This is a pretty large uninhabited Island; in Lat. 3
d. 20 m. S. and is full of high Trees. About a mile from the Island Nassaw
there is a small Island full of Coco-nut Trees. There we anchored the 29th day
to replenish our stock of Coco-Nuts. A Riff of Rocks lies almost round this
Island, so that our Boats could not go ashore, nor come aboard at low Water;
yet we got aboard four Boat-load of Nuts. This Island is low like Triste, and
the anchoring is on the North-side; where you have fourteen Fathom, a Mile from
Shore, clean Sand.

The 21st day we went from hence, and kept to the Northward, coasting still on
the West Side of the Island Sumatra; and having the Winds between the W. and S.
S. W. with unsettled Weather; sometimes Rains and Tornadoes, and sometimes fair
Weather.

The 25th day we crossed the Equator, still coasting to the Northward, between
the Island Sumatra, and a Range of small Islands, lying 14 or 15 Leagues off
it. Amongst all these Islands, Hog-Island is the most considerable. It lies in
Lat. 3 d. 40 m. North. It is pretty high even Land, clothed with tall
flourishing Trees; we past it by the 28th day.

The 29th we saw a Sail to the North of us, which we chased: but it being
little Wind, we did not come up with her till the 30th day. Then, being within
a League of her, Captain Read went into a Canoa and took her, and brought her
aboard. She was a Proe with four Men in her, belonging to Achin, whether she
was bound. She came from one of these Coco-nut Islands that we past by, and was
laden with Coco-nuts, and Coco-nut Oil. Captain Read ordered his Men to take
aboard all the Nuts, and as much of the Oil as he thought convenient, and then
cut a hole in the bottom of the Proe, and turned her loose, keeping the Men
Prisoners.

It was not for the lucre of the Cargo, that Captain Read took this Boat, but
to hinder me and some others from going ashore; for he knew that we were ready
to make our escapes, if an opportunity presented it self; and he thought, that
by his abusing and robbing the Natives, we should be afraid to trust our selves
among them. But yet this proceeding of his turned to our great advantage, as
shall be declared hereafter.

May the 1st, we ran down by the North West end of the Island Sumatra, within 7
or 8 Leagues of the Shore. All this West Side of Sumatra which we thus coasted
along, our Englishmen at Fort St. George, call the West-Coast simply; without
adding the name of Sumatra. The Prisoners who were taken the day before, showed
us the Islands that lie off Achin Harbor, and the Channels through which Ships
go in; and told us also that there was an English Factory at Achin. I wished my
self there, but was forced to wait with patience till my time was come.

We were now directing our Course toward the Nicobar Islands, intending there
to clean the Ship's bottom, in order to make her sail well.

The 4th day in the evening we had sight of one of the Nicobar Islands. The
Southermost of them lies about 40 Leagues N. N. W. from the N. W. end of the
Island Sumatra. This most Southerly of them is Nicobar it self, but all the
cluster of Islands lying South of the Audeman Islands are called by our Seamen
the Nicobar Islands.

The Inhabitants of these Islands have no certain Converse with any Nation; but
as Ships pass by them, they will come aboard in their Proes, and offer their
Commodities to sail, never enquiring of what Nation they are; for all white
People are alike to them. Their chiefest Commodities are Ambergrease and Fruits.

Ambergrease is often found by the Native Indians of these Islands, who know it
very well; as also know how to cheat ignorant Strangers with a certain mixture
like it. Several of our Men bought such of them for a small Purchase. Capt.
Weldon also about this time touched at some of these Islands, to the North of
the Island where we lay; and I saw a great deal of such Ambergrease, that one
of his Men bought there; but it was not good, having no smell at all. Yet I saw
some there very good and fragrant.

At that Island where Captain Weldon was, there were two Friars sent thither to
convert the Indians. One of them came away with Captain Weldon; the other
remained there still. He that came away with Captain Weldon, gave a very good
Character of the Inhabitants of that Island, viz. that they were very honest,
civil, harmless People; That they were not addicted to Quarrelling, Theft, or
Murder; That they did marry, or at least live as Man and Wife, one Man with one
Woman, never changing till Death made the Separation; That they were punctual
and honest in performing their Bargains; And that they were inclined to receive
the Christian Religion. This Relation I had afterward from the Mouth of a
Priest at Tonqueen, who told me that he received this Information by a Letter
from the Friar that Captain Weldon brought away from thence. But to proceed.

The 5th day of May we ran down on the Westside of the Island Nicobar, properly
so called, and anchored at the N. W. end of it, in a small Bay in 8 Fathom
Water, not half a Mile from the Shore The body of this Island is in 7 d. 30 m.
North Lat. it is about 12 Leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad. The South-end of it
is pretty high, with steep Cliffs against the Sea; the rest of the Island is
low, flat, and even. The Mold of it is black, and deep; and it is very well
watered with small running Streams. It produces abundance of tall Trees, fit
for any uses; for the whole Bulk of it seems to be but one entire Grove. But
that which adds most to its Beauty off at Sea, are the many spots of Coco-nut
Trees which grow round it in every small Bay. The Bays are half a Mile, or a
Mile long, more or less; and these Bays are intercepted, or divided from each
other, with as many little rocky Points (...) Woodland.

As the Coco-nut Trees do thus grow in Groves, fronting to the Sea, in the
Bays, so there is another sort of Fruit-Tree in the Bays, bordering on the
backside of the Coco-Trees, farther from the Sea. It is called by the Natives,
a Melory-Tree. This Tree is as big as our large Apple Trees, and as high. It
has a blackish Rind, and a pretty broad Leaf. The Fruit is as big as the
Bread-fruit at Guam, described in Chapter X. or a large Penny Loaf. It is
shaped like a Pear, and has a pretty tough smooth Rind, of a light green
Color. The inside of the Fruit is in substance much like an Apple; but full of
small Strings, as big as a brown Thread. I did never see of these Trees any
where but here.

The Natives of this Island are tall well-limb'd Men, pretty long-visag'd, with
black Eyes; their Noses middle proportioned, and the whole Symmetry of their
Faces agreeing very well. Their Hair is black and lank, and their Skins of a
dark Copper-colour. The Women have no Hair on their Eyebrows. I do believe it
is plucked up by the Roots; for the Men had Hair growing on their Eyebrows, as
other People.

The Men go all naked, save only a long narrow piece of Cloth, or Sash; which
going round their Wastes, and thence down between their Thighs, is brought up
behind, and tuckt in at that part which goes about the Waste. The Women have a
kind of a short Petticoat reaching from their Waste to their Knees.

Their Language was different from any that I had ever heard before; yet they
had some few Malayan Words, and some of them had a Word or two of Portugueze;
which probably they might learn aboard of their Ships, passing by this place:
for when these Men see a Sail, they do presently go aboard of them in their
Canoas. I did not perceive any Form of Religion that they had; they had neither
Temple nor Idol, nor any manner of outward Veneration to any Deity, that I did
see.

They inhabit all round the Island by the Seaside, in the Bays; there being 4
or 5 Houses, more or less, in each Bay. Their Houses are built on Posts, as the
Mindanayans are. They are small, low, and of a square form. There is but one
Room in each House, and this Room is about 8 foot from the Ground; and from
thence the Roof is raised about 8 Foot higher. But instead of a sharp Ridge,
the top is exceeding neatly arched with small Rafters about the bigness of a
Man's Arm, bent round like a Half Moon, and very curiously thatcht with
Palmeto-leaves.

They live under no Government that I could perceive; for they seem to be
equal, without any distinction, every Man ruling in his own House. Their
Plantations are only those Coco-nut Trees which grow by the Seaside; their
being no cleared Land farther in on the Island: for I observed that when past
the Fruit Trees, there were no Paths to be seen going into the Woods. The
greatest use which they make of their Coco-Trees is to draw Toddy from them, of
which they are very fond.

The Melory Trees seem to grow wild; they have great Earthen Pots to boil the
Melory Fruit in, which will hold 12 or 14 Gallons. These Pots they fill with
the Fruit; and putting in a little Water, they cover the Mouth of the Pot with
Leaves, to keep the Steam while it boils. When the Fruit is soft they peel off
the Rind, and scrape the Pulp from the Strings with a flat Stick made like a
Knife; and then make it up in great Lumps as big as a Holland Cheese; and then
it will keep 6 or 7 days. It looks yellow, and tastes well, and is their
chiefest Food: For they have no Yams, Potatoes, Rice, nor Plantains (except a
very few;) yet they have a few small Hogs, and a very few Cocks and Hens, like
ours. The Men employ themselves in Fishing; but I did not see much Fish that
they got: Every House has at least 2 or 3 Canoas belonging to it, which they
draw up ashore.

The Canoas that they go a fishing in are sharp at both ends; and both the
sides and the bottom are very thin and smooth. They are shaped somewhat like
the Proes at Guam, with one side flattish, and the other with a pretty big
Belly; and they have small slight Outlagers on one side. Being thus thin and
light they are better managed with Oars than with Sails: Yet they sail well
enough, and are steered with a Paddle. There commonly go 20 or 30 Men in one of
these Canoas; and seldom fewer than 9 or 10. Their Oars are short, and they do
not paddle, but row with them, as we do. The Benches they sit on when they row
are made of split Bamboes, laid across, and so near together, that they look
like a Deck. The Bamboes lie moveable; so that when any go in to row they take
up a Bambo in the place where they would sit, and lay it by to make room for
their Legs. The Canoas of those of the rest of these Islands were like those of
Nicobar: and probably they were alike in other things; for we saw no difference
at all in the Natives of them, who came hither while we were here.

But to proceed with our Affairs: It was, as I said before, the 5th day of May,
about 10 in the Morning, when we anchored at this Island: Captain Read
immediately ordered his Men to heel the Ship in order to clean her; which was
done this Day and the next. All the Water-Vessels were filled, they intended to
go to Sea at Night: For the Winds being yet at N. N. E. the Captain was in
hopes to get over to Cape Comorin before the Wind shifted; otherwise it would
have been somewhat difficult for him to get thither, because the Westerly
Monsoon was not at hand.

I thought now was my time to make my Escape; by getting leave, if possible, to
stay here; for it seemed not very feasible to do it by stealth; and I had no
reason to despair of getting leave; this being a place where my stay could,
probably, do our Crew no harm, should I design it. Indeed one reason that put
me on the thoughts of staying at this particular place, besides the present
opportunity of leaving Captain Read, which I did always intend to do, as soon I
could, was, that I had here also a prospect of advancing a profitable Trade for
Ambergrease with these People, and of gaining a considerable Fortune to my
self: For in a short time I might have learned their Language, and by
accustoming my self to row with them in the Proes or Canoas, especially by
conforming my self to their Customs and Manners of Living, I should have seen
how they got their Ambergrease, and have known what Quantities they get, and
the time of the Year when most is found. And then afterward I thought it would
be easy for me to have transported my self from thence, either in some Ship
that past this way, whether English, Dutch, or Portugueze; or else to have
gotten one of the young Men of the Island to have gone with me in one of their
Canoas to Achin; and there to have furnished my self with such Commodities as I
found most coveted by them; and therewith, at my return, to have bought their
Ambergrease.

I had, till this time, made no open show of going ashore here: But now, the
Water being filled, and the Ship in a readiness to sail, I desired Captain Read
to set me ashore on this Island. He, supposing that I could not go ashore in a
place less frequented by Ships than this, gave me leave; which probably he
would have refused to have done, if he thought I should have gotten from hence
in any short time; for fear of my giving an account of him to the English or
Dutch. I soon got up my Chest and Bedding, and immediately got some to row me
ashore, for fear le^t his Mind should change again.

The Canoa that brought me ashore, landed me on a small sandy Bay, where there
were two Houses, but no Person in them: For the Inhabitants were removed to
some other House, probably for fear of us; because the Ship was close by: And
yet both Men and Women came aboard the Ship without any sign of fear. When our
Ship's Canoa was going aboard again, they met the Owner of the Houses coming
ashore in his Boat. He made a great many Signs to them to fetch me off again;
but they would not understand him. Then he came to me, and offered his Boat to
carry me off; but I refused it. Then he made Signs for me to go up into the
House; and, according as I did understand him by his Signs, and a few Malayan
Words that he used, he intimated that somewhat would come out of the Woods in
the night, when I was asleep, and kill me, meaning probably some wild Beast.
Then I carried my Chest and Clothes up into the House.

I had not been ashore an hour before Captain Teat and one John Damarel, with 3
or 4 armed Men more, came to fetch me aboard again. They need not have sent an
armed Posse for me; for had they but sent the Cabbin-boy ashore for me, I would
not have denied going aboard. For though I could have hid my self in the Woods,
yet then they would have abused, or have killed some of the Natives, purposely
to incense them against me. I told them therefore, that I was ready to go with
them, and went aboard with all my Things.

When I came aboard I found the Ship in an uproar; for there were 3 Men more,
who taking Courage by my Example, desired leave also to accompany me. One of
them was the Surgeon Mr. Coppinger, the other was Mr. Robert Hall, and one
named Ambrose; I have forgot his Surname. These Men had always harbored the
same Designs as I had. The two last were not much opposed; but Captain Read and
his Crew would not part with the Surgeon. At last the Surgeon leapt into the
Canoa, and taking up my Gun, swore he would go ashore, and that if any Man did
oppose it, he would shoot him: But John Oliver, who was then Quartermaster,
leapt into the Canoa, taking hold of him, took away the Gun, and with the help
of two or three more, they dragged him again into the Ship.

Then Mr. Hall and Ambrose and I were again sent ashore; and one of the Men
that rowed us ashore stole an Ax, and gave it to us, knowing it was a good
Commodity with the Indians. It was now dark, therefore we lighted a Candle, and
I being the oldest stander in our new Country, conducted them into one of the
Houses, where we did presently hang up our Hammocks. We had scarce done this
before the Canoa came ashore again, and brought the 4 Malayan Men belonging to
Achin, (which we took in the Proe we took off of Sumatra) and the Portuguese
that came to our Ship out of the Siam Jonk at Pulo Condore: the Crew having no
occasion for these, being leaving the Malayan Parts, where the Portuguese Spark
served as an Interpreter; and not fearing now that the Achinese could be
serviceable to us in bringing us over to their Country, 40 Leagues off; nor
imagining that we durst make such an attempt; as indeed it was a bold one. Now
we were Men enough to defend our selves against the Natives of this Island, if
they should prove our Enemies: though if none of these Men had come ashore to
me, I should not have feared any danger. Nay, perhaps less, because I should
have been cautious of giving any offense to the Natives: and I am of the
Opinion, that there are no People in the World so barbarous as to kill a single
Person that falls accidently into their Hands, or comes to live among them;
except they have before been injured, by some outrage, or violence committed
against them. Yet even then, or afterward, if a Man could but preserve his
Life from their first rage, and come to treat with them (which is the hardest
thing because their way is usually to abscond, and rushing suddenly upon their
Enemy to kill him at unawares) one might, by some slight, insinuate ones self
into their Favors again. Especially by showing some Toy, or Knack that they
didnever see before: which any European, that has seen the World, might soon
contrive to amuse them withal: as might be done, generally even with a little
Fire struck with a Flint and Steel.

As for the common Opinion of Authropophagi, or Man-eaters, I did never meet
with any such People: All Nations or Families in the World, that I have seen or
heard of, having some sort of Food to live on, either Fruit, Grain, Pulse, or
Roots, which grow naturally, or else planted by them; if not Fish and
Land-Animals besides; (yea, even the People of New-Holland, had Fish amidst all
their Penury) and would scarce kill a Man purposely to eat him. I know not what
barbarous Customs may formerly have been in the World; and to Sacrifice their
Enemies to their Gods, is a thing has been much talked of, with relation to
the Savages of America. I am a Stranger to that also, if it be, or have been
customary in any Nation there; and yet, if they Sacrifice their Enemies it is
not necessary they should Eat them too. After all, I will not be peremptory in
the Negative, but I speak as to the compass of my own Knowledge, and know some
of these Cannibal Stories to be false, and many of them have been disproved
since I first went to the West Indies. At that time how Barbarous were the poor
Florida Indians accounted, whieh now we find to be Civil enough? what strange
Stories have we heard of the Indians, whose Islands were called the Isles of
Cannibals? Yet we find that they do Trade very civilly with the French and
Spaniards; and have done so with us. I do own that they have formerly
endeavored to destroy our Plantations at Barbados, and have since hindered us
from settling the Island Santa Loca, by destroying two or three Colonies
successively of those that were settled there; and even the Island Tabago has
been often annoyed and ravaged by them, when settled by the Dutch, and still
lies wast (though a delicate Fruitful Island) as being too near the Caribbees
on the Continent, who visit it every Year. But this was to preserve their own
right, by endeavoring to keep out any that would settle themselves on those
Islands, where they had planted themselves; yet even these People would not
hurt a single Person, as I have been told by some that have been Prisoners
among them. I could instance also in the Indians of Bocca Toro, and Bocca
Drago, and many other Places where they do live, as the Spaniards call it, Wild
and Salvage; yet there they have been familiar with Privateers, but by Abuses
have withdrawn their Friendship again. As for these Nicobar People, I found
them Affable enough, and therefore I did not fear them; but I did not much care
whether I had gotten any more Company or no.

But however I was very well satisfied, and the rather because we were now Men
enough to row our selves over to the Island Sumatra; and accordingly we
presently consulted how to purchase a Canoa of the Natives.

It was a fine clear Moonlight Night, in which we were left ashore. Therefore
we walked on the sandy Bay to watch when the Ship would weigh and be gone, not
thinking our selves secure in our new-gotten Liberty till then. About 11 or 12
a Clock we saw her under Sail, and then we returned to our Chamber, and so to
sleep. This was the 6th of May.

The next Morning betimes, our Landlord, with 4 or 5 of his Friends, came to
see his new Guests, and was somewhat surprised to see so many of us, for he
knew of no more but my self. Yet he seemed to be very well pleased, and
entertained us with a large Calabash of Toddy, which he brought with him.
Before he went away again, (for wheresoever we came they left their Houses to
us, but whether out of Fear or Superstition I know not) we bought a Canoa of
him for an Ax, and we did presently put our Chests and Clothes in it, designing
to go to the South-end of the Island, and lie there till the Monsoon shifted,
which we expected every day.

When our things were stowed away, we with the Achinese entered with joy into
our new Frigot, and launched off from the Shore. We were no sooner off, but our
Canoa overset, bottom upwards. We preserved our Lives well enough by Swimming,
and dragged also our Chests and Clothes ashore; but all our things were wet. I
had nothing of value but my Journal and some Drafts of Land, of my own taking,
which I much prized, and which I had hitherto carefully preserved. Mr. Hall had
also such another Cargo of Books and Drafts, which were now like to perish. But
we presently opened our Chests and took out our Books, which, with much ado, we
did afterward dry; but some of our Drafts that lay loose in our Chests were
spoiled.

We lay here afterward 3 days, making great Fires to dry our Books. The
Achinese in the mean time fixed our Canoa, with Outlagers on each side; and they
also cut a good Mast for her, and made a substantial Sail with Mats.

The Canoa being now very well sixth, and our Books and Clothes dry, we launched
out the second time, and rowed toward the East Side of the Island, leaving
many Islands to the North of us. The Indians of the Island accompanied us with
8 or 10 Canoas against our desire; for we thought that these Men would make
Provision dearer at that side of the Island we were going to, by giving an
account what rates we gave for it at the place from whence we came, which was
owing to the Ships being there; for the Ships crew were not so thrifty in
bargaining (as they seldom are) as single Persons, or a few Men might be apt to
be, who would keep to one bargain. Therefore to hinder them from going with us,
Mr. Hall scared one Canoas Crew, by firing a shot over them. They all leapt
overboard, and cried out, but seeing us row away, they got into their Canoa
again, and came after us.

The firing of that Gun made all the Inhabitants of the Island to be our
Enemies. For presently after this we put ashore at a Bay where were four
Houses, and a great many Canoas: but they all went away, and came near us no
more for several Days. We had then a great Loaf of Melory which was our
constant Food; and if we had a mind to Coco-nuts, or Toddy, our Malayans of
Achin would climb the Trees, and fetch as many Nuts as we would have, and a
good Pot of Toddy every Morning. Thus we lived till our Melory was almost
spent; being still in hopes that the Natives would come to us, and sell it as
they had formerly done. But they came not to us; nay, they opposed us
wherever we came, and often shaking their Lances at us, made all the show of
hatred that they could invent.

At last, when we saw that they stood in opposition to us, we resolved to use
force to get some of their Food, if we could not get it other ways. With this
Resolution, we went in our Canoa to a small Bay, on the North part of the
Island; because it was smooth water there and good landing; but on the other
side, the Wind being yet on that Quarter, we could not land without jeopardy of
oversetting our Canoa, and wetting our Arms, and then we must have lain at the
mercy of our Enemies, who stood 2 or 300 Men in every Bay, where they saw us
coming, to keep us off.

When we set out, we rowed directly to the North end, and presently were
followed by 7 or 8 of their Canoas. They keeping at a distance, rowed away
faster than we did, and got to the Bay before us; and there, with about 20 more
Canoas, full of Men, they all landed, and stood to hinder us from landing. But
we rowed in, within a hundred yards of them. Then we lay still, and I took my
Gun, and presented at them; at which they all fell down flat on the Ground. But
I turned my self about, and to show that we did not intend to harm them, I
fired my Gun off to Sea; so that they might see the Shot graze on the Water.
As Soon as my Gun was laden again, we rowed gently in; at which some of them
withdrew. The rest standing up, did still cut and hew the Air, making signs of
their hatred: till I once more frighted them with my Gun, and discharged it as
before. Then more of them sneaked away, leaving only 5 or 6 Men on the Bay.
Then we rowed in again, and Mr. Hall taking his Sword in his Hand, leapt
ashore; and I stood ready with my Gun to fire at the Indians, if they had
injured him: But they did not stir, till he came to them and saluted them.

He shook them by the Hand, and by such signs of Friendship as he made, the
Peace was concluded, ratified and confirmed by all that were present: And
others that were gone, were again called back, and they all very joyfully
accepted of a Peace. This became universal over all the Island, to the great
joy of the Inhabitants. There was no ringing of Bells nor Bonfires made, for
that is not the Custom here; but Gladness appeared in their Countenances, for
now they could go out and fish again, without fear of being taken. This Peace
was not more welcome to them than to us; for now the Inhabitants brought their
Melory again to us; which we bought for old Rags, and small stripes of Cloth,
about as broad as the Palm of ones Hand. I did not see abve 5 or 6 Hens, for
they have but few on the Island. At some places we saw some small Hogs, which
we could have bought of them reasonably; but we would not offend our Achinese
Friends, who were Mahometans.

We stayed here two or three days, and then rowed toward the South-end of the
Island, keeping on the East Side, and we were kindly received by the Natives
wherever we came. When we arrived at the South-end of the Island, we fitted
our selves with Melory, and Water. We bought 3 or 4 Loaves of Melory, and about
12 large Coco-nut shells, that had all the Kernel taken out, yet were preserved
whole, except only a small hole at one end; and all these held for us about 3
gallons and a half of Water. We bought also 2 or 3 Bamboes, that held about 4
or 5 Gallons more: This was our Sea-store.

We now design^d to go to Achin, a Town on the N. W. end of the Island Sumatra,
distant from hence about 40 leagues, bearing South South East. We only waited
for the Western Monsoon, which we had expected a great while, and now it seemed
to be at hand; for the Clouds began to hang their Heads to the Fastward, and at
last moved gently that way; and though the Wind was still at East, yet this was
an infalliable Sign that the Western Monsoon was nigh.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Author, with some others put to Sea in an open Boat, designing for Achin.
Their Accommodations for their Voyage. Change of Weather; a Halo about the Sun,
and a violent Storm. Their great Danger and Distress. Cudda, a Town and Harbor
on the Coast of Malacca. Pulo Way. Golden Mountain on the Isle of Sumatra:
River and Town of Passenge-Jonca, on Sumatra, near Diamondpoint; where they go
ashore very sick, and are kindly entertained by the Oromkay, and Inhabitants.
They go thence to Achin. The Author is examined before the Shabander; and takes
Physic of a Malayan Doctor. His long Illness. He sets out toward Nicobar
again, but returns suddenly to Achin Road. He makes several Voyages thence, to
Tonqueen, to Malacca, to Fort St. George, and to Bencouli, an English Factory
on Sumatra. An Account of the Ship's Crew who set the Author ashore at Nicobar.
Some go to Trangambar, a Danish Fort on Coromandel; others to Fort St. George;
many to the Mogul's Camp. Of the Peuns; and how John Oliver made himself a
Captain. Capt. Read, with the rest, having plundered a rich Portuguese Ship
near Ceylon, goes to Madagascar, and ships himself off thence in a New York
Ship. The Traverses of the rest to Johanna, etc. Their Ship, the Cygnet of
London, now lies sunk in Augustine Bay at Madagascar. Of Prince Jeoly, the
Painted Man, whom the Author brought with him to England, and who died at
Oxford. Of his Country the Isle of Meangis; the Cloves there, etc. The Author
is made Gunner of Bencouli, but is forced to slip away from thence to come for
England.

IT was the 15th day of May 1688. about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, when we
left Nicobar Island, directing our Course toward Achin, being 8 Men of us in
Company, viz. 3 English, 4 Malayans, who were born at Achin, and the mungrel
Portuguese.

Our Vessel, the Nicobar Canoa, was not one of the biggest, nor of the least
size: She was much about the Burden of one of our London Wherries below
Bridge, and built sharp at both ends, like the fore part of a Wherry. She was
deeper than a Wherry, but not so broad, and was so thin and light, that when
empty, 4 Men could launch he^, or hale her ashore on a sandy Bay. We had a good
substantial Mast, and a Mat Sail, and good Outlagers lasht very fast and firm
on each side the Vessel, being made of strong Poles. So that while these
continued firm the Vessel could not overset, which she would easily have done
without them, and with them too, had they not been made very strong; and we
were therefore much beholding to our Achinese Companions for this Contrivance.

These Men were none of them so sensible of the Danger as Mr. Hall and my self,
for they all confided so much in us, that they did not so much as scruple any
thing that we did approve of. Neither was Mr. Hall so well provided as I was,
for before we left the Ship, I had purposely consulted our Draft of the
East Indies, (for we had but one in the Ship) and out of that I had written in
my Pocketbook an account of the bearing and distance of all the Malacca Coast,
and that of Sumatra, Pegu, and Siam, and also brought away with me a
Pocket-Compass for my Direction in any Enterprise that I should undertake.

The Weather at our setting out was very fair, clear and hot. The Wind was
still at S. F. a very small Breeze, just fanning the Air, and the Clouds were
moving gently from West to East, which gave us hopes that the Winds were either
at West already abroad at Sea, or would be so in a very short time. We took
this opportunity of fair Weather, being in hopes to accomplish our Voyage to
Achin, before the Western Monsoon was set in strong, knowing that we should
have very blustering Weather after this fair Weather, especially at the first
coming of the Western Monsoon.

We rowed therefore away to the Southward, supposing that when we were clear
from the Island we should have a true Wind, as we call it; for the Land hales
the Wind; and we often find the Wind at Sea different from what it is near the
Shore. We rowed with 4 Oars, taking our turns: Mr. Hall and I steered also by
turns, for none of the rest were capable of it. We rowed the first Afternoon,
and the Night ensuing, about twelve Leagues by my Judgment. Our Course was
South South East; but the 16th Day in the Morning, when the Sun was an Hour
high, we saw the Island from whence we came, bearing N. W. by N. Therefore I
found we had gone a point more to the East than I intended, for which reason we
steered S. by F.

In the Afternoon at 4 a Clock, we had a gentle Breeze at W. S. W. which
continued so till 9, all which time we laid down our Oars, and steered away S.
S. E. I was then at the Helm, and I found by the ripling of the Sea, that there
was a strong Current against us. It made a great noise that might be heard near
half a Mile. At 9 a Clock it fell calm, and so continued till 10. Then the Wind
sprung up again, and blew a fresh Breeze all Night.

The 17th Day in the Morning we looked out for the Island Sumatra, supposing
that we were now within 20 Leagues of it; for we had rowed and sailed, by our
reckoning, 24 Leagues from Nicobar Island; and the distance from Nicobar to
Achin is about 40 Leagues. But we looked in vain for the Island Sumatra; for
turning our selves about, we saw, to our grief, Nicobar Island, lying W. N. W.
and not above 8 Leagues distant. By this it was visible, that we had met a very
strong Current against us in the Night. But the Wind freshned on us, and we
made the best use of it while the Weather continued fair. At Noon we had an
Observation of the Sun, my lat. was 6 d. 55 m. and Mr. Hall's was 7 d. N.

The 18th Day the Wind freshned on us again, and the Sky began to be clouded.
It was indifferent clear till Noon, and we thought to have had an Observation;
but we were hindered by the Clouds that covered the Face of the Sun, when it
came on the Meridian. This often happens that we are disappointed of making
Observations, by the Sun's being clouded at Noon, though it shines clear both
before and after, especially in places near the Sun; and this obscuring of the
Sun at Noon, is commonly sudden and unexpected, and for about half an hour or
more.

We had then also a very ill Passage, by a great Circle about the Sun (5 or 6
times the Diameter of it) which seldom appears, but storms of Wind, or much
Rain ensue. Such Circles about the Moon are more frequent, but of less import.
We do commonly take great notice of these that are about the Sun, observing if
there be any Breach in the Circle, and in what Quarter the Breach is; for from
thence we commoly find the greatest stress of the Wind will come. I must
confess that I was a little anxious at the sight of this Circle, and wished
heartily that we were near some Land. Yet I showed no sign of it to discourage
my Consorts, but made a Virtue of Necessity, and put a good Countenance on the
Matter.

I told Mr. Hall, that if the Wind became too strong and violent, as I feared
it would, it being even then very strong, we must of necessity steer away
before the Wind and Sea, till better Weather presented; and that as the Winds
were now, we should, instead of about 20 Leagues to Achin, be driven 60 and 70
Leagues to the Coast of Cudda or Queda, a Kingdom, and Town, and Harbor of
Trade on the Coast of Malacca.

The Winds therefore bearing very hard, we rolled up the Foot of our Sail on a
Pole fastened to it, and settled our Yard within three Foot of the Canoa sides,
so that we had now but a small Sail; yet it was still too big, considering the
Wind; for the Wind being on our broad side, pressed her down very much, though
supported by her Outlagers; insomuch that the Poles of the Outlagers going from
the sides of their Vessel, bent as if they would break; and should they have
broken, our overturning and perishing had been inevitable. Besides, the Sea
increasing, would soon have silled the Vessel this way. Yet thus we made a
shift to bear up with the side of the Vessel against the Wind for a while; But
the Wind still increasing, about one a Clock in the Afternoon we put away right
before Wind and Sea, continuing to run thus all the Afternoon, and part of the
Night ensuing. The Wind continued, increasing all the Afternoon, and the Sea
still swelled higher, and often broke, but did us no damage; for the ends of
the Vessel being very narrow, he that steered received and broke the Sea on his
back, and so kept it from coming in so much as to endanger the Vessel: Though
much Water would come in, which we were forced to keep heaving out continually.
And by this time we saw it was well that we had altered our Course, every Wave
would else have filled and sunk us, taking the side of the Vessel: And though
our Outlagers were well lashed down to the Canoas bottom with Rattans, yet they
must probably have yielded to such a Sea as this; when even before they were
plunged under Water, and bent like Twigs.

The Evening of this 18th day was very dismal. The Sky looked very black, being
covered with dark Clouds, the Wind blew hard, and the Seas ran high. The Sea
was already roaring in a white Foam about us; a dark Night coming on, and no
Land in sight to shelter us, and our little Ark in danger to be swallowed by
every Wave; and, what was worst of all, none of us thought our selves prepared
for another World. The Reader may better guess, than I can express, the
Confusion that we were all in. I had been in many eminent Dangers before now,
some of which I have already related, but the worst of them all was but a
Play-game in comparison with this. I must confess that I was in great Conflicts
of Mind at this time. Other Dangers came not upon me with such a leisurely and
dreadful Solemnity. A sudden Skirmish or Engagement, or so, was nothing when
ones Blood was up, and pushed forwards with eager Expectations. But here I had
a lingering view of approaching Death, and little or no hopes of escaping it;
and I must confess that my Courage, which I had hitherto kept up, failed me
here; and I made very sad Reflections on my former Life, and looked back with
Horror and Detestation, on Actions which before I disliked, but now I trembled
at the remembrance of. I had long before this repented me of that roving course
of life, but never with such concern as now. I did also call to mind the many
miraculous Acts of God's Providence toward me in the whole course of my Life,
of which kind I believe few Men have met with the like. For all these I
returned Thanks in a peculiar manner, and this once more desired God's
assistance, and composed my Mind, as well as I could, in the hopes of it, and,
as the Event showed, I was not disappointed of my Hopes.

Submitting our selves therefore to God's good Providence, and taking all the
care we could to preserve our Lives, Mr. Hall and I took turns to steer, and
the rest took turns to heave out the Water; and thus we provided to spend the
most doleful Night I ever was in. About 10 a clock it began to Thunder,
Lighten, and Rain; but the Rain was very welcome to us, having drank up all the
Water we brought from the Island.

The Wind at first blew harder than before, but within half an hour it abated,
and became more moderate; and the Sea also assuaged of its Fury; and then by a
lighted Match, of which we kept a piece burning on purpose, we looked on our
Compass, to see how we steered, and found our Course to be still East. We had
no occasion to look on the Compass before, for we steered right before the
Wind, which if it shifted we had been obliged to have altered our Course
accordingly. But now it being abated, we found our Vessel lively enough with
that small Sail which was then aboard, to hale to our former Course, S. S. E.
which accordingly we did, being now in hopes again to get to the Island Sumatra.

But about 2 a clock in the Morning of the 19th day, we had another Gust of
Wind, with much Thunder, Lightning and Rain, which lasted till Day, and obliged
us to put before the Wind again, steering thus for several Hours. It was very
dark, and the hard Rain soaked us so thoroughly, that we had not one dry Thread
about us. The Rain chilled us extremely; for any fresh Water is much colder
than that of the Sea. For even in the coldest Climates the Sea is warm, and in
the hottest Climates the Rain is cold and unwholsesome for Man's Body. In this
wet starveling plight we spent the tedious Night. Never did poor Mariners on a
Lee-shore more earnestly long for the dawning Light than we did now. At length
the Day appeared; but with such dark black Clouds near the Horizon, that the
sirst glimpse of the Dawn appeared 30 or 40 degrees high; which was dreadful
enough; for it is a common Saying among Seamen, and true, as I have
experienced, that a high Dawn will have high Winds, and a low Dawn small Winds.

We continued our Course still East, before Wind and Sea, till about 8 a Clock
in the morning of this 19th day; and then one of our Malayan Friends cried out,
Pulo Way. Mr. Hall, and Ambrose and I, thought the Fellow had said Pull away,
an Expression usual among English Seamen, when they are Rowing. And we wondered
what he meant by it, till we saw him point to his Consorts; and then we looking
that way, saw Land appearing, like an Island, and all our Malayans said it was
an Island at the N. W. end of Sumatra, called Way for Pulo Way, is the Island
Way. We, who were; dropping with Wet, Cold and Hungry, were all over joyed at
the sight of the Land, and presently marked its bearing. It bore South, and the
Wind was still at West, a strong gale; but the Sea did not run so high as in
the Night. Therefore we trimmed our small Sail no bigger than a Apron, and
steered with it. Now our Outlagers did us a great kindness again, for although
we had but a small Sail, yet the Wind was strong, and pressed down our Vessel's
side very much: But being supported by the Outlagers, we could brook it well
enough, which otherwise we could not have done.

About Noon we saw more Land beneath the supposed Pulo Way; and steering
toward it, before Night we saw all the Coast of Sumatra, and found the Errors
of our Achinesc; for the high Land that we first saw, which then appeared like
an Island, was not Pulo Way, but a great high Mountain on the Island Sumatra,
called by the English, the Golden Mountain. Our Wind continued till about 7 a
Clock at night; then it abated, and at 10 a Clock it died away: And then we
stuck to our Oars again, tho all of us quite tired with our former Fatigues and
Hardships.

The next Morning, being the 20th day, we saw all the low Land plain, and
judged our selves not above 8 Leagues off. About 8 Clock in the Morning we had
the Wind again at West, a fresh gale, and steering in still for the Shore, a 5
a Clock in the Afternoon we run to the Mouth of a River on the Island Sumatra,
called Passange Jonca. It is 34 Leagues to the Eastward of Achin, and 6 Leagues
to the West of Diamond Point, which makes with three Angles of a Rhombus, and
is low Land.

Our Malayans were very well acquainted here, and carried us to a small Fishing
Village, within a Mile of the River's Mouth, called also by the name of the
River, Passange Jonca. The Hardships of this Voyage, with the scorching heat of
the Sun, at our first setting out, and the cold Rain, and our continuing Wet
for the last two days, cast us all into Fevers, so that now we are not able to
help each other, nor so much as to get our Canoa up to the Village; but our
Malayans got some of the Townsmen to bring her up.

The News of our Arrival being noised abroad, one of the Oramkai's, or Noblemen
of the Island, came in the Night to see us. We were then lying in a small Hut,
at the end of the Town, and it being late, this Lord only viewed us, and having
spoken with our Malayans, went away again; but he returned to us again the next
day, and provided a large House for us to live in, till we should be recovered
of our Sickness; ordering the Towns-People to let us want for nothing. The
Achinese Malayans that came with us, told them all the Circumstances of our
Voyage; how they were taken by our Ship, and where, and how we that came with
them were Prisoners aboard the Ship, and had been set ashore together at
Nccobar, as they were. It was for this Reason probably, that the Gentlemen of
Sumatra were thus extraordinary kind to us, to provide every thing that we had
need of; nay, they would force us to accept of Presents from them, that we knew
not what to do with; as young Buffaloes, Goats, etc. for these we would turn
loose at Night, after the Gentlemen that gave them to us were gone, for we were
prompted by our Achinese Consorts to accept of them, for fear of disobliging by
our Refusal. But the Coco-Nuts, Plaintains, Fowls, Eggs, Fish, and Rice, we
kept for our use. The Malayans that accompanied us from Nicobar, separated
themselves from us now, living at one end of the House by themselves, for they
were Mahometans, as all those of the Kingdom of Achin are; and though during
our Passage by Sea together, we made them be contented to drink their Water out
of the same Cocoshell with us; yet being now no longer under that Necessity,
they again took up their accustomed Nicety and Reservedness. They all lay sick,
and as their sickness increased, one of them threatened us, that if any of them
died, the rest would kill us, for having brought them this Voyage; yet I
question whether they would have attempted, or the Country People have suffered
it. We made a shift to dress our own Food, for none of these People, though
they were very kind in giving us any thing that we wanted, would yet come near
us, to assist us in dressing our Victuals: Nay, they would not touch any thing
that we used. We had all Fevers, and therefore took turns to dress Victuals,
according as we had strength to do it, or Stomachs to eat it. I found my Fever
to increase, and my Head so distempered, that I could scarce stand, therefore I
whetted and sharpened my Penkife, in order to let my self Blood; but I could
not, for my Knife was too blunt.

We stayed here ten or twelve days, in hopes to recover our Health, but finding
no amendment, we desired to go to Achin. But we were delayed by the Natives,
who had a desire to have kept Mr Hall and my self, to Sail in their Vessels to
Malacca, Cudda; or to other places whither they Trade. But finding us more
desirous to to be with our Countrymen, in our Factory at Achin, they provided
a large Proe to carry us thither, we not being able to manage our own Canoa.
Besides, before this, three of our Malayan Comrades were gone very sick into
the Country, and only one of them and the Portuguese remained with us,
accompanying us to Achin, and they both as sick as we.

It was the beginning of June, 1688. when we left Passange Jonca. We had 4 men
to row, one to steer, and a Gentleman of the Country, that went puprosely to
give an Information to the Government of our Arrival. We were but three days
and nights in our Passage, having Sea-breezes by day, and Land-winds by night,
and very fair Weather.

When we arrived at Achin, I was carried before the Shabander, the chief
Magistrate in the City. One Mr Dennis Driscall, and Irishman, and a Resident
there, in the Factory which our East India Company had there then, was
Interpreter. I being weak, was suffered to stand in the Shabander's Presence:
For it is their custom to make men sit on the Floor, as they do, cross legged
like Tailors: But I had not strength then to pluck up my Heels in that manner.
The Shabander asked of me several Questions, especially how we durst adventure
to come in a Canoa from the Nicobar Islands to Sumatra. I told him, that I had
been accustomed to hardships and hazards, therefore I did with much freedom
undertake it. He enquired also concerning our Ship, whence she came, etc. I
told him, from the South Seas; that she had ranged about the Philippine
Islands, etc. and was now gone toward Arabia, and the Red Sea. The Malayans
also and Portuguese were afterward examined, and confimed what I declared, and
in less than half an Hour, I was dismissed with Mr Priscal, who then lived in the
English East India Company's Factory. He provided a Room for us to lie in, and
some Victuals.

Three Days after our arrival here, our Portuguese died of a Fever. What became
of our Malayans I know not. Ambrose lived not long after. Mr Hall also was so
weak, that I did not think he would recover. I was the best; yet still very
sick of a Fever, and little likely to live. Therefore Mr Driscal, and some
other Englishmen, persuaded me to take some Purging Physic of a Malayan
Doctor. I took their advice, being willing to get Ease: But after three Doses
each a large Calabash of nasty stuff, finding no amendment, I thought to desist
from more Physic: but was persuaded to take one Dose more; which I did, and it
wrought so violently, that I thought it would have ended my days. I struggled
till I had been about 20 or 30 times at Stool: But it working so quick with me,
with little Intermission, and my Strength being almost spent, I even threw my
self down once for all, and had above 60 Stools in all before it left off
working. I thought my Malayan Doctor, whom they so much commended, would have
killed me outright. I continued extraordinary Weak for some days after his
Drenching me thus: But my Fever left me for above a week: After which, it
returned upon me again for a Twelve Month, and a Flux with it.

However, when I was a little recovered from the Effects of my Drench, I made a
shift to go abroad: And having been kindly invited to Capt. Bowrey's House
there, my first visit was to him; who had a Ship in the Road, but lived ashore.
This Gentleman was extraordinary kind to us all, particularly to me, and
importuned me to go his Boatsawain to Persia; whither he was bound, with a
design to sell his Ship there; as I was told, though not by himself. From
thence he intended to pass with the Caravan to Aleppo, and so home for England.
His Business required him to stay some time longer at Achin; I judge, to sell
some Commodities, that he had not yet disposed of. Yet he chose rather to leave
the disposal of them to some Merchant there, and make a short trip to the
Nicobar Islands in the mean time, and on his return to take in his Effects, and
so proceed toward Persia. This was a sudden Resolution of Captain Bowry's,
presently after the arrival of a small Frigot from Siam, with an Ambassador
from the King of Siam, to the Queen of Achin. The Ambassador was a Frenchman
by Nation. The Vessel that he came in was but small, yet very well manned, and
fitted for a Fight. Therefore it was generally supposed here, that Captain
Bowry was afraid to lie in Achin Road, because the Siamers were now at Wars
with the English, and he was not able to defend his Ship, if should be attacked
by them.

But whatever made him think of going to the Nicobar Islands, he provided to
Sail; and took me, Mr Hall, and Ambrose with him; though all of us so sick and
weak, that we could do him no service. It was some time about the beginning of
June when we sailed out of Achin Road: But we met with the Winds at N. W. with
turbulent Weather, which forced us back again in two days time. Yet he gave us
each 12 Mess apiece, a Gold Coin, each of which is about the Value of 15 d.
English. So he gave over that Design: And some English Ships coming into Achin
Road, he was not afraid of the Siamers who lay there.

After this, he again invited me to his House at Achin, and treated me always
with Wine and good Cheer, and still importuned me to go with him to Persia: But
I being very weak, and fearing the Westerly Winds would create a great deal of
trouble, did not give him a positive Answer; especially because I thought I
might get a better Voyage in the English Ships newly arrived, or some others
now expected here. It was this Captain Bowry who sent the Letter from Borneo,
directed to the Chief of the English Factory at Mindanto, of which mention is
made in Chapter XIII.

A short time after this, Captain Welden arrived here from Fort St George, in a
Ship called the Curtana, bound to Tonqueen. This being a more agreeable Voyage
than to Persia, at this time of the year, besides, that the Ship was better
accommodated, especially with a Surgeon, and I being still sick; I therefore
chose rather to serve Captain Welden than Captain Bowry. But to go on with a
particular account of that Expedition, were to carry my Reader back again: Whom
having brought thus far toward England in my Circum-Navigation of the Globe, I
shall not weary him with new Rambles, nor so much swell this Volume, as I must
to describe the Tour I made in those remote Parts of the East Indies, from and
to Sumatra. So that my Voyage to Tonqueen at this time, as also another to
Malacca afterward, with my observations in them, and the descriptions of those
and the Neighboring Countries; as well as the description of the Island
Sumatra it self, and therein the Kingdom and City of Achin, Bencouli, etc. I
shall refer to another place, where I may give a particular Relation of them In
short, it may suffice, that I set out to Tonqueen with Captain Welden about
July 1688. and returned to Achin in the April following. I staid here till the
latter end of September. 1689. and making a short Voyage to Malacca, came thither
again about Christmas. Soon after that, I went to Fort St George, and staying
thereabout five months, I returned once more to Sumatra; not to Achin, but
Bencouli, an English Factory on the West Coast; of which I was Gunner about
five months more.

Sumatra, without carrying him back, I shall bring him on next way from thence
to England: And of all that occurred between my first setting out from this
Island in 1688, and my final depature from it at the beginning of the Year
1691. I shall only take notice at present of two Passages; which I think I
ought not to omit.

The first is, that at my return from Malacca, a little before Christmas, 1689.
I found at Achin one Mr Morgan, who was one of our Ships Crew that left me
ashore at Nicobar, now Mate of a Danish Ship of Trangambar; which is a Town on
the Coast of Coromandel, near Cape Comorin, belonging to the Danes: And
receiving an account of our Crew from him and others, I thought it might not be
amiss to gratify the Readers Curiosity therewith; who would probably be
desirous to know the success of those Ramblers, in their new intended
Expedition toward the Red Sea: And withal I thought it might not be unlikely
that these Papers might fall into hands of some of our London Merchants, who
were concerned in fitting out that Ship; which I said formerly, was called the
Cygnet of London, sent on a Trading Voyage into the South Seas, under the
Command of Captain Swan: And that they might be willing to have a particular
Information of the fate of their Ship. And by the way, even before this meeting
with Mr Morgan, while I was at Tenqueen, Jan. 1689. I met with an English Ship
in the River of Tenqueen, called the Rainbow of London. Captain Poole
Commander; by whose Mate, Mr Barlow, who was returning in that Ship to England,
I sent a Packet, which he undertook to deliver to the Merchants, Owners of the
Cygnet, some of which he said he knew: Wherein I gave a particular account of
all the Course and Transactions of their Ship, from the time of my first
meeting it in the South Seas, and going aboard it there, to its leaving me
ashore at Nicobar. But I never could hear that either that, or other Letters
which I sent at the same time, were received.

To proceed therefore with Morgan's Relation: He told me, That when they in the
Cygnet went away from Nicobar, in pursuit of their intended-Voyage to Persia,
they directed their Course to wards Ceylon. But not being able to Weather it,
the Westerly Monsoon being hard against them, they were oblidged to seek
Refreshment on the Coast of Coromandel. Here this mad fickle Crew were upon new
projects again. Their Designs meeting with such delays and obstructions, that
many of them grew weary of it, and about half of them went ashore. Of this
number, Mr Morgan, who told me this, and Mr Herman Copinger the Surgeon, went
to the Danes at Trangambar, who kindly received them. There they lived very
well; and Mr Morgan was employed as a Mate in a Ship of theirs at this time to
Achin: and Captain Knox tells me, that he since Commanded the Curtana, the Ship
that I went in to Tonqueen, which Captain Welden having sold to the Mogul's
Subjects, they employed Mr Morgan as Captain to Trade in her for them; and it
is an usual thing for the Trading Indians to hire Europeans to go Officers on
board their Ships; especially Captains and Gunners.

About two or three more of these that were set ashore, went to Fort St George;
but the main body of them were for going into the Mogul's Service. Our Seamen
are apt to have great notions of I know not what Profit and Advantages to be
had in serving the Mogul; nor do they want for fine stories to encourage one
another to it. It was what these men had long been thinking and talking of as a
fine thing; but now they went upon it in good earnest. The Place where they
went ashore was at a Town of the Moors: Which name our Seamen give to all the
Subjects of the great Mogul, but especially his Mohammedan Subjects; calling the
Idolaters, Gentous or Rashbouts. At this Moors Town they got a Peun to be their
Guide to the Mogul's nearest Camp; For he has always several Armies in his
vast Empire.

These Peuns are some of the Gentous or Rashbouts, who in all places along the
Coast, especially in Seaport Towns, make it their business to hire themselves
to wait upon Strangers, be they Merchants, Seamen, or what they will. To
qualify them for such attendance; they learn the European languages, English,
Dutch, French, Portuguese, etc. according as they have any of the Factories of
these Nations in their Neighborhood, or are visited by their Ships. No sooner
does any such Ship come to an Anchor, and the Men come ashore, but a great many
of these Peuns are ready to proffer their service. It Is usual for the Strangers
to hire their Attendance during their stay there, giving them about a Crown a
Month of our Money, more or less. The richest sort of men will ordinarily hire
2 or 3 Peuns to wait upon them; and even the common Seamen, if able, will hire
one a piece to attend them, either for Convenience or Ostentation; or sometimes
one Peun between two of them. These Peuns serve them in many Capacities, as
Interpreters, Brokers, Servants to attend at Meals, and go to Market, and on
Errands, etc. Nor do they give any trouble, eating at their own Homes, and
Lodging there; when they have done their Masters business for them, expecting
nothing but their Wages, except that they have a certain allowance of about a
Fanam, or 3 d. in a Dollar, which is an 18th part profit, by way of Brokerage
for every Bargain they drive; they being generally employed in Buying and
Selling. When the Strangers go away, their Peuns desire them to give them their
Names in Writing, with a Certificate of their honest and diligent serving 'em:
And these they show to the next Comers, to get into Business; some being able
to produce a large Scrowl of such Certificates.

But to proceed the Moors Town, where the (...) men landed, was not far from
Cunnimere, a small English Factory on the Coromondel Coast. The Governor
whereof having intelligence by the Moors of the landing of these men, and their
intended March to the Mogul's Camp, sent out a Captain with his Company to
oppose it. He came up with them, and gave them hard Words: But they being 30 or
40 resolute Fellows, not easily daunted, he durst not attack them, but returned
to the Governor, and the News of it was soon carried to Fort St George. During
their March, John Oliver, who was one of them, privately told the Peun who
guided them, that himself was their Captain. So when they came to the Camp, the
Peun told this to the General: And when their Stations and Pay were assigned
them, John Oliver had a greater respect paid him than the rest; and whereas
their Pay was ten Pagodas a Month each Man, (a Pagoda is two Dollar, or 9 s.
English) his Pay was twenty Pagodas: Which Stratagem and Usurpation of his,
occasioned him no small Envy and Indignation from his Comrades.

Soon after this, 2 or 3 of them went to Agra, to be of the Mogul's Guard. A
while after the Governor of Fort St George sent a message to the main Body of
them, and a Pardon, to withdraw them from thence; which most of them accepted,
and came away. John Oliver, and the small remainder, continued in the Country;
but leaving the Camp, went up and down plundering the Villages, and fleeing
when they were pursued; and this was the last News I heard of them. This
Account I had partly by Mr Morgan, from some of those Deserters he met with at
Trangambar; partly from others of them, whom I met with my self afterward at
Fort St George. And these were the Adventures of those who went up into the
Country.

Captain Read having thus lost the best half of his Men, sailed away with the
rest of them, after having filled his Water, and got Rice, still intending for
the Red Sea. When they were near Ceylon, they met with a Portuguese Ship richly
laden, out of which they took what they pleased, and then turned her away
again. From thence they pursued their Voyage: but the westerly Winds bearing
hard against them, and making it hardly feizable for them to reach the Red Sea,
they stood away for Madagascar. There they entered into the Service of one of
the petty Princes of that Island, to assist him against his Neighbors, with
whom he was at Wars. During this Interval, a small Vessel from New York came
hither to purchase Slaves: Which Trade is driven here, as it is upon the Coast
of Guinea; one Nation or Clan selling others that are their Enemies. Captain
Read, with about 5 or 6 more, stole away from their Crew, and went aboard this
New York Ship; and Captain Teat was made Commander of the Residue. Soon after
which, a Brigantine from the West Indies, Captain Knight Commander, coming
thither with design to go to the Red Sea also, these of the Cygnet consorted
with them, and they went together to the Island Johanna. Thence going together
toward the Red Sea, the Cygnet proving leaky, and Sailing heavily, as being
much out of repair, Captain Knight grew weary of her Company, and giving her
the slip in the Night, went away for Achin; for having heard that there was
plenty of Glod there, he went thither with a design to cruize: And 'twas from
one Mr. Humes, belonging to the Ann of London, Capt. Freke Commander, who had
gone aboard Captain Knight, and whom I saw afterward at Achin, that I had this
Relation. Some of Captain Freke's men, their own Ship being lost, and gone
aboard the Cygnet at Johanna: And after Capt. Knight had left Red Sea: But the
Winds being against them, and the Ship in so ill a condition, they were forced
to bear away for Coromandel, where Capt Teat and his own men went ashore to
serve the Mogul. But the Strangers of Capt Freke's Ship, who kept still aboard
the Cygnet, undertook to carry her for England: and the last News I heard of
the Cygnet was from Captain Knox, who tells me, that she now lies sunk in St.
Augustin's Bay in Madagascar This Digression I have made, to give an account of
our Ship.

The other Passage I shall speak of, that occurred during this interval of the
Tour l made from Achin, is with relation to the Painted Prince, whom I brought
with me into England, and who died at Oxford. For while I was at Fort St
George, about April, 1690, there arrived a Ship called the Mindanao Merchant,
laden with Clove-bark from Mindanao. Three of Capt. Swan's men, that remained
there when we went from thence, came in her: From whom I had the account of
Captain Swan's death, as is before related. There was also one Mr. Moody, who
was Supercargo of the Ship. This Gentleman bought at Mindanao the Painted
Prince Jeoly (mentioned in Chapter XIII.) and his Mother; and brought them to
Fort St George, where they were much admired by all that saw them. Some time
after this, Mr Moody, who spoke the Malayan Language very well, and was a
person very capable to manage the Company's Affairs, was ordered by the
Governor of Fort St George to prepare to go to Indrapore, an English Factory
on the West Coast of Sumatra, in order to succeed Mr Gibbons, who was chief of
that Place.

By this time I was very intimately acquainted with Mr Moody, and was
importuned by him to go with him, and to be Gunner of the Fort there. I always
told him I had a great desire to go to the Bay of Bengal, and that I had now an
offer to go thither with Capt. Metcalf, who wanted a Mate and had already spoke
to me. Mr Moody, to encourage me to go with him, told me, that if I would go
with him to Indrapore, he would buy a small Vessel there, and send me to the
Island Meangis, Commander of her; and that I should carry Prince Jeoly and his
Mother with me (that being their Country) by which means I might gain a
Commerce with his People for Cloves.

This was a design that I liked very well, and therefore I consented to go
thither. It was some time in July 1690. when we went from Fort St George in a
small Ship, called the Diamond, Capt. Howel Commander. We were about 50 or 60
Passengers, in all; some ordered to be left at Indrapore, and some at Bencouli:
Five or six of us were Officers, the rest Soldiers to the Company. We met
nothing in our Voyage that deserves notice, till we came abrest of Indrapore.
And then the wind came at N. W. and blew so hard that we could not get in, but
were forced to bear away to Bencouli, another English Factory on the same
Coast, lying 50 or 60 Leagues to the Southward of Indrapore.

Upon our arrival at Bencouli we saluted the Fort, and were welcomed by them.
The same day we came to an Anchor, and Captain Howel, and Mr Moody with the
other Merchants went ashore, and were all kindly received by the Covernour of
the Fort. It was two days before I went ashore and then I was importuned by the
Governor to stay there, to be Gunner of this Fort; because the Gunner was
lately dead: And this being a place of greater import than Indrapore, I should
do the Company more Service here than there. I told the Governor, if he would
augment my Sallary, which by Agreement with the Governor of Fort St George I
was to have had at Indrapore, I was willing to serve him, provided Mr Moody
would consent to it. As to my Sallary, he told me, I should have 24 Dollars per
month, which was as much as he gave to the old Gunner.

Mr Moody gave no Answer till a Week after, and then, being ready to be gone to
Indrapore, he told me I might use my own Liberty, either to stay here, or go
with him to Indrapore. He added, that if I went with him, he was not certain,
as yet, to perform his promise, in getting a Vessel for me to go to Meangas,
with Jeoly and his Mother: But he would be so fair to me, that because I left
Maderas on his account, he would give me the half share of the two Painted
People, and leave them in my Possession, and at my Disposal. I accepted of the
Offer, and Writings were immediately drawn between us.

Thus it was that I came to have this Painted Prince, whose Name was Jeoly, and
his Mother. They were born on a small Island called Meangis, which is once or
twice mentioned in Chap. XIII. I saw the Island twice, and two more close by
it: Each of the three seemed to be about four or five Leagues round, and of a
good height. Jeoly himself told me, that they all three abounded with Gold,
Cloves, and Nutmegs: For I showed him some of each sort several times, and he
told me in the Malayan Language, which he spoke indifferent well, Meangis Hadda
Madochala se Bullawan: That is, there is abundance of Gold at Meangis.
Bullawan, I have observed to be the common word for Gold at Mindanao; but
whether the proper Malayan word I know not, for I found much difference between
the Malayan Language as it was spoken at Mindanao, and the Language on the
Coast of Malacca and Achin. When I showed him Spice, he would not only tell me,
that there was Madochala, that is, abundance; but to make it appear more plain,
he would also show me the Hair of his Head, a thing frequent among all the
Indians that I have met with, to show their Hair, when they would express more
than they can number. He told me also, that his Father was Raja of the Island
where they lived: That there were not above Thirty Men on the Island, and about
one Hundred Women: That he himself had 5 Wives and eight Children, and that one
of his Wives painted him.

He was painted all down the Brreast, between his Shoulders behind; on his
Thighs (mostly) before; and in the form of several broad Rings, or Bracelets,
round his Arms and Legs. I cannot liken the Drawings to any Figure of Animals,
or the like; but they were very curious, full of great variety of Lines,
Flourishes, Chequered Work, etc. keeping a very graceful Proportion, and
appearing very Artificial, even to wonder, especially that upon and between his
Shoulder-blades. By the Account he gave me of the manner of doing it, I
understood that the Painting was done in the same manner, as the
Jerusalem-cross is made in Men's Arms, by pricking the Skin, and rubbing in a
Pigment. But whereas Powder is used in making the Jerusalem-cross, they at
Meangis use the Gum of a Tree beaten to Powder, called by English Dammer, which
is used instead of Pitch in many Parts of India. He told me, that most of the
Men and Women on the Island were thus painted: And also that they had all Ear
Rings made of Gold, and Gold Shaekles about their Legs and Arms: That their
common Food, of the Produce of the Land, was Potatoes and Yames: That they had
plenty of Cocks and Hens; but no other tame Fowl. He said, that Fish (of which
he was a great Lover, as wild Indians generally are) was very plentiful about
the Island: and that they had Canoas, and went a fishing frequently in them;
and that they often visited the other two small Islands, whose inhabitants
speak the same Language as they did; which was so unlike the Malayan, which he
had learnt while he was a Slave at Mindanao, that when his Mother and he were
talking together in their Meangian Tongue, I could not understand one Word they
said. And indeed all the Indians who speak Malayan, who are the Trading and
politer sort, looked on these Meangians as a kind of Barbarians; and upon any
occasion of dislike, would call them Bobby, that is Hoggs; the greatest
expression of Contempt that can be; especially from the mouth of Malayans, who
are generally Mahometans: and yet the Malayans every where call a Woman Babby,
by a name not much different: and Mamma signifies a Man. Though these two last
words properly denote Male and Female: And as Ejam signifies a Fowl, so Ejam
Mamma is a Cock, and Ejam Babbi is a Hen. But this by the way.

He said also that the Customs of those other Isles, and their manner of
living, was like theirs, and that they were the only People with whom they had
any Converse: And that one time, as he, with his Father, Mother and Brother,
with two or three Men more, were going to one of these other Islands, they were
driven by a strong Wind on the Coast of Mindanao, where they were taken by the
Fishermen of that Island, and carried ashore, and sold as Slaves; they being
first stripped of their Gold Ornaments. I did not see any of the Gold that they
wore, but there were great holes in their Ears, by which it was manifest that
they had worn some Ornaments in them. Jeoly was sold to one Michael a
Mindanayan, that spoke good Spanish, and commonly waited on Raja Laut, serving
him as our Interpreter, where the Raja was at a loss in any word, for Michael
understood it better. He did often beat and abuse his painted Servant, to make
him work, but all in vain; for neither fair means, threats nor blows, would
make him work, as he would have him. Yet he was very timorous, and could not
endure to see any sort of Weapons; and he often told me that they had no Arms
at Meangis, they having no Enemies to fight with.

I knew this Michael very well, while we were at Mindanao: I suppose that Name
was given him by the Spaniards, who baptized many of them at the time when they
had footing at that Island: But at the deparrure of the Spaniards, they were
Mahometans again as before. Some of our People lay at this Michael's house,
whose Wife and Daughter were Pagallies to some of them. I often saw Jeoly at
his Master Michael's House, and when I came to have him so long after, he
remembered me again. I did never see his Father nor Brother, n^ any of the
others that were taken with them; (...) Jeoly came several times aboard our
Ship when we lay at Mindanao, and gladly accepted of such Victuals as we gave
him; for his Master kept him at very short Commons.

Prince Jeoly lived thus a Slave at Mindanao 4 or 5 Years, till at last Mr
Moody bought him and his Mother for 60 Dollars, and, as is before related,
carried him to Fort St George, and from thence along with me to Bencouli. Mr
Moody stayed at Bencouli about three weeks, and then went back with Captain
Howel, to Indrapore, leaving Jeoly and his Mother with me. They lived in a
House by themselves without the Fort. I had no employment for them; but they
both employed themselves. She used to make and mend their own Clothes, at which
she was not very expert, for they wear no Clothes at Meangis, but only a Claoth
about their Wastes: And he busied himself in making a Chest with 4 Boards, and
a few Nails that he begged of me. It was but an ill shaped odd thing, yet he
was as proud of it as if it had been the rarest piece in the World. After some
time they were both taken sick, and though I took as much care of them as if
they had been my Brother and Sister, yet she died. I did what I could to
comfort Jeoly; but he took on extremely, insomuch that I feared him also.
Therefore I caused a Grave to be made presently, to hide her out of his sight.
I had her shrouded decently in a piece of new Callico; but Jeoly was not so
satisfied, for he wrapped all her Clothes about her, and two new pieces of
Chints that Mr Moody gave her, saying that they were his Mothers, and she must
have 'em. I would not disoblige him for fear of endangering his Life; and I
used all possible means to recover his health: but I found little amendment
while we stayed here.

In the little Printed Relation that was made of him when he was shown for a
Sight in England, there was a Romantic Story of a Beautiful Sister of his a
Slave with them at Mindanao; and of the Sultans falling in Love with her; but
these were Stories indeed. They reported also that his Paint was of such
Virtue, that Serpents and Venomous Creatures would flee from him, for which
reason, I suppose, they represented so many Serpents scampering about in the
Printed Picture that was made of him. But I never knew any Paint of such
Virtue: and as for Jeoly, I have seen him as much afraid of Snakes, Scorpions,
or Centapees, as my self.

Having given this account of the Ship that left me at Nicobar, and of my
Painted Prince whom I brought with me to Bencouli, I shall now proceed on with
the Relation of my Voyage thence to England, after I have given this short
Account of the occasion of it, and the manner of my getting away.

To say nothing therefore now of that place, and my Employment there as Gunner
of the Fort, the Year 1690. drew toward an end, and not finding the Governor
keep to his agreement with me, nor seeing by his carriage toward others any
great reason I had to expect he would, I began to wish my self away again. I
saw so much Ignorance in him, with respect to his charge, being much fitter to
be a Book-keeper than Governor of a Fort; and yet so much insolence and
cruelty with respect to those under him, and rashness in his management of the
Malayan Neighborhood, that I soon grew weary of him, not thinking my self very
safe, indeed, under a Man whose humors were so brutish and barbarous. I
forbear to mention his name after such a Character; nor do I care to fill these
Papers with particular stories of him: But therefore give this intimation,
because as it is the interest of the Nation in general, so is it especially of
the Honorable East India Company, to be informed of abuses in their Factories.
And I think the Company might receive great advantage by strictly enquiring
into the behavior of those wh^ they entrust with any Command. For (...), which
reflects back upon the Superiors from the misdoings of their Servants, how
undeservedly soever, the^e are great and lasti^g mischiefs proceed from the
Tyranny or Ignorant rashness of some petty Governors. Those under them are
discouraged from their Service by it^ and often go away to the Dutch, the
Mogul, or Malayan Princes, to the great detriment of our Trade, and even the
Trade and the Ports themselves are many times in danger by indiscreet
provocations given to the Neighboring Nations, who are best managed, as all
Mankind are, by Justice, Malayans, who live in the Neighborhood of Benc^li,
which Fort ha^h been more than once in danger of being surpised by them. I
speak not this out of disgust to this particular Governor; much less would I
seem to reflect on any others, of whom I know nothing amiss: But as it is not
to be wondered at, (...) should not know how to demean themselves in places of
Power, for which neither their Education nor their business possibly have
sufficiently qualified them, so it will be the more necessary for the
Honorable Company to have the closer eye over them, and as much as may be, to
prevent or reform any abuses they may be guilty of; and it is purely out of my
Zeal for theirs and the Nation's interest, that I have given this caution,
having seen too much occasion for it.

I had other Motives also for my going away. I began to long after my Native
Country, after so tedious a ramble from it: and I proposed no small advantage
to my self from my Painted Prince whom Mr Moody had left entirely to my
disposal, only reserving to himself his right to one half share in him. For
beside what might be gained by showing him in England, I was in hopes that when
I had got some Money, I might there obtain what I had in vain sought for in the
Indies, viz. A Ship from the Merchants, wherewith to carry him back to Meangis,
and re-instate him there in his own Country, and by his Favor and Negotiation
to establish a traffic for the Spices and other products of those Islands.

Upon these Projects, I went to the Governor and Council, and desired that I
might have my discharge to go for England with the next Ship that came. The
Council ^hought it reasonable, and they consented to it; he also give me his
word that I should go. Upon the 2d of January, 1691. there came to Anchor in
Bencouli Road, the Defense, Captain Heath Commander, bound for England, in te
service of the Company. They had been at Indrapore, where Mr Moody then was,
and he had made over his share in Prince Jeoly to Mr Goddard chief Mate of the
Ship Upon his coming on shore, he showed me Mr Moody's writings, and looked upon
Jeoly, who had been sick for 3 Months: in all which time I tended him as
carefully as if he had been my Brother. I agreed matters with Mr Goddard, and
sent Jeoly on board, intending to follow him as I could, and desiring Mr
Goddard's assistance to fetch me off, and conceal me aboard the Ship, if there
should be occasion; which he promised to do, and the Captain promised to
entertain me. For it proved, as I had foreseen, that upon Captain Heath's
arrival, the Governor repented him of of his Promise, and would not suffer me
to depart. I importuned him all I could; but in vain: so did Captain Heath
also, but to no purpose. In short, after several essays, I slipped away, at
midnight (understanding the Ship was to sail away the next morning, and that
they had taken leave of the Fort) and creeping through one of the Port-holes of
the Fort, I got to the shore, where the Ships Boat waited for me, and carried
me on board. I brought with me my Journal, and most of my written Papers: but
some Papers and Books of value I left in haste, and all my Furniture; being
glad I was my self at liberty, and had hopes of seeing England again.

CHAP. XX.
The Author's departure from Bencouli, on board the Defense, under Captain
Heath. Of a Fight between some French Men of War from Ponticheri, and some
Dutch Ships from Pallacat, joined with some English, in sight of Fort St
George. Of the bad Water taken in at Bencouli; and the strange sickness and
death of the Seamen, supposed to be occasioned thereby. A Spring at Bencouli
recommended. The great Exigences on board: A Consult held, and a Proposal made
to go to Johanna. A Resolution taken to prosecute their Voyage to the Cape of
Good Hope. The Wind favors them. The Captains Couduct. They arrive at the
Cape, and are helped into Harbor by the Dutch. A Description of the Cape, its
Prospect, Soundings, Table Mount, Harbor, Soil, etc. large Pomgranates and
good Wines. The Land Animals. A very beautiful kind of Onager, or wild Ass
striped regularly bla^k and white. Ostrages. Fish. Seals. The Dutch Fort and
Factory. Their fine Garden. Tbe Traffic here.

BEing thus got on board the Defense, I was concealed there, till a Boat which
came from the Fort, laden with Pepper, was gone off again. And then we set sail
for the Cape of Good Hope, Jan. 25, 1691. and made the best of our way, as Wind
and Weather would permit; expecting there to meet 3 English Ships more, bound
home from the Indies: for the War with the French having been proclaimed at
Fort St George, a little before Captain Heath came from thence, he was willing
to have company home, if he could.

A little before this War was proclaimed, there was an Engagement in the Road
of Fort St George between some French Men of War and some Dutch and English
Ships at anchor in the Road: which, because there is such a plausible Story
made of it in Monsieur Duquesne's late Voyage to the East Indies, I shall give
a short account of, as I had it particularly related to me by the Gunners Mate
of Capt. Heath's Ship, a very sensible Man, and several others of his Men, who
were in the Action. The Dutch have a Fort on the Coast of Coromandel, called
Pallacat, about 20 Leagues to the Northward of Fort St George. Upon some
occasion or other the Dutch sent some Ships thither to fetch away their
effects, and transport them to Batavia Acts of Hostility were already begun
between the French and Dutch; and the French had at this time a Squadron newly
arrived in India, and lying at Ponticheri, a French Fort on the same Coast,
Southward of Fort St George. The Dutch in returning to Batavia, were obliged to
coast it along by Fort St George and Ponticheri, for the sake of the Wind: but
when they came near this last, they saw the French Men of War lying at Anchor
there; and should they have proceeded along the Shore, or stood out to Sea,
expected to be pursued by them. They therefore turned back again; for though
their Ships were of a pretty good force, yet were they unsit for Fight, as
having great Loads of Goods, and many Passengers, Women and Children, on board;
so they put in at Fort St George, and desiring the Governors Protection, had
leave to anchor in the Road, and to send their Goods and useless People ashore.
There were then in the Road a few small English Ships: and Capt. Heath, whose
Ship was a very stout Merchant man, and which the French Relater calls the
English Admiral, was just come from China; but very deep laden with Goods, and
the Deck full of Canisters of Sugar, which he was preparing to send ashore. But
before he could do it, the French appeared; coming into the Road with their
lower Sails and top Sails, and had with them a Fireship. With this they thought
to have burnt the Dutch-Commodore, and might probably enough have done it as
she lay at Anchor, if they had had the courage to have come boldly on; but they
fired their Ship at a distance, and the Dutch sent and towed her away, where
she spent her self without any execution. Had the French Men of War also come
boldly up, and grappled with their Enemies, they might have done something
considerable, for the Fort could not have played on them, without damaging our
Ships as well as theirs. But instead of this, the French dropped Anchor out of
reach of the shot of the Fort, and there lay exchanging shot with their Enemies
Ships, with so little advantage to themselves, that after about four hours
fighting, they cut their Cables, and went away in haste and disorder, with all
their Sails loose, even their Top gallant Sails, which is not usual, but when
Ships are just next to running away.

Captain Heath, notwithstanding his Ship was so heavy and encumbered, behaved
himself very bravely in the sight; and upon the going off of the French went
aboard the Dutch Commodore and told him, that if he would pursue them, he would
stand out with them to Sea, though he had very little Water aboard; but the
Dutch Commander excused himself, saying he had orders to defend himself from
the French, but none to chase them, or go out of his way to seek them. And this
was the Exploit which the French have thought fit to brag of. I hear that the
Dutch have taken from them since their Fort of Ponticheri.

But to proceed with our Voyage: We had not been at Sea long before our men
began to droop, in a sort of a Distemper that stole insensibly on them, and
proved fatal to above thirty who died before we arrived at the Cape. We had
sometimes two, and once three men thrown over board in a morning. This
Distemper might probably arise from the badness of the Water, which we took in
at Bencouli: For I did observe while I was there, that the River water,
wherewith our Ships were watered, was very unwholesome, it being mixed with the
Water of many small Creeks, that proceeded from low Land, and whose Streams
were always very black, they being nourished by the Water that drained out of
the low swampy unwholesome Ground.

I have observed not only there, but in other hot Countries also both in the
East and West Indies, that the Land-floods which pour into the Channels of the
Rivers, about the season of the Rains, are very unwholesome. For when I lived in
the Bay of Campeachy, the Fish were found dead in heaps on the shores of the
Rivers and Creeks, at such a season; and many we took up half dead; of which
sudden mortality there appeared no cause, but only the malignity of the Waters
draining off the Land. This happens chiefly, as I take it, where the Water
drains through thick Woods, and Savannahs of long Grass, and swampy Grounds,
with which some hot Countries abound: And I believe it receives a strong
Tincture from the Roots of several kind of Trees, Herbs, etc. and especially
where there is any stagnancy of the Water, it soon corrupts; and possibly the
Serpents and other poisonous Vermin and Insects may not a little contribute to
its bad Qualities: at such times it will look very deep colored, yellow, red,
or black, etc. The season of the Rains was over, and the Land-floods were
abating upon the taking up this Water in the River of Bencouli: but would the
Seamen have given themselves the trouble they might have filled their Vessels
with excellent good Water at a Spring on the backside of the Fort, not above 2
or 300 paces from the Landing place; and with which the Fort is served. And I
mention this as a caution to any Ships that shall go to Bencouli for the
future; and withal I think it worth the care of the Owners or Governors of the
Factory, and that it would tend much to the preservation of their Seamen's
lives, to lay Pipes to convey the Fountain Water to the Shore, which might
easily be done with a small charge: and had I staid longer there I would have
undertaken it. I had a design also of bringing it into the Fort, tho much
higher: for it would be a great convenience and security to it, in case of a
Siege.

Besides the badness of our Water, it was stowed among the Pepper in the Hold,
which made it very hot. Every Morning when we came to take our Allowance, it
was so hot that a man could hardly suffer his hands in it, or hold a Bottle
full of it in his hand. I never any where felt the like, nor could have thought
it possible that Water should heat to that degree in a Ships Hold. It was
exceeding black too, and looked more like Ink than Water. Whether it grew so
black with standing, or was tinged with the Pepper, I know not, for this Water
was not so black when it was first taken up. Our Food also was very bad; for
the Ship had been out of England upon this Voyage above three Years; and the
salt Provision brought from thence, and which we fed on, having been so long in
Salt, was but ordinary Food for sickly Men to Feed on.

Captain Heath, when he saw the misery of his Company, ordered his own
Tamarinds, of which he had some Jars aboard, to be given some to each Mess, to
eat with their Rice. This was a great refreshment to the men, and I do believe
it contributed much to keep us on our Legs.

This Distemper was so universal, that I do believe there was scarce a man in
the Ship but languished under it; yet it stole so insensibly on us, that we
could not say we were sick, feeling little or no pain, only a Weakness, and but
little Stomach. Nay, most of those that died in this Voyage, would hardly be
persuaded to keep their Cabbins, or Hammocks, till they could not stir about;
and when they were forced to lie down, they made their Wills and piked off in
two or three days.

The loss of these men, and the weak languishing condition that the rest of us
were in, rendered us incapable to govern our Ship, when the Wind blew more than
ordinary. This often happened when we drew near the Cape, and as often put us to
our trumps to manage the Ship. Captain Health, to encourage his men to their
labor, kept his Watch as constantly as any man, though sickly himself, and lent
an helping hand on all occasions. But at last, almost despairing of gaining his
Passage to the Cape, by reason of the Winds coming Southerly, and we having now
been sailing 8 or 9 weeks, he called all our men to consult about our safety,
and desired every man, from the highest to the lowest, freely to give his real
Opinion and Advice, what to do in this dangerous juncture; for we were not in a
condition to keep out long; and could we not get to Land quickly, must have
perished at Sea. He consulted therefore whether it were best to beat for the
Cape, or bear away for Johanna, where we might expect relief, that being a
place where our outward bound East India Ships usually touch, and whose Natives
are very familiar; but other places, especially St Laarence, or Madagascar,
which was nearer, was unknown to us. We were now so nigh the Cape that with a
fair Wind we might expect to be there in 4 or 5 days; but as the Wind was now,
we could not hope to get thither. On the other side this Wind was fair to carry
us to Johanna: but then Johanna was a great way off, and if the Wind should
continue as it was, to bring us into a true Trade Wind, yet we could not get
thither under a fortnight; and if we should meet calms, as we might probably
expect, it might be much longer. Besides, we should lose our passage about the
Cape till October or November, this being about the latter end of March, for
after the 10th of May it is not usual to beat about the Cape to come home. All
circumstances therefore being weighed and considered, we at last unanimously
agreed to prosecute our Voyage toward the Cape, and with patience wait for a
shift of Wind.

But Captain Heath, having thus far sounded the inclination of his weak men,
told them, that it was not enough that they all consented to beat for the Cape,
for our desires were not sufficient to bring us thither; but that there would
need a more than ordinary labor and management from those that were able. And
withal, for their encouragement he promised a months pay Gratis, to every man
that would engage to assist on all occasions, and be ready upon call, whether
it were his turn to watch or not; and this Money he promised to pay at the
Cape. This offer was first embraced by some of the Officers, and then as many
of the Men as found themselves in a capacity, listed themselves in a Roll to
serve their Commander.

This was wisely contrived of the Captain, for he could not have compelled them
in their weak condition, neither would fair Words alone, without some hopes of
a reward, have engaged them to so much extraordinary Work; for the Ship, Sail
and Rigging were much out of repair. For my part, I was too weak to enter my
self into that List, for else our common safety, which I plainly saw lay at
stake, would have prompted me to do more than any such reward would do. In a
short time after this it pleased God to favor us with a fine Wind, which being
improved to the best advantage by the incessant labor of these new listed men,
brought us in a short time to the Cape.

The night before we entered the Harbor, which was about the beginning of
April, being near the Land, we fired a Gun every hour, to give notice that we
were in distress. The next day, a Dutch Captain came aboard in his Boat, who
seeing us so weak as not to be able to trim our Sails to turn into the Harbor;
tho we did tolerably well at Sea, before the Wind, and being requested by our
Captain to assist him, sent ashore for a hundred lusty men, who immediately
came aboard, and brought our Ship in to an Anchor. They also unbent our Sails,
and did every thing for us that they were required to do, for which Capt. Heath
gratified them to the full.

These men had better stomachs than we, and eat freely of such Food as the Ship
afforded: and they having the freedom of our Ship, to go to and fro between
Decks, made prize of what they could lay their hands on, especially Salt Beef,
which our men, for want of stomachs in the Voyage, had hung up 6, 8, or 10
pieces in a place. This was conveyed away before we knew it, or thought of it:
besides, in the night, there was a Bale of Muzlins broke open, and a great deal
conveyed away: but whether the Muzlins were stolen by our own men, or the
Dutch, I cannot say; for we had some very dexterous Thieves in our Ship.

Being thus got safe to an Anchor, the Sick were presently sent ashore to
Quarters provided for them, and those that were able remained aboard, and had
good fat Mutton, or fresh Beef, sent aboard every day. I went ashore also with
my Painted Prince, where I remained with him till the time of sailing again,
which was about six Weeks. In which time I took the opportunity to inform my
self what I could concerning this Country, which I shall in the next place give
you a brief account of, and so make what haste I can home.

The Cape of Good Hope is the utmost Bounds of the Continent of Africa toward
the South, lying in 34 d. 30 m. S. lat. in a very temperate Climate. I look
upon this Latitude to be one of the mildest and sweetest for its temperature of
any whatsoever; and I cannot here but take notice of a common prejudice our
European Seamen have as to this Country, that they look upon it as much colder,
than Places in the same Latitude to the North of the Line. I am not of their
opinion as to that: and their thinking so, I believe, may easily be accounted
for from hence, that whatever way they come to the Cape, whether going to the
East Indies or returning back, they pass through a hot Climate; and coming to it
thus out of an extremity of heat, it is no wonder if it appear the colder to
them. Some impute the coldness of the South Wind here to its blowing off from
Sea. On the contrary, I have always observed the Sea Winds to be warmer than
Land Winds, unless it be when a bloom, as we call it, or hot blast blow from
thence. Such an one we felt in this very Voyage, as we went from Cape Verd
Islands, toward the South Seas; which I forgot to mention in its proper place,
Chap. 4th. For one afternoon about the 19th of Jan. 1683. in the lat. of 37
South we felt a brisk Gale coming from off the Coast of America, but so violent
hot, that we thought it came from some burning Mountain on the Shore, and was
like the heat from the mouth of an Oven. Just such another Gleam I felt one
afternoon also, as I lay at Anchor at the Groin in July. 1694. it came with a
Southerly Wind: both these were followed by a Thunder shower. These were the
only great Blooms I ever met with in my Travels. But setting these aside, which
are exceptions, I have made it my general observation, that the Sea-Winds are a
great deal warmer than those which blow from Land: unless where the Wind blows
from the Poles, which I take to be the true cause of the coldness of the South
Wind at the Cape, for it is cold at Sea also. And as for the coldness of
Land-Winds, as the South West parts of Europe are very sensible of it from the
Northern and Eastern Winds; so on the opposite Coast of Virginia, they are as
much pinched with the North West Winds, blowing excessively cold from over the
Continent; tho its Lat. be not much greater than this of the Cape.

But to proceed: This large Promontory consists of high and very remarkable
Land; and off at Sea it affords a very pleasant and agreeable Prospect. And
without doubt the Prospect of it was very agreeable to those Portuguese, who
first sound out this way by Sea to the East Indies; when after coasting along
the vast Continent of Africa, toward the South Pole, they had the comfort of
seeing the Land and their Course end in this Promontory: Which therefore they
called the Cape de Bon Esperance, or of Good Hope, finding that they might now
proceed Fastwardly.

There is good sounding off this Cape 50 or 60 Leagues at Sea to the Southward,
and therefore our English Seamen standing over as they usually do, from the
Coast of Brazil, content themselves with their Soundings, concluding thereby
that they are abrest of the Cape, they often pass by without seeing it, and
begin to shape their course Northward. They have several other Signs whereby to
know when they are near it, as by the Sea-Fowl they meet at Sea, especially the
Algatrosses, a very large long winged Bird, and the Mango-volucres, a smaller
Fowl. But the greatest dependence of our English Seamen now is upon their
observing the variation of the Compass, which is very carefully minded when
they come near the Cape, by taking the Suns Amplitude mornings and evenings.
This they are so exact in, that by the help of the Azimuth Compass, an
Instrument more peculiar to the Seamen of our Nation, they know when they are
abrest of the Cape, or are either to the East or West of it: And for that
reason, though they should be to Southward of all the Soundings or fathomable
Ground, they can shape their course right, without being obliged to make the
Land. But the Dutch, on the contrary, having settled themselves on this
Promontory, do always touch here in their East India Voyages, both going and
coming.

The most remarkable Land at Sea is a high Mountain, steep to the Sea, with a
flat even top, which is called the Table Land. On the West side of the Cape, a
little to the Northward of it, there is a spacious Harbor, with a low flat
Island lying off it, which you may leave on either hand, and pass in or out
securely at either end. Ships that anchor here, ride near the main Land,
leaving the Island at a farther distance without them. The Land by the Sea
against the Harbor is low; but backed with high Mountains a little way in, to
the Southward of it.

The Soil of this Country is of a brown color; not deep, yet indifferently
productive of Grass, Herbs and Trees. The Grass is short, like that which grows
on our Wiltshire or Dorsetshire Downs. The Trees hereabouts are but small and
few; the Country also farther from the Sea does not much abound in Trees, as I
have been informed. The Mould or Soil also is much like this near the Harbor,
which though it cannot be said to be very fat, or rich Land, yet it is very fit
for cultivation, and yields good Croops to the industrious Husbandman, and the
Country is pretty well settled with Farms, Dutch Families, and French Refugees,
for 20 or 30 leagues up the Country; but there are but few Farms near the
Harbor.

Here grows plenty of Wheat, Barley, Pease, etc. Here are also Fruits of many
kinds, as Apples, Pears, Quinces, and the largest Pomgranates that I did ever
see.

The chief Fruits are Grapes. These thrive very well, and the Country is of
later Years so well stockt with Vineyards, that they make abundance of Wine, of
which they have enough and to spare; and do sell great quantities to Ships that
rouch here. This Wine is like a French High Country White Wind, but of a pale
yellowish color; it is sweet, very pleasant and strong.

The tame Animals of this Country are Sheep, Goats, Hogs, Cows, Horses, etc.
The Sheep are very large and fat, for they thrive very well here: This being a
dry Country, and the short Pasturage very agreeable to these Creatures, but it
is not so proper for great Cattle; neither is the Beef in its kind so sweet as
the Mutton. Of wild Beasts, it is said, here are several sorts, but I saw none.
However, it is very likely there are some wild Beasts, that prey on the Sheep,
because they are commonly brought into the Houses in the night, and penned up.

There is a very beautiful sort of wild Ass in this Country, whose body is
curiously striped with equal Lists of white and black; the Stripes coming from
the Ridge of his Back, and ending under the Belly, which is white. These
Stripes are two or three Fingers broad, running parallel with each other, and
curiously intermixed, one white and one black, over from the Shoulder to the
Rump. I saw two of the Skins of these Beasts, dried and preserved to be sent to
Holland, as a Rarity. They seemed big enough to enclose the Body of a Beast, as
big as a large Colt of a Twelvemonth old.

Here are a great many Ducks, Dunghill Fowls, etc. and Ostriges are plentifully
found in the dry Mountains and Plains. I eat of their Eggs here, and those of
whom I bought them told me that these Creatures lay their Eggs in the Sand, or
at least on dry Ground, and so leave them to be hatched by the Sun. The Meat of
one of their Eggs will suffice two Men very well. The Inhabitants do preserve
the Eggs that they find to sell to Strangers. They were pretty scarce when I
was here, it being the beginning of their Winter; whereas I was told they lay
their Eggs about Christmas, which is their Summer.

The Sea hereabouts affords plenty of Fish of diverse sorts; especially a small
sort of Fish, not so big as a Herring; whereof they have such great plenty,
that they Pickle great Quantities yearly, and send them to Europe. Seals are
also in great numbers about the Cape; which, as I have still observed, is a
good sign of the plentifulness of Fish, which is their Food.

The Dutch have a strong Fort by the Sea side, against the Harbor, where the
Governor lives. At about 2 or 300 Paces distance from thence, on the West side
of the Fort, there is a small Dutch Town, in which I told about 50 or 60
Houses; low, but well built, with Stone-walls; there being plenty of Stone,
drawn out of a Quarry close by.

On the backside of the Town, as you go toward the Mountains, the Dutch East
India Company have a large House, and a stately Garden walled in with a high
Stone-wall.

This Garden is full of diverse sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Fruits, with
curious spacious Gravel-walks and Arbors; and is watered with a Brook that
descends out of the Mountains: which being cut into many Channels, is conveyed
into all parts of the Garden. The Hedges which make the Walks are very thick,
and 9 or 10 foot high: They are kept exceeding neat and even by continual
pruning. There are lower Hedges within these again, which serve to separate the
Fruit Trees from each other, but without shading them: and they keep each sort
of Fruit by themselves, as Apples, Pears, abundance of Quinces, Pomgranats,
etc. These all prosper very well, and bear good Fruit, especially the
Pomgranat. The Roots and Garden-Herbs have also their distinct places, hedged
in apart by themselves; and all in such order, that it is exceeding pleasant
and beautiful. There are a great number of Negro Slaves brought from other
parts of the World; some of which are continually weeding, pruning, trimming
and looking after it. All Strangers are allowed the liberty to walk there; and
by the Servants leave, you may be admitted to taste of the Fruit: but if you
think to do it clandestinly, you may be mistaken, as I knew one was when I was
in the Garden, who took 5 or 6 Pomgranats, and was espied by one of the Slaves,
and threatened to be carried before the Governor: I believe it cost him some
Money to make his peace, for I heard no more of it. Further up from the Sea,
beyond the Garden, toward the Mountains, there are several other small Gardens
and Vineyards, belonging to private Men: but the Mountains are so nigh, that
the number of them are but small.

The Dutch that live in the Town get considerably by the Ships that frequently
touch here, chiefly by entertaining Strangers that come ashore to refresh
themselves; for you must give 3 s. or a Dollar a day for your Entertainment;
the Bread and Flesh is as cheap here as in England; besides they buy good
pennyworths of the Seamen, both outward and homeward bound, which the Farmers
up the Country buy of them again at a dear rate; for they have not an
opportunity of buying things at the best hand, but must buy of those that live
at the Harbor: the nearest Settlements, as I was informed, being 20 miles off.

Notwithstanding the great plenty of Corn and Wine, yet the extraordinary high
Taxes which the Company lays on Liquor, makes it very dear; and you can buy
none but at the Tavern, except it be by stealth. There are but 3 Houses in the
Town that sell strong Liquor, one of which is this Wine-House or Tavern; there
they sell only Wine; another sells Beer and Mum; and the third sells Brandy and
Tobacco, all extraordinary dear. A Flask of Wine which holds 3 quarts will cost
18 Stivers, for so much I paid for it; yet I bought as much for 8 Stivers in
another place, but it was privately, at an unlicenced House, and the person
that sold it, would have been ruined had it been known; and thus much for the
Country, and the European Inhabitants.

CHAP. XX.
Of the natural Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope, the Hodmodods or
Hottantots. Their Personage, Garb, besmearing themselves; their Clothing,
Houses, Food, way of Living, and Dancing at the Full of the Moon: Compared in
those respects with other Negroes and Wild Indians. Captain Heath refreshes his
Men at the Cape, and getting some more Hands, departs in company with the James
and Mary, and the Josiah. A great swelling Sea from S. W. They arrive at Santa
Hellena, and there meet with the Princess Ann, homeward bound. The Air,
Situation, and Soil of that Island. Its first discovery and change of Masters
since. How the English got it. Its Strength, Town, Inhabitants, and the product
of their Plantations. The Santa Hellena Manatee no other than the Sea Lion. Of
the English Women at this Isle. The English Ships refresh their Men here; and
depart all together. Of the different Courses from hence to England. Their
Course and arrival in the English Channel and the Downs.

THe Natural Inhabitants of the Cape are the Hodmodods, as they are commonly
called, which is a corruption of the Word Hottantot; for this is the Name by
which they call to one another either in their Dances, or on any occasion; as
if every one of them had this for his Name. The Word probably has some
signification or other in their Language, whatever it is.

These Hottantots are People of a middle Stature, with small Limbs and thin
Bodies, full of activity. Their Faces are of a flat oval Figure, of the Negro
make, with great Eyebrows, black Eyes, but neither are their Noses so flat,
nor their Lips so thick, as the Negroes of Guinea. Their Complexion is darker
than the common Indians; though not so black as the Negroes or New Hollanders;
neither is their Hair so much frizled.

They besmear themselves all over with Grease, as well to keep their Joints
supple, as to fence their half naked Bodies from the Air, by stopping up their
Pores. To do this the more effectually they rub Soot over the greased parts,
especially their Faces, which adds to their natural Beauty, as Painting does in
Europe; but withal sends from them a strong Smell, which though sufficiently
pleasing to themselves, is very unpleasant to others. They are glad of the
worst of Kitchin-stuff for this purpose, and use it as often as they can get it.

This Custom of anointing the Body is very common in other parts of Africa,
especially on the Coast of Guinea, where they generally use Palm-Oil, anointing
themselves from Head to Foot; but when they want Oil, they make use of
Kitchin-stuff, which they buy of the Europeans, that Trade with them. In the
East Indies also, especially on the Coast of Cudda and Malacca, and in general,
on almost all the Easterly Islands, as well on Sumatra, Java, etc. as on the
Philippine and Spice Islands, the Indian Inhabitants anoint themselves with
Coco-nut Oil, two or three times a day, especially Mornings and Evenings. They
spend sometimes half an hour in chasing the Oil, and rubbing it into their Hair
and Skin, leaving no place unsmear'd with Oil, but their Face, which they daub
not like these Hottantots. The Americans also in some places do use this
Custom, but not so frequently perhaps for want of Oil and Grease to do it. Yet
some AmericanIndians in the North Seas frequently daub themselves with a
Pigment made with Leaves, Roots, or Herbs, or with a sort of red Earth, giving
their skins a yellow, red, or green color, according as the Pigment is. And
these smell unsavourly enough to People not accustomed to them; tho not so rank
as those who use Oil or Grease.

The Hottantots do wear no covering on their Heads, but deck their Hair with
small shells. Their Garments are Sheepskins wrapped about their Shoulders like a
Mantle, with the Woolly sides next their Bodies. The Men have besides this
Mantle, a piece of Skin like a small Apron, hanging before them. The Women have
another Skin tucked about their Wastes, which comes down to their Knees like a
Petticoat; and their Legs are wrapped round with Sheeps-guts two or three Inches
thick, some up as high as to their Calves, others even from their Feet to their
Knees, which at a small distance seems to be a sort of Boots. These are put on
when they are green; and so they grow hard and stiff on their Legs for they
never pull them off again, till they have occasion to eat them; which is when
they journey from home, and have no other Food, then these Guts which have been
worn, it may be, six, eight, ten or twelve months, make them a good Banquet:
This I was informed of by the Dutch. They never pull off their Sheep skin
Garment, but to louse themselves, for by continual wearing them they are sull
of Vermin, which obliges them often to strip and sit in the Sun two or three
hours together in the heat of the day, to destroy them. Indeed most Indians
that live remote from the Equator, are molested with Lice, though their
Garments afford less shelter for Lice than these Hottatots Sheepskins do. For
all those Indians who live in cold Countries, as in the North and South parts
of America, have some sort of Skin or other to cover their Bodies, as Deer,
Otter, Beaver or Seals Skins, all which they as constantly wear, without
shifting themselves, as these Hottantots do their Sheep skins. And hence they
are lousy too, and strong scented, though they do not daub themselves at all,
or but very little; for even by reason of their Skins they smell strong.

The Hottantots Houses are the meanest that I did ever see. They are about 9 or
10 foot high, and 10 or 12 from side to side. They are in a manner round made
with small Poles stuck into the ground, and brought together at the top, where
they are fastened. The sides and top of the House are filled up with Boughs
coursely wattled between the Poles, and all is covered over with long Grass,
Rushes, and pieces of Hides; and the House at a distance appears just like a
Hay-cock. They leave only a small hole on one side, about 3 or 4 foot high, for
a door to creep in and out at; but when the Wind comes in at this door, they
stop it up, and make another hole in the opposite side. They make the Fire in
the middle of the House, and the Smoke ascends out of the Crannies from all
parts of the House. They have no Beds to lie on, but tumble down at night round
the sire.

Their Household Furniture is commonly an earthen Pot or two to boil Victuals,
and they live very miserably and hard; it is reported that they will last two or
three days together, when they travel about the Country.

Their common Food is either Herbs, Flesh, or Shellfish; which they get among
the Rocks, or other places at low Water: for they have no Boats, Barklogs, nor
Canoas to go a Fishing in; so that their chiefest subsistence is on Land
Animals, or on such Herbs as the Land naturally produces. I was told by my
Dutch Landlord, that they kept Sheep and Bullocks here before the Dutch settled
among them: and that the Inland Hottantots have still great stocks of Cattle,
and sell them to the Dutch for Rolls of Tobacco: and that the price for which
they sell a Cow or Sheep, was as much twisted Tobacco, as will reach from the
Horns or Head to the Tail; for they are great lovers of Tobacco, and will do
any thing for it. This their way of trucking was confirmed to me by many
others, who yet said that they could not buy their Beef this cheap way, for
they had not the liberty to deal with the Hottantots, that being a privilege
which the Dutch East India Company reserve to themselves. My Landlord having a
great many Lodgers, fed us most with Mutton, some of which he bought of the
Butcher, and there is but one in the Town; but most of it he killed in the
Night. the Sheep being brought privately by the Hottantots, who assisted in the
Skinning and Dressing, and had the Skin and Guts for their pains: I judged
these Sheep were fetched out of the country, a good way off, for he himself
would be absent a day or two to procure them, and two or three Hottantots with
him. These of the Hottantots that live by the Dutch Town, have their greatest
subsistence from the Dutch, for there is one or more of them belonging to every
House. These do all sorts of servile work, and there take their Food and
Grease. Three or four more of their nearest Relations sit at the Doors or near
the Dutch House, waiting for the scraps and fragments that come from the Table;
and if between meals the Dutch people have any occasion for them, to go on
Errands, or the like, they are ready at command; expecting little for their
pains; but for a Stranger they will not budge under a Stiver.

Their Religion, if they have any, is wholly unknown to me; for they have no
Temple nor Idol, nor any place of Worship that I did see or hear of. yet their
mirth and nocturnal pastimes at the New and Full of the Moon, looked as if they
had some Superstition about it. For at the Full especially they sing and dance
all Night, making a great noise: I walked out to their Huts twice at these
times, in the Evening, when the Moon arose above the Horizon, and viewed them
for an hour or more. They seem all very busy, both Men, Women and Children,
dancing very oddly on the green Grass by their Houses. They traced two and fro
promiscuously, often clapping their hands and singing aloud. Their Faces were
sometimes to the East, sometimes to the West: neither did I see any motion or
gesture that they used when their Faces were toward the Moon, more than when
their backs were toward it. After I had thus observed them for a while, I
returned to my Lodging, which was not above 2 or 300 paces from their Huts; and
I heard them singing in the same manner all Night. In the gray of the Morning I
walked out again, and found many of the Men and Women still Singing and
Dancing; who continued their Mirth till the Moon went down, and then they left
off: Some of them going into their Huts to sleep, and others to their
attendance in their Dutch Houses. Other Negroes are less circumspect in their
Night-Dances, as to the precise time of the Full Moon, they being more general
in these Nocturnal Pastimes, and use them oftener; as do many people also in the
East and West Indies: yet there is a difference between colder and warmer
Countries as to their Devertisements. The warmer Climates being generally very
productive of delicate Fruits, etc. and these unciviliz'd people caring for
little else than what is barely necessary, they spend the greatest part of
their time in diverting themselves, after their several fashions; but the
Indians of colder Climates are not so much at leisure, the Fruits of the Earth
being scarce with them, and they necessiated to be continually Fishing,
Hunting, or Fowling for their subsistence; not as with us for Recreation.

As for these Hottantots, they are a very lazy sort of People, and tho they
live in a delicate Country, very fit to be manured, and where there is Land
enough for them, yet they choose rather to live as their Forefathers, poor and
miserable, than be at pains for plenty. And so much for the Hottantots: I shall
now return to our own affairs.

Upon our arrival at the Cape, Captain Heath took an House to live in, in order
to recover his Health. Such of his men as were able did so too, for the rest he
provided Lodgings and paid their Expenses. Three or four of our men, who came
ashore very sick, died, but the rest, by the assistance of the Doctors of the
Fort, a fine Air, and good Kitchen and Cellar Physic, soon recovered their
Healths. Those that subscribed to be at all calls, and assisted to bring in the
Ship, received Captain Heath's Bounty, by which they furnished themselves, with
Liquor for their homeward Voyage. But we were now so few, that we could not
sail the Ship; therefore Captain Heath desired the Governor to spare him some
Men; and as I was informed, had a promise to be supplied out of the homeward
bound Dutch East India Ships, that were now expected every day, and we waiied
for them. In the mean time in came the James and Mary, and the Josiah of
London, bound home. Out of those we thought to have been furnished with men;
but they had only enough for themselves; therefore we waited yet longer for the
Dutch Fleet, which at last arrived but we could get no men from them.

Captain Heath was therefore forced to get Men by stealth, such as he could
pick up, whether Soldiers or Seamen. The Dutch knew our want of Men, therefore
near 40 of them, those that had a design to return to Europe, came privately
and offered themselves, and waited in the night at places appointed, where our
Boats went and fetched 3 or 4 aboard at a time, and hid them, especially when
any Dutch Boat came aboard our Ship. Here at the Cape I met my Friend Daniel
Wallis, the same who leapt into the Sea and swam at Pulo Condore. After several
Traverses to Madagascar, Don Mascarin, Ponticherri, Pegu, Cunnimere, Maderas,
and the River of Hugli, he was now got hither in a homeward bound Dutch Ship. I
soon persuaded him to come over to us, and found means to get him aboard our
Ship.

About the 23d of May we sailed from the Cape, in the Company of the James and
Mary, and the Jasiah, directing our course toward the Island Santa Hellena. We
met nothing of remark in this Voyage, except a great swelling Sea, out of the
S. W. which taking us on the broad side, made us roll sufficiently. Such of our
Water-casks as were between Decks, running from side to side, were in a short
time all staved, and the Deck well washed with the fresh Water. The Shot
tumbled out the Lockers and Garlands; and rung a loud Peal, rumbling from side
to side, every ^wl that the Ship made; neither was it an easy matter to reduce
them again within bounds. The Guns being carefully looked after and lashed
fast, never budg'd, but the Tackles or Pulleys, and Lashings, made great Music
too. The sudden and violent motion of the Ship, made us fearful last some of
the Guns should have broken loose, which must have been very detrimental to the
Ship's sides. The Masts were also in great danger to be rolled by the board;
but no harm happened to any of us, besides the loss of 3 or 4 Butts of Water,
and a Barrel or two of good Cape Wine, which was stav'd in the great Cabin.

This great tumbling Sea took us shortly after we came from the Cape. The
violence of it lasted but one night; yet we had a continual swelling came out
of the S. W. almost during all the passage to Santa Hellena; which was an
eminent token that the S. W. Winds were now violent in the higher Latitudes
toward the South Pole; for this was the time of the Year for those Winds.
Notwithstanding this boisterous Sea coming thus obliquely upon us, we had fine
clear Weather, and a moderate Gale at S. E. or between that and the East, till
we came to the Island Santa Hellena, where we arrived the 20th day of June.
There we found the Princess Ann at an Anchor, waiting for us.

The Island Santa Hellena lies in about 16 Degrees South Lat. The Air is
commonly serene and clear, except in the Months that yield Rain; yet we had one
or two very rainy days, even while we were here. Here are moist Seasons to
Plant and Sow, and the Weather is temperate enough as to Heat, tho so near the
Equator, and very healthy.

The Island is but small, not above nine or ten Leagues in length, and stands 3
or 400 Leagues from the main Land. It is bounded against the Sea with steep
Rocks, so that there is no landing but at two or three places. The Land is high
and Mountainous, and seems to be very dry and poor; yet they are fine Valleys,
proper for cultivation. The Mountains appear bare, only in some places you may
see a few low Shrubs, but the Valleys afford some Trees fit for building, as I
was informed.

This Island is said to have been first discovered and settled by the
Portuguese, who stockt it with Goats and Hogs. But it being afterward deserted
by them, it lay waste, till the Dutch, finding it convenient to relieve their
East India Ships, settled it again; but they afterward relinquished it for a
more convenient place; I mean the Cape of Good Hope. Then the English East
India Company settled their Servants there, and began to fortify it, but they
being yet weak, the Dutch about the year 1672, came thither, and re-took it,
and keep it in their possession. This News being reported in England, Captain
Monday was sent to re-take it, who by the advice and conduct of one that had
formerly lived there, landed a party of Armed Men in the night in a small Cove,
unknown to the Dutch then in Garrison, and climbing the Rocks, got up into the
Island, and so came in the morning to the Hills hanging over the Fort, which
stands by the Sea in a small Valley. From thence firing into the Fort, they
soon made them surrender. There were at this time two or three Dutch East India
Ships, either at Anchor or coming thither, when our Ships were there. These,
when they saw that the English were Masters of the Island again, made sail to
be gone; but being chaced by the English Frigots, 2 of them became rich Prizes
to Capt. Monday and his men.

The Island has continued ever since in the hands of the English East India
Company, and has been greatly strengthened both with Men and Guns; so that at
this day it is secure enough from the Invasion of an Enemy. For the common
Landing place is a small Bay, like a Half Moon, scarce 500 paces wide, between
the two Points. Close by the Seaside are good Guns planted at equal distances,
lying along from one end of the Bay to the other; besides a small Fort, a
little further in from the Sea, near the midst of the Bay. All which makes the
Bay so strong, that it is impossible to force it. The small Cove where Capt.
Monday landed his Men when he took the Island from the Dutch, is scarce fit for
a Boat to land at; and yet that is now also fortified.

There is a small English Town within the great Bay, standing in a little
Valley, between two high steep Mountains. There may be about 20 or 30 small
Houses, whose Walls are built with rough Stones: The inside Furniture is very
mean. The Governor has a pretty tolerable handsome low House, by the Fort;
where he commonly lives, having a few Soldiers to attend him, and to guard the
Fort. But the Houses in the Town before, mentioned stand empty, save only when
Ships arrive here here; for their Owners have all Plantations farther in the
Island, where they constantly employ themselves. But when Ships arrive, they
all flock to the Town, where they live all the time that the Ships lie here;
for then is their Fair or Market, to buy such Necessaries as they want, and to
sell off the Produce of their Plantations.

Their Plantations afford Potatoes, Yams and some Plantains and Bonanoes. Their
Stock consists chiefly of Hogs, Bullocks, Cocks and Hens, Ducks, Geese and
Turkeys, of which they have great plenty, and fell them at a low rate to the
Sailers, taking in exchange, Shirts, Drawers, or any light Clothes; pieces of
Callico, Silks, or Muzlins: Arack, Sugar and Lime juice, is also much esteemed
and coveted by them. But now they are in hopes to produce Wine and Brandy in a
short time; for they do already begin to plant Vines for that end, there being
a few French men that are to manage that affair. This I was told but I saw
nothing of it, for it rained so hard when I was ashore, that I had not the
opportunity of seeing their Plantations. I was also informed, that they get
Manatee or Sea-Cows here, which seemed very strange to me. Therefore enquiring
more strictly into the matter, I found the Santa Hellena Manatee to be, by
their shapes, and manner of lying ashore on the Rocks, those Creatures called
Sea-Lyons; for the Manatee never come ashore, neither are they feund near any
rocky shores, as this Island is, there being no feeding for them in such
places. Besides, in this Island there is no River for them to drink at, tho
there is a small Brook runs into the Sea, out of the Valley by the Fort.

We stayed here 5 or 6 days; all which time the Islanders lived at the Town, to
entertain the Seamen; who constantly flock ashore, to enjoy themselves among
their Country people. Our touching at the Cape had greatly drained the Seamen
of their loose Corns, at which these Islanders as greatly repined; and some of
the poorer sort openly complained against such doings, saying, it was fit that
the East India Company should be acquainted with it, that they might hinder
their Ships from touching at the Cape. Yet they were extremely kind, in hopes
to get what was remaining. They are most of them very poor: but such as could
get a little Liquor to sell to the Seamen at this time got what the Seamen
could spare, for the Punch-houses were never empty. But had we all come
directly hither, and not touched at the Cape, even the poorest people among
them would have gotten something by entertaining sick men. For commonly the
Seamen coming home, are troubled, more or less with Scorbutic Distempers; and
their only hopes are to get refreshment and health at this Island, and th^se
hopes seldom or never fail them, if once they get footing here. For the Islands
afford ^bundance of delicate Herbs, wherewith the sick ^re first bathed to
supple their Joints, and then the ^ruits and Herbs, and fresh food soon after
cure them of their Scorbutic Humor. So that in a weeks time men that have
been carried ashore in Hammocks, and they who were wholly unable to go, have
soon been able to leap and dance. Doubtless the serenity and wholesomness of
the Air contributes much to the carrying off of these Distempers; for here is
constantly a fresh breze. While we stayed here, many of the Seamen got
Sweet-hearts. One young man belonging to the James and Mary, was married, and
brought his Wife to England with him. Another brought his Sweetheart to
England, they being each engaged by Bonds to marry at their arrival in England;
and several other of our men were over Head and Ears in love with the Santa
Hellena Maids, who tho they were born there, yet very earnestly desired to be
released from that Prison, which they have no other way to compass, but by
marrying Seamen or Passengers that touch here. The young Women born here, are
but one remove from English, being the Daughters of such. They are well shaped,
proper and comely, were they in a dress to set them off.

My stay ashore here was but two days, to get refreshments for my self and
Jcoly, whom I carried ashore with me: and he was very diligent to pick up such
things as the Islands afforded, carrying ashore with him a Bag, which the
People of the Isle filled with Roots for him. They flockt about him, and seemed
to admire him much. This was the last place where I had him at my own disposal,
for the Mate of the Ship, who had Mr. Moodie's share in him, left him entirely
to my management, I being to bring him to England. But I was no sooner arrived
in the Thames, but he was sent ashore to be seen by some eminent persons; and I
being in want of Money, was prevailed upon to sell first part of my share in
him, and by degrees all of it. After this I heard he was carried about to be
shown as a Sight, and that he died of the small Pox at Oxsord.

But to proceed, our Water being filled, and the Ship all stockt with fresh
Provision, we sailed from hence in Company of the Princess Ann, the James and
Mary, and the Josiah, July the 2d, 1691. directing our course toward England,
and designing to touch no where by the way. We were now in the way of the Trade
Winds, which we commonly find at E. S. E. or S. E. by E. or S. E. till we draw
near the Line, and sometimes till we are 8 or 10 degrees to the North of the
Line. For which reason Ships might shape their course so as to keep on the
Asrican shore, and pass between Cape Verd and Cape Verd Islands; for that seems
to be the dirctest course to England. But experience often shows us, that the
sarthest way about is the nearest way home, and so it is here. For by striving
to keep near the Asrican shore, you meet with the Winds more uncertain, and
subject to calms; whereas in keeping the mid way between Asrica and America, or
rather nearer the American Continent, till you are North of the Line, you have
a brisk constant gale.

This was the way that we took, and in our passage before we got to the Line,
we saw three Ships, and making toward them, we found two of them to be
Portugueze, bound to Brazil. The third kept on a Wind, so that we could not
speak with her; but we found by the Portugueze it was an English Ship called
the Dorothy, Capt. Thwart Commander, bound to the East Indies. After this, we
kept Company still with our 3 Consorts till we came near England, and then were
separated by bad weather; but before we came within sight of Land we got
together again, all but the James and Mary. She got into the Channel before us,
and went to Plymouth, and there gave an account of the rest of us; whereupon
our Men of War who l^y there, came out to join us, and meeting us, brought us
off of Plymouth. There our Consort the James and Mary came to us again, and
from thence we all sailed in company of several Men of War toward Portsmouth.
There our first Convoy left us, and went in thither. But we did not want
Convoys, for our Fleets were then repairing to their Winter Harbors, to be
laid up; so that we had the company of several English Ships to the Downs, and
a Squadron also of Dutch sailed up the Channel, but kept off farther from our
English Coast, they being bound home to Holland. When we came as high as the
South Foreland, we left them standing on their course, keeping on the back of
the Goodwin Sands; and we lufft in for the Downs, where we anchored September
the 16th, 1691.

BOOKS Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St Paul's Churchyard.
VOyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. In three parts, viz. 1. A Supplement of the
Voyage round the World, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin, Malacca,
etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two Voyages to
Campeachy; with a description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-Cutting, Trade, etc. of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World, with an account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negroes, etc. By Captain Wm Dampier. Illustrated with
particular Maps and Draughts. To which is added, a General INDEX to both
Volumes The Second Edition. Price 6 s. A New Voyage round the World. Describing
particularly, the Isthmus of America, several Coasts and Islands in the West
Indies, the Isles of Cape Verd, the Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea
Coasts of Chili, Peru and Mexico; the Isle of Guan one of the Ladrones,
Mindanao and other Philippine and East India Islands near Cambodia, China,
Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc. New-Holland, Sumatra, Nicobar Isles: the Cape
of Good Hope, and Santa Helena. Their Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits,
Animals and Inhabitants. Customs, Religion, Government, Trade, etc. By Capt. Wm
Dampier, Vol. the First. Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The
Fifth Edition, Corrected. Price 6 s. A New Voyage and Description of the
Isthmus of America, giving an Account of the Authors abode there; the Form and
Make of the Country, Coasts, Hills, Rivers, etc. Wood, Soil, Weather, etc.
Trees, Fruit, Beasts, Birds, Fish, etc. The Indian Inhabitants, their Features,
Complexion, etc. Their Manners, Customs, Employments, Marriages, Feasts,
Hunting-Computation, Language, etc. With Remarkable Occurrences in the South
Sea, and elsewhere. By Lionel Wafer. Illustrated with several Copper Plates.
Price 3 s. 6 d. A Collection of Original Voyages: Containing, 1. Capt. Cowley's
Voyages round the Globe. 2. Capt. Sharp's Journal over the Isthmus of Darien,
and Expedition into the South Seas. Written by himself. 3. Capt. W^'s Voyages
through the Streights of Magellan. 4. Mr Robert's Adventures among the Corsairs
of the Levant, his Account of their way of Living, Description of the
Archipelago Islands, taking of Scio, etc. Illustrated with several Maps and
Draughts. Published by Captain William Hack, Price 3 s. 6 d. Disco^uses on the
Public Revenues and on the Trade of England. In two Parts, viz. 1. Of the Use
of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the Revenues and Trade.
2. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be restord. 3 On the
Management of the Kings Revenues. 4. Whether to Farm the Revenues, may not, in
this juncture, be most for the Public Service? 5. On the Public Debts (...).
Part 1. To which is added, a Discourse upon improving the Revenue of the State
of Athens. Written Originally in Greek; and now made English from the Original,
with some Historical Notes. Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the
Trade of England; which more immediately Treat of the Foreign Traffic of this
Kingd^m. viz. 1. That Foreign Trade is beneficial to England. 2. On the
Protection and Care of Trade. 3. On the Plantation Trade. 4. On the East India
Trade. Part 2. To which is added the (...) on the East India Trade. An Essay
upon the Probable Methods of making a People (...), in the Balance of Trade.
Treating of these Heads; viz., Of the People of England. Of the Land of
England, and its Product. Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner
the Balance of Trade may be thereby effe^ted. That ^ Country cannot increase in
Wealth and Power, but by private Men doing their Duty to the Public, and but
by a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in such as are trusted with the
Administration of aff^irs. A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions. Showing how
our Ancestors have proceeded with such Ministers as have procured to themselves
Grants of the Crown-Revenue; and that the forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to
be applied toward the Payment of the Public Debts. Essays upon 1. The Balance
of Power. 2. The Right of making War, Peace and Alliances. 3. Universal
Monarchy. To which is added, an APPENDIX containing the Records referred to in
the Second Essay. These five by the Author of, The Essays on Ways and Means.
Several Discourses, Concerning the Shortness of Humane Charity. The Perfection
of the Mercy of God. The Difference of Times with respect to Religion. The joy
which the Righteous have in God. The secret Blasting of Men. The Instructive
Discipline of God. The Danger of Unfaithfulness to God. The Malignity of
Popery. The Deceitfulness of Sin. The Conversion of a Sinner. Also the Prayer
used before Sermon. Vol. 1. The 2d Edition. Price 5 s. -- Several Discourses,
concerning the true Valuation of Man. The necessary Repentance of a Sinner. The
Exercise and Progress of a Christian. The Frailty of Humane Nature. The Justice
of one toward another. The Nature of Salvation by Christ, etc. Being 20
Sermons. Vol. 2. Bonth by the Reverend and Learned B^. W^te sometime Minister
of St Lawrence Jury, London. Examined and Corrected by his own Notes; and
published by John Jeffery, D. D. Archdeacon of Norwich, Price 5 s. Three
Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation and Repentance. Containing
Instructions for a Holy Life: With earnest Exhortations, especially to young
Persons, drawn from the Considerations of the Severity of the Discipline of the
Primitive Church. By Samuel Clark, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father
in God John Lord Bishop of Norwich. Price 3 s. A Paraphrase on the Gospels of
St Matthew, St Mark, St Luke and St John. In 2 Vol. Written by Samuel Clarke, A
M. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of Norwich.
8vo. Jacobi Rohaulti Physica. Latin verti^. recensuit, and uberioribus jam
Annotationibus, ex illustrissimi Issaaici Newtoni Philosophia maxim^m partem
haustis, amplificavit and ornavit Samuel Clarke, A. M. Admodum Reverendo in
Christo patri, Joanni Episcopo Norvicensi, a Sacris Domesticis. Accedunt etiam
in hae Secunda Editionae, novae aliquot Tabulae aeri incisae. 8vo. Confessio,
five Declaratio, Sententiae Pastorum, qui in Faederato Relgio remonstrantes
vocantur, super praecipuis Articulis Religioni, Christianae. 12s. price 1 s. 6
d. Devotions, viz. Confessions, Petitions, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings for
every day of the week; and also, before, at and after the Sacrament: With
Occasional Prayers for all Persons whatsoever. By Tho. Bennet, M. A. Rector of
St James's in Colchester, and Fellow of St John's College in Cambridge. Price
1 s. 6 d. The Godfathers Advice to his Son. ^ Showing the necessity of,
Performing the Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of neglecting it. With general
Instructions to young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and prepare them for
their Confirmation. Very necessary for Parents, etc. to give their Children, or
others committed to their Care. By John Birket, Vicar of Milford and Hordle in
Hampshire. The 2d Edition, with a Preface, Price 3 d. 100 for 20 s. The
Government of the Passions, according to the Rules of Reason and Religion, viz.
Love, Hatred, Desire, Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger, Delight and
Sorrow. 12s. Price 1 s. Some Reflections on that part of a Book called Amyntor:
Or, the Defense of Milton's Life, which relates to the Writings of the
Primitive Fathers and the Canon of the New Testament. In a Letter to a Friend.
8vo. Price 6 d. A Treatise of Morality. In two Parts. Written in French by F.
Malbranch, Author of the Search after Truth. And Translated into English by
James Shipton, M. A. The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French
Armies 56 Years. Translated by Charles Cotton Esquire Folio. Price 8 s. The
Penitent, or Entertainments for Lent. Written in French by R. F. N. Caussin,
and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth Edition. To which is added
several Sculptures. A new method of Curing all sorts of Fevers, without taking
any thing by the Mouth. Being a new prescription for giving the Bark in
Clyster^ Whereby all the inconveniences of administering it in any other form
are avoided, and a more speedy, certain Cure is obtained. Writ by A. Helvet, M.
D. The 2d Edition. Mr Wingate's Arithmetic: Containing a plain and familiar
method for attaining the Knowledge and Practice of Common Arithmetic. The 10th
Edition, very much enlarged. By John Kirsey, late Teacher of the Mathematics.
The History of the Inquisition, as it is exercised at Goa, Written in French,
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five years under those
Severities. With an account of his Deliverance. Done into English by the
learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the late Archbishop of
Canterbury. Price 1 s. The Artificial Clock-Maker. A Treatise of Watch and
Clockwork. Wherein the Art of Calculating numbers for most sorts of Movements
is explained, to the Capacity of the Unlearned. Also, the History of Watch and
Clockwork, both Ancient and Modern. With other useful matters never before
Published. The 2d Edition enlarged. To which is added a Supplement, containing,
1. The Anatomy of a Watch and Clock. 2. Monsieur Romer's Satellite Instrument,
with Observations concerning the Calculation of the Eclipses of Jupiter's
Satellites, and to find the Longitude by them. 3. A nice way to correct
Pendulum Watches. 4. M. Flamsteed's Equation Tables. 5. To find a
Meridian-Line, for the Governing of Watches, and other uses. 6. To make a
Telescope to keep a Watch by the fixed Stars. By W. D. M. A. price 1 s. 6 d.
Arcana Imperii detecta: Or, diverse select Cases in Government; more
particularly, Of the unjust Commands of a Prince. Of the Renunciation of a
Right to a Crown. Of the Proscription of a limited Prince and his Heirs. Of the
Trying, Condemning and Execution of a Crowned Head. Of the Marriage of a Prince
and Princess. Of the Detecting of Conspiracies against a Government. Of
Subjects Revolting from a Tyrannical Prince. Of Excluding Foreigners from
Public Employments. Of Constituting Extraordinary Magistrates upon
Extraordinary Occasions. Of Subjects Anticipating the Execution of Laws. Of
Toleration of Religion. Of Peace and War, etc. With the Debates, Arguments and
Resolutions of the greatest Statesmen, in several Ages and Governments
thereupon. pr. 5 s. The Royal Dictionary, in two Parts. 1. French and English.
2. English and French. The French taken out of the Dictionaries of Richelet,
Furetiere, Tachart, the Great Dictionary of the French Academy, and the Remarks
of Vaugelas, Menage and Bouhours. And the English Collected chiefly out of the
best Dictionaries, and the Works of the greatest Masters of the English Tongue;
such as Archbishop Tillotson, Bishop Sprat, Sir Roger L' Estrange, Mr Dryden,
Sir William Temple, etc. For the use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By
Mr Boyer. 4 to. -- Idem in Octavo. A View of the Posture of Affairs in Europe
both in Church and State. 1. The Ancient Pretensions of the two Families of
Austria and Bourbon, to the Spanish Monarchy. 2. The Balance of the Power of
Europe, settled by Charles V. and how it come to be broke. 3. A view of the
Courts of Europe, and their present Disposition and State relating to War. 4.
Of the State of the Church of Rome, and the Decry of the Protestant interest in
Europe. Written by a Gentleman by way of Letter. pr. 1 s. The Surgeons
Ass^stant. In which is plainly discovered the True Origin of most Diseases.
Treating particularly of the Plague, French Pox, Leprosy, etc. Of the Biting
of Mad Dogs, and other Venomous Creatures. Also a Complete Treatise of Cancers
and Gangreens. With an Enquiry whether they have any Alliance with Contagious
Diseases. Their most easy and speedy method of Cure. With diverse approved
Receipts. By John Brown, Sworn Surgeon in Ordinary to his late most Excellent
Majesty King William III. and late Senior Surgeon of St Thomas's Hospital in
Southwark pr. 2 s. 6 d. A Learned Treatise of the situation of the Terrestial
Paradise. Written by Monsieur Huet, done into English. A Relation of two
several Voyages made into the East India, by Christopher Fryke, Surg. and
Christopher Schewitzer. The whole containing an exact account of the Customs,
Dispositions, Manners, Religion, etc. of the several Kingdoms and Dominions in
those parts of the World in General: But in a more particular manner,
describing those Countries which are under the Power and Government of the
Dutch, 8 vo. pr. 4 s. Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curands, a Duo.
Tho. Sydenham, conscripti. Duodecimo, pr. 1 s. Dr Sydenham's Practice of
Physic, faithfully Translated into English with large Annotations,
Animadvers^ons, and Practical Observations on the same. By W. Salmon, M. D.
12s. pr. 1 s. 6 d. The Life of King James the II. late King of England,
containing an account of his Birth, Education, Religion and Enterprises, both
at home and abroad, in Peace and War, while in a Private and Public Capacity
till his Dethronment, with the various struggles made since his Restoration,
the State of his Court at St Germans, and the particulars of his Death. The
whole Intermixed with diverse Original Papers, Debates, Letters, Declarations,
etc. and illustrated with several Medals, pr. 5 s. The Life of William the III,
King of England, and Prince of Orange. Containing an account of his Family,
Birth, Education, Accession to the Dignity of Stadtholder, and Captain General
of Holland, his Marriage, Expedition to England, and the various steps by which
He and his Princess Ascended the Throne; with the History of his Reign,
Enterprises and Conduct in Peace and War. With a Relation of his Will, Death
and Funeral, Intermixed with many Original Papers, Letters, Declarations,
Memoirs Treaties and Alliances, all his public Speeches as well to the States
as when King of England amongst which is that to the States, how matters should
be managed in Case he miscarried in England, a List of the Convention
Parliament, Lords and Commons, with those for and against making him King, the
Glenco business, with the Scotch Parliaments, Debates thereon, and 100 more
never yet published. Illustrated with 40 Copper Cuts, as all the Medals ever
Coined on him, Sieges, etc. in one Vol 8vo, pr. 6 s. A Discourse upon the
Uniting Scotland with England. Containing the general advantages of such an
Union to both Kingdoms. The several ways of Uniting Nations, the difference of
Religion, Laws and Nobility, etc. Adjusted by the Law of Nature and the
practice of all Nations in such Cases. With diverse Original Papers, delivered
by the Commissioners of both Nations to one another about an Union, pr. 1 s.
One hundred Ingenious Novels, written by John Boccacio, the first refiner of
the Italian Language, new done into English, and accommodated to the Gust of
the present Age, 8vo, pr. bound 6 s. Letters to the Right Reverend the Lord
Bishop of Carlisle. Occasioned by some Passages in his late Book of the Scotch
Library: Wherein Robert the Third is beyond all Dispute freed from the
Imputation of Bastardy. A particular account is given of King David Ransom, and
of the Hostages for the Payment of the same. With several Original Papers
relating to the Scotch Affairs: And a Grant of the Liberties of Scotland. By
Tho. Rymer, Esquire Letter I. pr. 1 s. Bennet of Schism. Price 2 s. 6 d. -- Defense
of it pr. 1 s. Scot's Christian Life, in 5 Vol. 8vo. Milners Reflections on
L'Clerk, 8vo, pr. 3 s. 6 d. Russels Treatise of Physic, 8vo. pr. 1 s. 6 d.
Elis de Arculis, 12s Bugerdi^j and Hereboord Logica, 1 s. Governor of Cyprus a
Novel, pr. 1 s Oxford Grammar. Grotius de Veritato, 12s Oxon. K^ibour's
President, 8vo. 1703. Mr Shadwel's Plays, bound or single, viz. 1 Sullen Lovers
2 Humorist 3 Royal Shepherdess 4 Vertuoso 5 Psyche 6 L^bertine 7 Epsom Wells 8
Timon of Athens 9 Miser 10 True Widow 11 Lancashire Witches 12 Woman Captain 13
Squire of Alsa^ 14 Bury Fair 15 Amorous Biggot 16 Scowrers 17 Volunte^
And most other Modern PLAYS.
FINIS.

