THE FAMOUS PROPHECY OF THE White King and the Dead Man Explained To the
Present TIMES.

CONTAINING

The Introduction.

I. The White King's Character and Description.

I. The Time when the White King shall raise the Dead Man, and the Signs of his
Coming.

^ That the Dead Man is the Lyon's Whelp which the Eagle had drove away from
the Old Lion before.

^ The Business that the Dead Man is sent about by the White King.

I. The Dead Man's Governor, and what he does with his Charge.

II. The Signs when the Dead Man and the White King shall be Destroyed, after
which Peace shall be Established for ever more.

By ISAAC BICKERSTAFFE, Esquire

LONDON Printed for J. Morphew, near Stationers' Hall.

THE Famous Prophecy OF THE White King and the Dead Man, etc.
IT will be necessary to inform the Reader that this Prophecy was writ seven
hundred Years ago in Latin, and found about a hundred Years since at the
pulling down of an old Monastry: All ^e parts of this Prophecy are already
come to pass ^t this last, which you will find by the sequel is ^w at hand: The
first thing that was foretold by ^ was the Union of the two Crowns under one
Mo^rch, after the Death of the Maiden Queen; the ext thing was the Troubles of
England, and the ^eath of King Charles the Martyr; the third thing ^as the
Exile; and the fourth the Restoration of ^ing Charles the Second; after that,
this Prophecy ^mes to the late Revolution and describes it; by ^ Eagle coming
out of the East, landing in the South, nd coming to the West, where, at an old
Castle that ands by the River side that washes the Walls of Briain 's
Metropolis, the Great and Mighty Men of the ^ingdom shall come to receive him,
and offer him their ^ervice to catch the Old Lion 's Whelp; the last Pro^hesie
that shall come to pass is just succeeding the time ^at England and Scotland
shall lose their former Names, and be swallowed up in that of Great Britai^ and
then shall be explained this of the White King a^ the Dead Man.

The White King, and his Character. He is the great Red Dragon who is gorged
and ready to burst wit the Blood of all Nations: He is known by the mightiness
of his Power, and the absoluteness of his Dominion The best of his Subjects are
the greatest of his Slaves and his most applauded Acts of Devotion consist in
th Multitude of Victims be has Sacrificed to the false God that he Worshippeth.
His Honor is lodged in the numberless Number of his Troops: His Religion in th
Breast of his Confessor; and his Riches in the Purs^ of his Subjects; which,
like the Unjust Steward, h uses at his own Will and Pleasure.

This White King you may plainly see by th Description is meant for the French
King, who ha been so long foretold to be a Tyrant over his People and a Scourge
to the Neighboring Nations, as th Prophets of old delivered in dark Mysteries
they Prophesies concerning the coming of Cyrus, the downfall of the Persian
Monarchy under Darius; and the rise of the Western under Alexander, and
afterward that of the Caesar's. Can any thing point plainer at him than to say
He is gorged with the Blood of all Nations, when there is scarce one in Europe
whom the French King has not imbrued his Hands in their Blood? The next is as
plain, which points at Power, and the Arbitrariness of his Government* and
wherein he has made the best of his Subjects* which are the Protestants,
without whose assistance he had scarce been able to have kept his Crown, now
Slaves by sending several to the Galleys, and forcing others to quit his
Dominions. The rest of the Prophecy is as true in every particular, and
therefore needless to repeat.

The Time when the White King shall raise the Dead Man, and the Signs of his
Coming. The Time when this shall come to pass shall be the time after England
and Scotland shall lose the Distinction of their former Names, and be swallowed
up in their Original Name of Great Britain. And the Sign that shall be given
shall be that when False Prophets arise, and shall pretend to raise the Dead
Man; but this shall not be the Dead Man which the White King shall raise; for
he is not a Dead Man, but to the Hopes and Expectations of the People he is
Dead only, but shall rise again.

This is directly hit at the Union of the Two Kingdoms, and cannot be
interpreted to mean any ^ther thing, but what the Dead Man is would look ^
little doubtful, but the next Paragraph explains it, which if it did not the
present times would show that it has brought him to Life which every Body
thought was Dead, to us at least; but that which is very particular, and
wonderfully remarkable in deed, is the Sign given us of those times that is
when False Prophets shall arise and pretend to aise the Dead Man, before ever
the other Dead Man hat was meant, was ever thought to make such a Resurrection.
This is worth a serious Reflection to hink that just at a time when these False
Prophets pretend to raise Emes, one of their pretended Probets, which is their
Dead Man, the White King, in he Prophecy, is pretending to raise to us, the
People of the Union, another Dead Man, contrary to all our Thoughts, our
Apprehensions, or Expectations, and who this Dead Man is, the next Paragraph of
the Prophecy shows.

And the Dead Man is the Lyon's Whelp, which the Eagle had drove away from the
Old Lion before.

This part of the Prophecy is explained by that which foretold the Revolution
by the coming of an Eagle out of the East, which was the then Prince of Orange,
afterward our Glorious Restorer King William, who came to catch the Old Lyon's
Whelp, which may be plainly understood of the then Pretended Prince of Wales,
who is afterward all along called the Dead Man, which very emphatically shows
us, He is a Person Dead and lost to all Reasonable Expectation. But this is the
Dead Man which the Eagle had drove away from the Old Lion, as this Pretender
was driven from K. James, before he Abdicated the Crown of England, and
therefore he is a Dead Man indeed that is excluded all hopes of Reigning, by
the Crown of Great Britain's being Settled on the House of Hannover, and in a
Protestant Succession for ever, so that he is actually Dead to the Law.
Therefore we shall proceed to examine in the next place.

The Business that the Dead Man is sent about by the White King. And the White
King having War with all the Nations round about him, setting up one King, and
pulling down another, at last raises up the Dead Man, which was the Old Lyon's
Whelp, and furnishes him with Wooden Horses to carry him to his Native Country,
there to assault it, and destroy the People for the hardness of their Hearts,
and their Infidelity in not beliening that the Dead Man should come again, whom
they spued out from amongst them long before. This is the design the Dead Man
is sent about ^y the White King; but his Governor has disappoin^d all his
Projects.

This Paragraph needs but little explaining at his time of Day, when we find
the White King* is ^etting up the Dead Man against us, and sending ^im to
execute his own Designs. The Wooden Hor^s he is preparing for him to Visit the
Land of his Nativity are the White King's Shipping, wherewith he threatens to
Invade us, and Force the Subjects of a Free State, and who Live under the
happiest Government in the World, to bow their Necks down to a Foreign Yoke of
Slavery, under Pretense of a Person and Title that is absolutely Dead to us,
and all the World beside this White King, this Scourge of the Nations, which,
as the Prophecy says, Is for setting up one King, and pulling down another.
But ^n the last place this Dead Man shall bring a Governor along with him; now
who this Governor is will be worth while to enquire, because this Governor
shall break the Neck of all his Designs in a manner that shall be acceptable to
all the World, as the Prophecy further illustrates when it comes to the
Destruction of the White King and the Dead Man. And this Governor seems to be
directly levelled at the Duke of Berwick, who shall discover all the Underhand
Projects of the White King, to make a Property of the Dead Man, and so shall
deliver up the Dead Man, that he may be no more a Disturber of the People, or a
Handle for the White King to work all his dark Designs withal.

And the Dead Man's Governor shall bring over his Charge, and then the White
King shall leave the Dead Man to the Charge of his Governor, and there sha^
Consternation, and Confusion, and Amazement; but the B^ of the People shall not
be spilt, nor shall Desolation or Des*ction come near their Houses; for the
Governor of the D Man shall deliver up his Charge to the Hands of them that
quire it of him, and he shall be Crowned with Honor for Wonderfulness of that
Work; and the signs of it coming to p^ shall be when the false Prophe^s that
pretended to raise up the Dead Man shall be confounded and dispersed Abroad, so
t^ their Names shall be no more heard of in our Str^ets: And the the White King
shall be destroyed from off the face of the Eart^ the Dead Man shall never Rise
again, bu^ Peace shall be Est^*blish'd for evermore.

The Reader may observe that this Paragraph brings the Prophecy down to a
general Peace, if not to the last Day, which none knows how near its approach
may be: However we fin^ by this plain^y that the Dead Man and his Project shall
com^ to nothing, but he be made a Prey and Sacrifice to the Ambition and
Tyranny of the White King, who shall be disappointe^ in the Trust of this Great
Governor whoever he shall be; for he seems resolved by the Prophecy to
prevent the Effusion o^ Blood, by readily delivering up his Charge, which must
immediately put an End to all the White King's Designs, nay the Prophecy seems
to Point plainly at his own Destruction at Home, while he is so busied in
forming Foreign Projects, and that the Time is very shortly at hand, for it
says the sign of its coming to p^ss shall be soon after this A^tempt in May
next of pretending to rai^e Emes, the false Prophets Dead Man; and when we find
them disappointed in their Designs, as we have no reason to doubt but they
will, then may we expect the fulfilling of these things; That all Foreign
Attempts against us will be en^irely baffled; the White King, our Great Enemy,
utterly destroyed; the Dead Man in the Prophecy shall never rise again, that
is, we shall be freed from all Fears or Disturbances from him, and then there
shall be Peace to the End of the World.

FINIS.

