THE MARTIAL REVIEW; OR, A GENERAL HISTORY OF THE LATE WARS; TOGETHER WITH THE
DEFINITIVE TREATY, AND SOME Reflections on the probable Consequences OF THE
PEACE.

Tu regere imperio populos, Britanne, memento,
Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos.
VIRGIL. LONDON: Printed for J. NEWBERY, in St. Paul's Churchyard. M DCC LXIII.

PREFACE.
THE following is an attempt, to separate what is substantial and material,
from what is circumstantial and useless, in history. That of the late war forms
the brightest period of any in the British annals; and the author has
endeavored to do it justice, by the manner in which he has recorded the
several transactions, and the impartiality he has observed. As to the first, it
is matter of opinion, and he must stand or fall by the judgment of his readers.
His own intention acquits him of every charge with regard to the latter. He is
sensible, that in many passages, he has the prepossessions of party to
encounter, and the same must have been his fate, had he adopted different
opinions. He disclaims all systems in politics, and has been guided in his
narrative by matters of fact only. In his reflections and conjectures, where
his own lights failed him, he had recourse to those who were most capable of
giving him proper information; and he has the satisfaction to believe, that
when the prejudices of party are buried with their authors, the following
pages, whatever defects they may have in point of composition, will be
acquitted of every imputation of partiality; as rational entertainment, and
undeviating candor, have been his only objects.

This Review was first published in the Reading Mercury, and parcelled out
every week in that paper, till completed, when the Gentlemen, who had thus
read it, thought so well of the work, that they desired to have it reprinted,
in this manner, that they might again purchase it, in a more convenient form.
The Author thinks himself obliged to those Gentlemen, for the good opinion they
entertain of his abilities and impartiality, and hopes their testimony will in
some measure recommend his labors to the notice of the public.

THE MARTIAL REVIEW: OR, A GENERAL History of the LATE WARS.
THE French, while they pretend to instruct the rest of mankind in the arts,
have learnt the noblest of them all from Great Britain, I mean that of civil
polity, or the art of increasing national riches, power, and influence at home
and abroad. She saw all her attempts for universal monarchy deseated by the
assistance and protection given by England, a commercial nation, to the other
states of Europe; and therefore judging that commerce was the source of real
power, she applied herself to its cultivation. During the long administration
of Cardinal Fleury, the French commerce was incredibly extended; but the pride
and ambition of the Princes of the Blood, and their great nobility, (the late
Marshal de Belleisle in particular) drove that minister from his pacific plans,
and France renewed her expensive operations in a land war on the continent.

It appeared, during the course of that war, that Fleury had not taken measures
for protecting the commerce which he had so greatly extended, nor could we have
been sensible of the vast trade which France then carried on, but from the
prodigious losses it sustained by our marine. This counterbalanced all the
successes of their arms on the continent of Europe; and, at the peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle, the whole system of continental power was altered. France gave
up, or demolished, that barrier, which for so many years might have been termed
the cockpit of Europe, from the many millions of lives sacrificed to acquire
or d fend it, and she agreed to the conferences of Aix-la-Chapelle, merely with
the insidious view of gaining leisure for pursuing her commercial schemes, and
retrieving that error, which had proved so fatal to her during the war, I mean
her inability to defend her trade.

With those two views that treaty was begun and conducted on the part of
France. Her great scheme was, that nothing definitive should be concluded. She
was aware, that our possession of Nova Scotia had been too loosely stipulated
by the treaty of Utrecht, and that it was liable, at least, to some cavils,
though nothing can be more certain from the spirit, and even from the words of
that treaty, than that it comprehended all the lands claimed by the English,
and that when the treaty of Utrecht was executed, the English, in consequence
of that claim, took possession of all Nova Scotia, or Acadia, in presence of
the French commissaries, as appears by the report on 30th of August, 1714.

It is not our intention to enter here into a minute disquisition of the
particulars of that contest, which we^^ afterward fully discussed in the state
papers. It is sufficient to say, that the English, by the confession of the
French themselves, had an infinite superiority in point of argument,
notwithstanding the vast disadvantages they were under from their ignorance of
the places in question, and the arbitrary maps and charts (without the least
foundation of truth to support them) fabricated and produced by their
adversaries. The British plenipotentiaries at Aix-la-Chapelle, little dreaming,
perhaps, of the consequences, or the importance of the discussion, referred the
limits of Acadia, or Nova Scotia, to be settled in conferences between the
commissaries of the two nations at Paris. Our proposed brevity will not admit
of particularizing the various shifts and shufflings of the French
commissaries, who proceeded on the same indecisive plan with that of their
plenipotentiaries at Aix-la-Chapelle, that they might amuse Great Britain,
while France was encroaching upon her property in North America, and fortifying
her encroachments in such a manner, as to bid defiance to all that the
negotiation could effect. It soon appeared* that they pretended to the
possession of all the vast country between Canada and Louisiana, and were
building a chain of forts, to maintain that possession, and to exclude the
British traders from all communication with their back settlements. In short,
under pretense of having discovered the mouths of the Mississippi, they claimed
all the country toward New Mexico on the east, extending to the Apalachian or
Aligany mountains on the west. Those claims were in direct violation of the
rights of the crown of Great Britain, whose subjects had been the first
discoverers of those countries, and accordingly his Majesty King George the
Second had ordered a patent to be made out for a company of merchants and
planters, granting them a considerable tract of land near the river Ohio, (by
which the company was denominated) but within what had been always considered
to be the limits of the British province of Virginia. The interest of this
company was incompatible with that of the French government; and it was very
plain, that both could not subsist. Either the English must be excluded from
all trade with the Indians, and exposed to continual incursions both in war and
peace, or the communication between the French Canadians, and the mouth of the
Mississippi must be cut off. Such an interruption would render the maintenance
of the two provinces, which if joined must be of infinite value, of little or
no service to France.

The French, sensible of this, not only drove the subjects of Great Britain
from their new settlements, but secured the command of the entrance into the
countries on the Ohio and Mississippi, by means of a fort built on the Forks of
the river Monongahela, called Fort du Quesne. The British government at this
time were by no means disposed for entering into a fresh war; but the perpetual
alarms it received from Virginia, and all their northern colonies, who
considered themselves as being on the brink of perdition, at last roused the
ministry. Mr. Pelham was now dead, and his successors in the government advised
his Majesty to vigorous measures. There was still, however, in the cabinet a
pacific party strong enough to prevent any precipitate steps being taken. It
was therefore resolved that no hostilities should be committed against France,
but such as were absolutely necessary for asserting the undoubted rights of the
British crown, and for repelling the invasions upon our own colonies. This plan
was the more plausible, as it could be carried to what extent we pleased. The
French had violently dispossessed Major Washington from a fort, or rather
entrenchment, raised on British ground; many British subjects had been killed;
many were carried into captivity; and the French had declared they were
resolved to maintain their usurpations by the sword. What added to the
deplorable condition of the English in those parts, was the collusion between
the French and their barbarous Indians. For the former no sooner granted a
capitulation, which they never did but for their own convenience, than it was
broken by the latter, whom the French pretended they could not control.

In consequence of the British ministry's having received undoubted
intelligence that the French had sent several ships of war with land forces,
arms, and ammunition of all kinds, to support their usurpations in America,
orders were sent to all the British colonies there to arm, and make such
dispositions as might effectually oppose the enemy, and dispossess them from
their encroachments. They were given to understand, at the same time, that they
were to be supported by a body of regular troops from England, under Major
General Braddock, who was to command in chief in America; and that several
expeditions were intended. The first and chief, headed by Braddock, against
fort du Quesne; one against the French forts in Nova Scotia, and another
against Crown-Point, on the frontiers of New York; besides another under
General Shirley, to the lakes Eric and Ontario. It appears, that the conduct of
the British colonies on this occasion was neither suitable to their danger, nor
the interest of their mother country. Many of them, from the character they had
acquired in the preceding war, took it amiss that they were to be commanded by
a General from England; each province had a separate interest to pursue; and,
in short, the dispositions they made for receiving and supporting Braddock,
upon so long a march, and so dangerous an expedition, were weak and dissipated;
though it was plain, that the success of the whole depended upon their
unanimity and hearty concurrence.

As to Braddock, he was unexceptionable in point of courage and regular
education as a soldier, but a very unfit man to command irregular and
provincial troops; and indeed, from the time of his arrival in America to the
day of his death, he seems to have resolved to do his duty, but to have
despaired of doing it with success; and the event but too fatally verified his
forebodings. He complained that nothing was in readiness for his reception or
march; he conceived an aversion and contempt for the provincials, and he was
upon no very good terms with his own officers; but, what was worst of all, he
abandoned the excellent set of instructions which had been given him by his R.
H. the D. of C. for his conduct during the expedition. The consequence was,
that for want of employing irregulars on the flanks of his army, and to scour
the country through which he was to march, he fell into an ambuscade of French
and Indians on the 9th of July, 1755, and was totally defeated. The enemy had
entrenched themselves so artfully, that his troops had not an opportunity of
exerting their valor, and stunned with the frightful yells of the barbarians,
they seemed to forget the use of their arms, and stood the unactive marks of
their enemies fury; so that all who remained in the field, amongst whom were
the General and almost all the officers, were killed, and scarce half the army
escaped.

The expedition against Crown-Point was commanded by General Johnson, who,
having advanced as far as lake George, was attacked in his entrenchments by
Dieskau, the French General, who being likewise a regular bred officer, had so
great a contempt for the provincials under Johnson, that he attacked them
without cannon; but was defeated, and himself taken prisoner. This success
happening so late as the 7th of September, the victory was attended with no
great advantages to Great Britain.

As to General Shirley's expedition, it is scarcely possible to describe it,
his proceedings were so unintelligible to all but himself. What we know of them
is, that having marched over prodigious tracts of land, he came very late in
the year to fort Oswego, and left 700 men there to be sacrificed, as they
afterward were, by the enemy, and then returned without doing any thing else.

The expedition against the French forts in Nova Scotia, under Colonel
Monckton, was successful, and of infinite service to the mother country. -- But
we are now to attend the operations of another element.

On the 10th of June 1755, two French men of war were taken by the Admirals
Boscawen and Mostyn, who had been sent to America to intercept the French
supplies. But notwithstanding all the British successes, the public of England
were far from being satisfied with the state of the war, which they were taught
to believe would have been much more splendid in their favor. A resolution was
therefore taken by our government to consider the war as being actually
proclaimed by the hostilities that had been committed by the French in America,
and orders were given for the British ships to take all the French vessels and
their cargoes, wherever they could be met with by sea; so that before the end
of the year, above 300 French vessels, many of them very richly laden, and
above 8000 of their most serviceable seamen, were carried into the ports of
Great Britain.

This proceeding amazed all Europe, and the tameness of France was not less
astonishing. The Duke de Mirepoix, the French Ambassador, had declared to his
Majesty and his ministry, that the first gun, fired by British against French
ships, would be considered by his master as a declaration of war, and set all
Europe in a flame, and upon hostilities being begun in America, he was
recalled. No reprisals, however, were made by the French, all they did was to
send a letter to Mr. Fox, the Britsh secretary of state, accusing our Admirals
and sea Captains of piracy and robbery; and to fill the courts of Europe with
complaints of our conduct. In acting, they affected so much moderation, that
after taking the Blandford ship of war, they released her upon that principle.
The motives of this passive conduct were soon explained.

Since the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle to the year 1756, the French had been
incessantly laboring to repair their marine; but though they spent immense
sums, and made a vast progress in that design, yet it was still unequal to that
of Great Britain. They therefore formed two schemes, the first was the conquest
of Minorca, and the latter an attempt upon Hanover. To render both successful,
in the spring of 1756, they brought down troops to Picardy, and such of the
French coasts as lie nearest to England, wi^^ a show of invading Great Britain;
and, in the mean time, a squadron of twelve men of war of the line, commanded
by the Admiral Galissoniere, with 11 or 12,000 troops on board, commanded by
the the Duke de Richelieu, sailed from Toulon, and landed in Minorca, where, on
the 25th of April, they opened trenches before fort St. Philip.

His Britannic Majesty was, all this while, concerting measures for keeping the
flames of war from breaking out in Germany, and for the preservation of his
Hanoverian dominions. No Prince or private man in Europe understood, so well as
he did, the views and interests of the Northern Powers. He was sensible that
the Empress Queen would take the first opportunity of revoking the cession of
Silesia, which she had made to the King of Prussia by the treaties of Dresden
and Breslau; and the court of Vienna had already been tampering with him on
that account, but perceived him inflexible in his guarantyship of that country
to his Prussian Majesty. Her Imperial Majesty refused him the troops stipulated
by treaty for the defense of Hanover, which the French made now no secret they
intended to invade. The Dutch were required in like terms to furnish the 6000
troops stipulated for the defense of Great Britain, in case of a war with
France, but refused for the same reason, viz. because the war between Great
Britain and France in Germany, not affecting Europe, was not a case of the
treaty. His Britannic Majesty had the magnanimity to overlook this ingratitude
of the Dutch, by ordering his minister Colonel York to desist from the demand.

By this time the French armies had assembled on the Upper Rhine, and the
Moselle; and the court of Versailles found means to bring the Elector of
Cologne over, to suffer magazines to be erected in Westphalia, which could only
be with a view of attacking Hanover. But though the dread of such an attack did
not in the least shake his Majesty in the system he had adopted, viz. that of
hazarding all events rather than Great Britain should suffer; yet he took early
and wise precautions for the defense of his Hanoverian dominions; and at the
very time when, unknown to him, the courts of Vienna and Petersburgh were
forming schemes for dividing the spoils of Prussia, he entered into a
subsidiary treaty for taking 55,000 Russians, and 40 or 50 Russian galleys into
pay for preserving the quiet of Germany, if invaded by foreign troops. He
likewise entered into another subsidiary treaty with the Landgrave of Hesse,
for 12,000 of his troops, who were to be employed, if either England or Hanover
should be attacked. These treaties, though strongly opposed in the British
Parliament, were at last approved of there, and, in fact, brought on a new
treaty between Great Britain and Prussia.

His Prussian Majesty had for some time been secretly discontented with the
ministers of Versailles; but they continued to all appearance to be so
intimately connected, that his Britannic Majesty was not a little apprehensive
that France had brought him into her views; to obviate which had been the great
end of the two subsidiary treaties we have mentioned. But no sooner was that
with Russia made public, than his Prussian Majesty declared in the strongest
manner, that he would oppose to the utmost, the introduction of all foreign
troops whatsoever into the empire. Thus the views of their Britannic and
Prussian Majesty's came to be precisely the same, though arising from different
objects. The former was apprehensive of the French, the latter of the Russians;
and this coincidence of sentiments, with some eclaircisements, as to the views
of the court of Vienna, brought on the famous treaty of London with Prussia,
which was signed January the 16th, 1756; by which he obtained a subsidy from
Great Britain of 750,000 l. a year, for services that were extremely obvious,
and the two Potentates agreed not to make a peace without the consent of each
other. The publication of this treaty produced that of Vienna, between the
Empress Queen and his most Christian Majesty; to which the Empress of Russia
acceded, and laid the foundation of the present bloody war. The British court
was not insensible that the French intended to attack Minorca, and had
appointed Admiral Byng to sail to the Mediterranean with a squadron equal to
that under Galissoniere. The public is well apprized of Byng's misconduct,
miscarriage, and fate. He had, at best, a doubtful engagement with
Galissoniere, and under pretext of providing for the safety of Gibraltar, he
abandoned that of fort St. Philip, which was taken by the French, and Minorca
reduced to their obedience.

This advantage gained by the French, with the account of the loss of Oswego,
and of the prevalence of the French power in America, raised such a clamor
against the British ministry, that the chief of them resigned their places, but
their characters were fully vindicated by a parliamentary enquiry set on foot,
and carried on by their enemies; the report of which entirely acquitted them of
being in the least accessory to any of the late military misfortunes; but as
this is a martial and not a cabinet review, we are to confine it to military
matters.

The danger of an invasion from France still continuing, a motion was made, and
carried through the House of Commons, to address his Majesty to call over a
body of Hanoverians and Hessians, for the defense of his regal dominions. This
address was complied with, and the foreigners accordingly arrived, to the
number of 12 or 13,000, and to the great disgust of the public, who thought
Great Britain was in a condition to defend herself.

His Britannic Majesty was this year offered a neutrality by the courts of
Vienna and Versailles, but he magnanimously rejected it, because the conditions
annexed to it were dishonorable in themselves, and would have been detrimental
to the common cause. This firmness endeared him still more to his Parliament,
who being fired with indignation at the menaces of the French, now in full
march against Hanover, agreed on the 21st of February, to assist his Majesty in
forming, what was called, an army of observation in Germany, to be commanded by
the Duke of Cumberland, who accordingly put himself at the head of it on the
16th of April, 1757.

The French on this occasion had formed two armies, the one commanded by Mons.
d'Etrees, one of the best general officers in France, consisting of above
86,000 men, destined to act against Hanover, but under the pretext of serving
as allies to the Empress-Queen, and guarantees of the treaty of Westphalia. The
other, consisting of 25,000 men, was commanded by the Prince de Soubise, and
was to join the Army of the Empire, which was to put in execution the Imperial
Ban against his Prussian Majesty. Before the latter army passed the Rhine, it
seized the Prussian territories of Cleves, Meurs, and Gueldres, while a
detachment of the army under d'Etrees made itself master of Embden, and of
every thing belonging to his Prussian Majesty in East Friesland. But we are
now, in as summary a manner as possible, to attend the important operations of
his Prussian Majesty's arms.

We have already taken notice of the dangerous tendency of the treaty of
Petersburgh against his Prussian Majesty, and having full proofs of its secret
articles, he resolved to lose no time. He had ordered his minister at the court
of Vienna to demand clear and categorical answers as to the destination of the
vast armaments making in Moravia and Bohemia, but he received no satisfactory
answer. At the same time the King of Poland had assembled an army of 16,000
men, with which he took possession of the important and impregnable pass of
Pirna. On the 29th of August, 1756, he demanded from the King of Poland,
Elector of Saxony, free passage for his troops, and that his Polish Majesty, as
a proof of his neutrality, should dismiss his army. This not being complied
with, the pass of Pirna was blockaded, there being no way to reduce it but by
famine. The blockade was scarce formed, when Brown, the Austrian General,
marched to the relief of the Saxons; upon which his Prussian Majesty put
himself at the head of his army under Field-Marshal Keith, and fought the
battle of Lowositz, in which Brown was defeated, and the Saxons at Pirna forced
to surrender upon capitulation; so that his Prussian Majesty's army wintered in
Saxony, and he himself, by forcing his way into the archives of Dresden,
notwithstanding the opposition made by the Queen of Poland, whose husband had
retired to his regal dominions, obtained the original proofs of the confederacy
that had been formed against him.

At the opening of the campaign next year, every thing appeared very
unfavourable for the King of Prussia. His victory at Lowositz had been attended
with no other consequence than the surrender of the pass of Pirna! the Austrian
army in Bohemia, commanded by Prince Charles of Lorrain and General Brown,
amounted to 80,000 men; the Czarina sent 60,000 men under the command of
Marshal Apraxin, assisted by a strong fleet, to invade the Ducal Prussia; and
the Swedes, in hopes of recovering what they had lost in Pomerania, joined the
same confederacy, being aided by 6000 troops of Mecklenburgh. His Prussian
Majesty, however, with a cool rapidity peculiar to himself, divided his army
into three bodies, which at the same time penetrated into Bohemia. The first
was under Marshal Schwerin, and entered that country from Silesia. The second
was under the Prince of Bevern, who marched from Lusatia, and bravely defeated
a body of 28,000 Austrians on the 21st of April. The last body was commanded by
the King of Prussia himself, who, after a train of operations, the most
judicious, perhaps, that can be met with in history, joined his two Generals in
Bohemia, and proceeded against the great body of Austrians, who thought
themselves impregnably encamped near Prague; but nothing could withstand the
ardour of the Prussians; for under all disadvantages they gained a complete
victory over an hundred thousand of their enemies, about forty thousand of whom
escaped to Prague, which was now invested on all sides by his Prussian Majesty.
He had lost in the late battle his brave General Schwerin, as the Austrians had
done General Brown, and he trusted chiefly to Field-Marshal Keith for the
conduct of the siege.

It was in this situation of affairs, which threatened the house of Austria
with ruin, that Count Daun, who 'till then had made no distinguished figure in
military history, was appointed to the command of the Austrian troops. This
General collected the dispersed parties of the Austrians, and while the King of
Prussia was endeavoring to make himself master of Prague by a tremendous
bombardment, he took a strong post near that city, and the Prussian army not
being numerous enough entirely to invest it, he encouraged the garrison to make
a vigorous defense, in hopes of being relieved. By this time his army was
60,000 strong, and the Empress-Queen looking upon Prague as the Bulwark of
Vienna, was continually reinforcing it. His Prussian Majesty knew the value of
time, and too much despising the enemies he had lately conquered, came to a
resolution of forcing Daun in his intrenchments at Colin, though they were by
all but himself deemed impregnable. If he was guilty of any mistake that day,
it was his undertaking that mighty attempt with no more than 23,000 men. This
temerity can only be excused by the necessity he was under of continuing the
blockade of Prague; but, on the other hand, we are to consider what prodigious
consequences would have attended his attempt, had it been successful, and
likewise the necessity of checking Daun's growing power, by which in time he
himself might have been besieged by two armies, one without and the other
within the city. His conduct and courage on this occasion exceeded all
expectation. He carried his two brothers with him to the action, and never was
valor more signally, and more unsuccessfully employed. The battle lasted from
three in the afternoon till it was dark. His Prussian Majesty charged at the
head of his own cavalry, but had neglected to bring along with him a sufficient
number of infantry, or a train of artillery equal to his mighty enterprise. In
short, he performed every thing but impossibilities. He could not dislodge the
Austrians from their triply fortified camp, each entrenchment rising above the
other, and defended by an immense artillery, in a ground where cavalry, in
which the Prussian strength chiefly consisted, could scarcely act. After six
attacks, the King, collecting all his force, made the concluding charge, which,
though more furious, was as unavailing as the preceding; and perceiving that he
could not gain his point, he ordered the Prince of Bevern to give the signal
for a retreat, saying, very cooly, We shall do better another time.

If we view the merit of a great man in the light of philosophy, his Prussian
Majesty gained more honor by this defeat, than he did by all his preceding
victories. It made not the smallest alteration in his countenance or his
manner; nor did it even interrupt the course of his usual amusements. Far from
disguising the indiscretion of his own conduct, he acknowledged it in the face
of all Europe, and did such justice to the courage of his enemies, that he
seemed to envy Daun the glory of commanding such troops. His army spent the
night after the battle near the place where it was fought, and he formed an
almost instantaneous resolution of raising the blockade of Prague. Many obvious
motives determined him to that step; and amongst others was a scarcity of
ammunition, occasioned by the casual blowing up of a large laboratory full of
bombs. Though he had been on horseback and in perpetual action all the day of
the battle, yet that very night he set out for his camp before Prague, escorted
by no more than about a dozen Hussars, with orders for his army to follow him
as soon as possible. This they did without being harrassed by the Austrians,
though the Prussian loss in the late battle was near 8000 men, and all the
Prussian army, by a most admirable disposition, drew off from before Prague,
without any loss, and retreated toward Letomeritz.

By this time the army, called that of Execution, was formed in the empire,
with a view of executing the sentence of the diet of Ratisbon against the King
of Prussia. This army was composed of the troops of the Princes of the Empire,
many of whom were Protestants; and scarcely any of them satisfied as to the
justice of the cause in which they fought; so that the army in itself, which
was commanded by the Prince of Saxe Hildbourghausen was not formidable till it
was joined by a large body of Austrians, and by the French army under the
Prince de Soubise, and then its numbers were double to those of the Prussians.
All Europe now thought that his Prussian Majesty must be inevitably ruined; but
he had resources in his own genius that placed him above the power of fortune.
After his arrival at Letomeritz he omitted no opportunity of provoking Count
Daun to a battle, and even made some desperate efforts for that purpose; but
the mechanical manner in which Daun carried on war defeated all his views.
Leaving part of his army at Barnstadel, under the Prince of Bevern, he and
Marshal Keith proceeded with the rest to Erfurth, where they arrived the 14th
of September. Upon this, the army of the empire retreated first to Gotha, and
then to Eisenach, where it took so advantageous a post, that he found it
impracticable to force them to a battle.

In this situation of things, his Prussian Majesty bethought himself of one of
those happy expedients that are so common amongst great Generals, that, if
attended with disappointment, bring no disgrace, and if with success, immortal
glory. Under pretext of being destitute of provisions, he retired to Naumburg,
and sent Marshal Keith with seven battalions to Leipsic. After this, he seemed
to throw himself quite off his guard, and sent his troops into such quarters as
could best afford them subsistence, but privately made such disposition of them
that he could assemble them at a short warning. His enemies were not so far
imposed upon as not to imagine that he had something in view. But they mistook
the object: they thought he intended to cover Magdeburgh, and that they in the
mean time had a fair opportunity of reducing Leipsic, which place they actually
summoned Marshal Keith to surrender. Keith probably was in his Master's secret,
and made preparations for defending Leipsic to the last extremity. The
Imperialists and the French made dispositions for besieging it, which was the
precise situation to which his Prussian Majesty wanted to bring them. He was at
this time to all appearance upon the brink of destruction; but the reader will
best judge of his situation, from a description of his person and condition
printed at that time in the public papers as follows, Many persons who saw the
King of Prussia when he passed lately through Leipsic, cannot express how much
he is altered. They say he is so much worn away, that they scarce knew him.
This, indeed, is not to be wondered at; he has not a body of iron like Charles
XII. and he endures as great fatigues as he did. He is as much on horseback as
Charles was, and often lies upon the ground. His inward sufferings cannot be
less than his outward: let us cast our eyes on a map of the Prussian dominions,
and measure what he has left of the many fair possessions he had in the month
of April 1761, of which a space of seven months have stripped him; whence can
he have men? he is shut out from the empire; and from whence can he draw money?
the duchy of Cleves, the principality of Muers, the county of Lingen, the
county of Lipstadt, the principality of Minden, East Friesland, Embden, and its
infant company, part of the rich bishopric of Magdeburg, some other parts of
the March, Ducal Pomerania, a great part of Silesia, a great part of the
kingdom of Prussia, Berlin itself, and almost all his dominions are taken from
him, or laid under contribution, and possessed by his enemies, who collect the
public revenues, fatten on the contributions, and with the money which they
draw from the electorate of Hanover, and other conquests, defray the expenses
of the war. This picture certainly differs greatly from that which the King of
Prussia might have sketched out the day he took arms to enter Saxony. Add to
this the Duke of C -- 's convention, which deprived him of all his allies, and
left him without any assistance whatever, excepting 4 or 500,000 l. sterling,
which the British parliament may give him. Add likewise some domestic
uneasinesses. Such was the picture exhibited of his Prussian Majesty while his
enemies were besieging Leipsic, and when all of a sudden they received
intelligence of his marching to its relief, his name was so terrible that the
Imperialists retired over the Sala; but they were followed by his Prussian
Majesty, who had wisely declined to give them battle till almost the depth of
winter, having provided for the security of all his passes and fortresses in
Silesia and Saxony. At last on the 5th of November, his Prussian Majesty came
up with his enemies near a village called Rosbach, and a battle being now
inevitable, he addressed his troops in very near the following terms: My dear
friends, you know the hour is come in which all that is, and all that ought to
be dear to us, depends upon the swords which are now drawn for the battle. Time
permits me to say but little; nor is there occasion to say much. You know that
there is no labor, no hunger, no cold, no watching, no danger, that I have not
shared with you hitherto; and you now see me ready to lay down my life with
you, and for you. All I ask, is, the same pledge of fidelity and affection that
I give. And let me add, not as an incitement to your courage, but as a
testimony of my own gratitude, that from this hour, until you go into quarters,
your pay shall be double: Acquit yourselves like men, and put your confidence
in God.

The speech made by his Prussian Majesty, as beforementioned, rendered the
meanest soldier in his army an hero. Though they were but 25,000 strong, and
their enemies more than double that number, they called out to be led to
action, in which they were headed by the King himself. The French cavalry at
first behaved well, and their infantry disputed an eminence, which, if they
could have maintained, would have given them great advantages; but nothing
could withstand the ardour of the Prussians, who gained so complete a victory,
that night alone saved the French and Imperialists from total destruction;
three thousand, however, were killed upon the field, 63 pieces of cannon, with
a great number of colors, were taken, eight French Generals, 250 Officers, and
6000 common men were made prisoners.

The victory complete, and seemingly decisive as it was, was far from giving
any respite to his Prussian Majesty's military labors. The Austrians were
still strong, and perhaps the sentiments of some of his own family did not
entirely favor the system of his operations. Thus much at least is certain,
that he was dissatisfied with the conduct of his Generals in Silesia, where, on
the 11th of December, the Austrians after a vigorous siege reduced Schweidnitz,
and obliged the Prussian garrison, to the number of 4000, to surrender
prisoners of war. After this, on the 22d of the same month, they attacked the
Prince of Bevern's army, which, we have already mentioned, his Prussian Majesty
left at Barnstadel. The Prince lay then near Breslau, which was by this time
invested by the Austrian General Nadasti. There is somewhat in the Prince of
Bevern's conduct at this time, that requires to be touched by an Historian with
a tender hand. He gallantly repulsed the Austrians, who attacked him with great
fury, and he even defeated them. It is possible he, and the Generals under him,
thought that his Prussian Majesty's affairs were irretrievable, and abandoning
their strong situation they passed the Oder, where the Prince of Bevern, riding
out, on the pretext of reconnoitring, was made prisoner by a body of Croats who
had passed that river. After this, Breslau fell into the hands of the
Austrians, and it was thought they had nothing now to do but to take possession
of all Silesia.

During this desperate plunge of fortune, his Prussian Majesty behaved with the
same intrepidity and coolness as he would have done had he been conquered. He
was now in Lusatia, and far from being terrified by the progress of his
enemies, he made a war of diversion, by detaching Marshal Keith with part of
his army into Bohemia, where he advanced almost as far as Prague, every where
levying contributions.

He then entered Silesia, after a dreadful march of upwards of 200 miles, on
the 2d of December, at the head of not above 15,000 men, and when he was joined
by the Prince of Bevern's army, his whole force did not exceed 40,000, and
those greatly fatigued and harrassed. The Austrians were at this time in
possession of the strong camp that had been so unaccountably abandoned by the
Prince of Bevern, and they were commanded by Count Daun, their numbers being
above 70,000 men. Upon his Prussian Majesty's arrival in Silesia, he was to his
great, but agreeable surprise, joined by the captive garrison of Schweidnitz,
who, upon their hearing of his victory at Rosbach, had mastered the escort
which was conducting them to their prisons. Upon this, on the 5th of December,
he came to a resolution of giving Count Daun battle. The Austrians by this
time, trusting to the superiority of their numbers, were so far from declining
an engagement, that they quitted their strong camp, and both armies met at the
village of Leuthen. The ground which was there occupied by the Austrians was
excessively strong, and surrounded or interspersed with eminences, on which
were raised batteries of cannon; they likewise had the precaution to fell down
large trees to encumber the Prussian cavalry, and General Nadasti commanded a
corpse de reserve posted so as to take the Prussian army in flank.

The prodigious quickness and sagacity of his Prussian Majesty made him obviate
all the difficulties, numerous as they were, which he lay under. He saw that
great part of the fortune of the day must depend upon Nadasti's attack, and he
provided against it by placing four battalions of infantry behind the cavalry
of his right wing: and their fire was so furious that they obliged the
Austrians to retreat. Upon this the Prussian cavalry fell upon the enemy sword
in hand, and their artillery being well served, the whole Austrian army was
broke, but not till after a most obstinate resistance, especially about the
village of Leuthen, which they had endeavored to render impregnable by
redoubts and entrenchments. Losing that post, they fled with vast confusion;
6000 were killed on the field of battle, 15,000 were taken prisoners, and his
Prussian Majesty continued the pursuit as far as Lissa. The Austrian loss of
artillery in this battle, which is called that of Breslau, was about 200 pieces
of cannon.

This victory of Breslau, which was obtained exactly a month after that of
Rosbach, was, if we except that of Minden, the most amazing of any that has
been fought these two centuries. Though it was in a season of the year in which
other troops are indulged in winter quarters, his Prussian Majesty on the 7th
of December formed the siege of Breslau, which, on the 20th of January
succeeding 1758, surrendered to him; the Austrian garrison, consisting of
10,000 fighting men, besides 4000 sick and wounded, becoming prisoners of war.
It would have been worse than madness after this, in so rigorous a season, to
have thought of besieging Schweidnitz, which was provided with a numerous
Austrian garrison. The return of Marshal Keith and his army, loaded with the
spoils of Bohemia and Saxony, completed his Prussian Majesty's triumphs this
year, and all Silesia, Schweidnitz excepted, now returned to his possession.
Nay, before he went into winter quarters, he reduced many places in it,
belonging to the Empress Queen. -- Having thus brought the Prussian operations
of 1757 to a close, I am now to attend those in which Great Britain was more
immediately interested.

His late Majesty King George the Second, in point of good faith, was, perhaps,
one of the most scrupulous Princes that ever lived. Though he knew the justice
on which his Prussian Majesty's invasion of Saxony was founded; yet as it did
not immediately concern himself, either as a member of the empire, or as King
of Great Britain, he was so far from giving it any countenance, that he ordered
his minister at the Saxon court to do every thing that was in his power to
soften the rigor of his Polish Majesty's fate. But King George the Second, who
of himself always thought and acted as a King and a man, had contemporary
Princes to deal with, who listened more to the voice of resentment, than to
that of reason; nor perhaps upon certain occasions can be entirely clear even
his Prussian Majesty of that charge. Thus much at least is certain, that had
his Britannic Majesty's voice been heard, a stop might have been put to the
horrors of war, about the beginning of the year 1757; but the sore was more
festered than he or the public apprehended. The French, fatally for themselves
and all Europe, imagined, that his Britannic Majesty never would be proof
against an attack upon his electoral dominions; and that they should be able in
Germany to establish their encroachments upon the continent of America. Our
taking the French ships without a formal declaration of war, though a step that
had no manner of relation to his Majesty's conduct as Elector of Hanover,
served them as a pretext for invading that country, and his Prussian Majesty's
irruption into Saxony, gave them as guarantees of the treaty of Westphalia,
some color of justice in the eyes of the rest of Europe. They demanded a
passage from the Dutch for their warlike stores through Namur and Macstricht,
which, notwithstanding our opposition, was granted them, and about the end of
March 1757, they rendezvoused at Nuys, opposite to Dusseldorp. Upon their
entering Germany they met with little or no opposition, and even the strong
town of Wesel belonging to his Prussian Majesty, fell into their hands. They
raised at the same time vast contributions, and blockaded the town of Gueldres.
Their army, amounting to above 110,000 men, was commanded by the Marshal
D'Etrees, who was then reckoned to be the best General France had, and in a
very short time, they made themselves masters of the Prussian Guelderland, the
duchy of Cleves, and all his Prussian Majesty's estates upon the Rhine.

Notwithstanding this formidable progress of the French, his Britannic
Majesty's delicacy, in point of good faith, would not suffer him to take the
least step that could carry the smallest appearance of violating the peace of
Germany. All the use he made of his connections in the empire, was to form an
army of observation, the command of which was given to his royal highness the
Duke of Cumberland, who arrived in Germany early in the spring of 1757, and
took post with about 40,000 Hessians and Hanoverians in the Prussian
territories of Ravensburg. D'Etrees, who had the flower of the French Generals
to command under him, ridiculously demanded a safe passage through the
Hanoverian dominions to march against the King of Prussia, though it would have
cost him a detour of many hundred miles. This demand being rejected, the French
army advanced against that of observation toward Bielefield, the Duke of
Cumberland's head quarters.

It is impossible for a writer to make the subsequent operations of his royal
highness comprehensible to a candid reader, without touching upon the civil
history of the times, which with some reluctance, I am now obliged to do. The
eyes of the Germanic body were at this time fixed upon the parliament and
ministry of Great Britain; neither of whom were very forward in extending their
German connections. Whatever private convictions the ministry might have as to
the expediency of defending Hanover, the topic was so unpopular that few of
them cared to avow their sentiments. His Britannic Majesty saw this with some
concern, nor durst he venture to give either his Hanoverian regency or the
Princes of the empire, who were in his interest, any positive assurance of
their being supported by Great Britain. Hanover was but a feeble object, when
opposed to an army of 110,000 men, and it was natural for his Majesty to listen
to the representations of his ministers there, who advised him to a neutrality
if it could be obtained. This being premised, the conduct of his royal highness
the Duke of Cumberland will appear not only intelligible, but so far as related
to himself, magnanimous and defensible upon every principle of justice and
prudence.

About the 13th of June, the French army approached to Bielefield, and
notwithstanding its vast superiority of numbers, his royal highness did not
pass the Weser till the 19th. While the two armies continued on the opposite
banks of the Weser, the French took possession of Embden and all the Prussian
territories in East Friesland, as they did of the country of Bentheim, which
had been purchased by his Britannic Majesty in the year 1752. After garrisoning
those acquisitions, the French detachments returned to their main army under
d'Etrees, who being an able General knew the inconveniences the Duke of
Cumberland was under to guard all the passages of the Weser, and prepared to
pass that river at Hoxter, at a large distance from the Duke's army. The
apparent consequence of which was the laying all the southern parts of Hanover
under contribution. His royal highness, notwithstanding the prodigious odds of
numbers, made most excellent dispositions for opposing his enemies, and at
last, after a most judicious choice of ground, he encamped at Hastenbeck near
Hamelen. The French attacked the rear of the army of observation, in which they
were several times defeated, and the Duke having passed the Weser, the Marquess
d'Etrees, the French General, found himself under great difficulties in forcing
him to a battle. After several marches and countermarches, in which the Duke's
army was neither numerous enough to attend him, and far less to guard all the
extensive banks of the river, the Marquess d'Armentieres, while his royal
highness was intent upon the motions of the Duke de Broglio and Monsieur
Chevert, on the 9th of July threw bridges over the river at Hoxter, and passed
it with a large detachment of troops and artillery. He was followed by the Duke
of Orleans, and then by d'Etrees and all the French army. This, together with
the submission of the landgraviate of Hesse-Cassel to M. Contades, enabled the
French to extend their contributions; and on the 25th of July, they attacked
the Hanoverians at Hastenbeck, where the most complete generalship shown on the
part of his royal highness, which was admired by his enemies themselves, did
not give him victory. He was obliged to retire after the loss of about 1500
men, that of the enemy being greater, by the way of Hamelen, Nyenburg, and Hoy,
till he came to Ferden. The French followed him, but very slowly, and forced
the garrison of Hamelen to capitulate. They had several reasons for this delay.
They did not choose to press too hard upon an army which had been so little
diminished by the late battle; they knew that a great part of the Hanoverian
regency were inclined to a neutrality, but above all, the arrival of the Duke
de Richelieu, who superceded M. d'Etrees in his command, retarded their march.
Richelieu, a rapacious expensive Officer, had, by the influence of the French
King's mistress, obtained that command to repair his broken fortunes, and he
made the most of it by his acts of oppression and plunder.

He sent the Duke de Randan to take possession of the city of Hanover with 2000
men, which he did without resistance, and was appointed to be its governor; but
all the treasure, archives, and effects, had been before sent to Stade.
Richelieu, at the same time, took possession of all the other considerable
places of the electorate, and ordered its several divisions to send deputies to
his camp, to settle the mode and proportion of the contributions they were to
furnish. After thus collecting his army, he marched toward Ferden, as his
royal highness did to a strong camd between Ottersberg and Rothenburg. The
French, by their superiority of numbers, were enabled to make dispositions
which might have cut off the communication of his royal highness with Stade,
the most important fortification in all the electorate, and this obliged him to
retire with his army under the cannon of that place.

It was generally thought that his situation, as he could retire no further,
must have brought on a battle, which, every thing considered, must have been
decisive in his favor. But it was otherwise resolved upon in the Hanoverian
councils, which had prevailed upon the King of Denmark to employ the Count de
Lynar to mediate a convention between the two armies, which was signed at
Closter-Seven, and by which the Hanoverian army was bound up from hostilities,
and was sent into different cantonments in their own country. This convention
left Richelieu at liberty to tyrannize over all that electorate, which he did
in the most inhuman, rapacious, manner; though we must do the Duke de Randan
the justice to say, that his conduct in his government was directly the reverse
of that of Richelieu: for which he received the thanks of his Britannic Majesty.

The reader, from what is before said, may guess at the secret causes that
produced the surprising convention of Closter-Seven. It is certain, that
neither his royal highness nor the British ministry were privy to them. The
latter, ever since the French had entered Westphalia, had foreseen the
expediency of giving them a diversion in their own country, and that same
summer, 1757, a powerful armament for a secret expedition was fitted out in
England. The design was so well concealed, that the most penetrating
politicians were at a loss to account for its object, and the chief command of
the expedition was given to Lieutenant General Sir John Mordaunt, under whom
served the Major Generals, Conway and Cornwallis, with about 6000 land troops
on board. On the 21st of September, this armament appeared off Rochfort, and
soon after, the small isle of Aix was reduced by the British shipping. From the
fortifications of this island the coasts and situation of the country was
attentively observed, and some of the British officers imagined they discovered
two encampments. This produced disputes and doubts among the officers, which
were heightened by the apparent difficulties of landing, but all agreed in the
expediency of taking a small fort, called Fort Fouras, in order to secure their
retreat. This attack was neglected; but it was resolved to land the troops in
boats on the 28th of September. The weather being somewhat boisterous, (though it
did not appear to be so for three days before) the troops, after being put into
the boats, were ordered to reimbark. Sir Edward Hawke, who commanded the fleet,
grew uneasy at its situation at that time of the year, and it was resolved, but
without any regular, or general, meeting of the council of war, that the whole
expedition should return to England, without making any further attempt. The
consternation of the people and parliament, after the loss of their money, and
what is still more, of their national reputation, was inexpressible. His
Majesty referred the case of the commanding officer to a board of general
officers, and in consequence of their report, he was tried at a general court
martial, held at Whitehall the 14th of December 1757, and acquitted upon the
dubiety of the evidence which was against him.

The public of England had now a disagreeable prospect before its eyes. The
army of observation had been rendered inactive; and thus there was no
cooperating power to take off the weight of the French arms from his Prussian
Majesty, who appeared to be in a most melancholy situation. The Empress of
Russia, his irreconcilable enemy, ordered her troops to quicken their motions,
and they entered the Ducal Prussia, under Marshal Apraxin and General Fermer,
where they were guilty of monstrous inhumanities. An Austrian army penetrated
as far as Breslaw into Silesia, and laid siege to Schweidnitz, while another
body reduced Zittau. The Swedes, to the number of 22,000, made themselves
masters of the towns of Anclam and Demmein, in the Prussian Pomerania, and laid
the neighboring country under contribution, as Richelieu, being now easy on
the side of Hanover, did the old March of Brandenburg, which, however, did not
excuse the inhabitants from being plundered wherever the French came. As the
recovering of Silesia was the main object of the Empress Queen, the army of the
empire was joined by that of the French, under Prince Soubise, and marched
toward Saxony, which left Silesia exposed to all the Austrian force, so that
the King of Prussia durst not venture to defend even his capital Berlin, which
was entered and laid under contribution by General Haddick. The Russians, though
intent only upon their own views, still increased the distress of his Prussian
Majesty. His General Lehwald had orders at all hazards to oppose their
progress, and with no more than 50,000 men, he attacked above double that
number at Norkittin, on the 30th of August 1757. The Russians may be cut to
pieces, but it can seldom be said, they are beaten. Though they lost five men
for one that fell on the Prussian side, yet Lehwald was obliged to retire,
which he did with great reputation to himself, and the arms of his master.
Notwithstanding the amazing exertions of valor and conduct daily made by his
Prussian Majesty, all Europe, not excepting even his friends in England,
thought him now to be at the last gasp. He had lost possession of the dutchies
of Gueldres and Cleves, the principalities of Muers and Munden, with the
counties of Lingen and Lipstadt; East Friesland, Embden, part of Magdeburg, and
the March, the Ducal Pomerania, great part of Silesia, and Regal Prussia.
Conquests, that while they took from him the means of carrying on the war, gave
them to his enemies. His chief means of subsistence rested on his British
subsidy; but that, though great, was not only inadequate to his necessities,
but precarious in itself. The unaccountable failure of the expedition against
Rochfort had soured the nation, and it was uncertain into whose hands the
ministry was to fall.

But the juncture in which his Prussian Majesty was thought to be the most
distressed, rendered him formidable. He had by an admirable train of operations
covered Saxony; but when the army of the empire, and that of Soubise advanced
to the frontiers of Misnia, and seemed to point toward the siege of Leipsic,
he put his troops in motion, after taking all possible precautions against the
Austrians in Lusatia, and for the defense of Schweidnitz. The Imperialists knew
what great things his Prussian Majesty was capable of, and they retired at his
approach; till having reinforced themselves with a vast superiority of numbers,
they again faced his army, and he in his turn retired. It was now the 24th of
October, and he had secretly determined on a battle, but found great
difficulties in bringing it on with advantage to himself. To effect this, he
cantoned his troops in such a manner as to persuade his enemies, from the
distance between their corpse, that he intended to act only on the defensive,
during the remaining part of the winter; but on the 27th of October, to the
amazement of his enemies, so quickly had his troops advanced, he was at the
head of 25,000 choice men.

Though the convention of Closter Seven was equally binding upon the French as
upon the Hanoverians, yet the former behaved with all the insolence of tyrants
over slaves. The rapaciousness of the Duke de Richelieu knew no bounds, one
cruel exaction followed another, but though all was submitted to, the wretched
inhabitants found no relief from plundering and pillaging. Money, and booty was
all that Richelieu had in view, nor indeed durst he repress the licentiousness
of his soldiers, which not only carried them beyond all the bounds of military
discipline, but led them into habits of life, that proved fatal to them, in the
diseases they introduced, attended with vast mortality; while their General and
other Commanders, mindful only of enriching themselves, neither provided for
their recovery, nor furnished them with arms, clothes, or any means of
subsistence, but what they acquired by plunder. Richelieu was sensible of his
army's growing weakness, and to guard against the effects of it, he required
the Hessians and Hanoverians to deliver up their arms, a condition that had not
been stipulated by the convention of Closter Seven. He pushed the breach of
those articles still further, by attempting to seize upon places not
comprehended in them, and by shutting them up in such narrow districts of
cantonment, as rendered it impossible for the inhabitants to subsist. The
revenues of the electorate was farmed out to one Faidy, a money-undertaker,
under pretense of its being a conquered country, and he set up a booth at
Hanover by virtue of his commission, which empowered him to commit what
excesses he pleased.

All these, and many other oppressions, convinced the regency of Hanover, how
greatly they were mistaken, in imagining, that the convention of Closter Seven
would bring any relief to their country. It fortunately happened, that the
court of Versailles refused to consider the convention, as being obligatory
upon her, unless the auxiliary troops of Hanover were disarmed, and unless his
Britannic Majesty would abandon his electorate as a prey to the French. Those
demands, therefore, in fact, freed his Britannic Majesty, as much as it did
France, from looking upon the convention as being obligatory, and he could no
longer resist the voice of his distressed subjects. He appointed Prince
Ferdinand, the brother of the reigning Duke of Brunswic, to be his General, and
the battle of Rosbach critically happening at the same time, the Hanoverians
and Hessians resumed their arms, united under him, and broke from their
disgraceful confinements. The French were in no condition to resist the spirit
of liberty, enflamed by resentment. They were every where beaten. The
Hanoverians took the town of Harburg, and the gallant resistance made by the
castle, which at last was reduced likewise, was the only instance, in which the
French could be said to act like soldiers or men. Prince Ferdinand then
retreated to Ultzen, half way between Zell and Lunenburg, and Broglio having
passed the Aller with a large body of cavalry, the Hanoverians expected every
moment to be attacked. But the movements of the French proved to be only a
feint to cover some wagons of Richelieu's ill gotten plunder, and they fell
back upon their headquarters at Zell. We shall now attend the Russians.

The army under Apraxin had behaved with such unexampled brutality, that in
desolating the countries, through which it marched, they left no subsistence
for themselves; and the court of Vienna had been so slow in its remittances,
that the troops, both officers and soldiers, being greatly in arrear, they took
a resolution to evacuate the Prussian territories, which, to the amazement of
all Europe, they accordingly did. His Prussian Majesty, who at first scarcely
believed the news, upon this, ordered Lehwald to march his army into Pomerania
against the Swedes. Lehwald, on entering that country, scarce met with
resistance from a people, whose military virtues, but a few years before, had
struck terror into all Europe. He not only drove them out of the Prussian
Pomerania, but took possession of all the Swedish, excepting Stralsund, under
the cannon of which, the Swedish army took shelter. The Duke of Mecklenburgh
Schwerin, who, during all the war, had shown a remarkable attachment to the
French, being, by the retreat of the Russians and Swedes, left exposed to his
Prussian Majesty's resentment, was obliged to take shelter at Lubec; and it is
to be lamented, that his subjects, though Protestants, paid dearly for the
misconduct of their Sovereign.

The enemies of the King of Prussia were more strongly united against him by
fear and hatred than they would have been either by interest or principle. The
bloody events and various fortunes of the last campaign, such as never before
happened in so short a time, had not disposed any of the powers at war to make
so much as a proposal for peace. That the King of Prussia might give some
repose to his troops, the campaign did not open till the beginning of April,
1758. The consequences of the battle of Lissa had been extremely favorable to
the King of Prussia, as by the contributions he raised in Saxony and other
places, he was enabled to spare his Hereditary countries, and to send a small
body of cavalry to the assistance of Prince Ferdinand. The Count de Clermont
had now the command of the French army in Westphalia. But the change of the
General did them no service. They retreated or rather fled every where before
the Hanoverians, who marched in two divisions; one on the right to the country
of Bremen, and another under General Zastrow, to the left toward Gifforn. In a
few days the French retired from Ottersburg, Bremen, and Ferden, and the castle
of Rottenburg did not hold out above six hours. It was expected that Count
Chabot, who was posted with a strong detachment at Hoy above Ferden, would have
made a vigorous stand; and Prince Ferdinand appointed his nephew, the young
Prince of Brunswick, with four battalions of foot and some light horse, to
dislodge him. This Prince, though but twenty years of age, had seen a great
deal of action, and his genius was so truly military, that he had performed
exploits which would have done honor to the ablest Generals. He had signalized
himself at the battle of Hastenbeck, and such was his ardour for glory in a
noble cause, that he had, though with the seeming disapprobation of his father,
followed his uncle to the field. The enterprise he was charged with was not
only full of difficulties, but a train of disappointments threatened to render
it unsuccessful. Having a broad river to pass, and but one float to carry his
troops over it, and the wind blowing fresh in his teeth, he found it
impracticable to pass over but one half of his detachment. It was now the 23d
of February, and he boldly, but wisely, determined to surprise the town before
it was daylight sufficient for the French to discover the small handful he was
attended with. Before he was arrived at the town, the enemy was alarmed by an
accidental firing, and prepared to receive him; but the Prince by his courage
and excellent dispositions conquered all opposition. He beat the enemy from the
possession of a bridge they held, took possession of the town, and forced
Chabot, the French commandant, who had thrown himself into the castle, to
surrender it with all his stores and magazines. The Prince, who had with him no
heavy artillery, suffered the troops under Chabot to depart, but he had in the
preceding action killed a great number of the enemy, and made almost 700
prisoners, with no more than 100 of his own men killed and wounded.

The Hanoverian army continuing its march in two divisions, at last cleared all
the electorate of the French, Minden excepted, which was garrisoned by 4000
men; but the place being invested, they were obliged on March the 14th to
surrender themselves prisoners of war, after a siege of no more than nine days.
It does not fall within the narrow compass of our design to particularize the
many skirmishes that all this while passed between the French and the
Hanoverians. The former scarce made a resistance but when they were prompted by
despair, and even then it was ineffectual. All subordination was lost amongst
their troops. Destitute of clothing and covering in a bitter season many
perished on the roads, and the sword was scarcely wanted to finish the
destruction of the survivors, most of whom were so weak and diseased, that they
were knocked on the head by the clubs of the enraged peasants, while the
Hanoverian Hussars and Hunters harrassed the few who had strength enough to
attempt an escape. Upon the whole, it is reckoned at a moderate computation,
that, of 130,000 French, who had entered Westphalia, all of them fine troops,
not above 50,000 were alive at the end of the campaign. These being collected
together from all quarters, at last reached the Rhine, except a body which
maintained itself at Wesel, under count Clermont. We must, however, from the
scene of French oppression and barbarity we have exhibited, except the conduct
of the Duke de Randan, who preserved his virtue and humanity, even amidst all
the horros and provocations of this dismal retreat. Though he had large
magazines, far from destroying them, as the custom of common war might have
justified him in doing, he consigned them to the Hanoverian magistracy for the
benefit of their poor, and that, by his presence, he might prevent all
disorders, he was the last Frenchman, who marched out of Hanover.

The same spirit of despondency seemed to infect the French troops in other
places. A small English squadron under Commodore Holmes arrived before Embden,
which, as we mentioned before, was taken from the King of Prussia by the
French, and, by them, garrisoned with 4000 men, and cut off the communication
between the place and the mouth of the river. The garrison, either struck with
a panic, or apprehending that Holmes expected a speedy supply of ships and
troops, evacuated the town, and sent their heavy artillery and baggag up the
river. Holmes ordered some armed boats to pursue them, and some of their
vessels were taken. In one of them was a youth, the son of a French officer of
distinction, whom the Commodore immediately sent to his father, and offered to
send him the money too, upon his giving his word and honor that it was his own
property. We mention this circumstance, because it is the duty of history to do
justice to private, as well as public, virtue.

Though the French in the space of a few months had sustained almost incredible
losses in Germany, yet we are not with some writers to represent them as being
at this time a ruined people. Their councils, it is true, were not only divided
but unsteady and infirm. All reciprocal confidence had been lost between their
court and parliaments, and the ablest of their ministers had with indignation
retired from public business. Notwithstanding this, France was still internally
powerful, and had prodigious resources. The slightest condescensions, on the
part of her King, gave spirit to her people, and even the losses he had
suffered served to animate them with a passion to repair them. The Duke de
Belleisle, so famous for his exploits civil as well as military, was pointed
out by the public voice, as the only minister who could prevent farther
disgraces, and the French King accordingly put him at the head of the
war-department, to the general satisfaction of his subjects.

England presented a very different scene. The administration there was
popular. A harmony subsisted between the court and parliament, and between the
parliament and people, circumstances which were almost unprecedented in
history. The few intestine divisions that still prevailed were swallowed up in
a universal admiration of his Prussian Majesty's virtues and victories, after
the train of distresses he had undergone. This made it safe for the ministry
thoroughly to adopt a new system, in which there otherwise would have been some
danger to themselves. The design met with little opposition either without or
within doors, because, they who really inclined to oppose it, though a
considerable party in parliament, thought it would be to no purpose, and that
it would expose them to the odium of the public. His Prussian Majesty had
hitherto received only occasional assistances from Great Britain; but on the
11th of April, 1758, a convention was concluded between him and his Britannic
Majesty, by which his Prussian Majesty was to receive 670,000l. sterling a year
from Great Britain; and the contracting parties mutually engaged, that one
should not make peace without the other. Some thought there was danger to Great
Britain, in thus becoming as much a principal as Prussia itself, in a
continental war, and the British ministers themselves perhaps did not foresee
the consequences that have since happened, or that the empress of Russia would
prove so intractable as she did. The retreat of her troops was considered as a
prelude to an alteration of her conduct; but the public were soon undeceived in
that respect. Apraxin was disposted and put under arrest, as was Bestucheff her
Imperial Majesty's first minister, for countenancing the retreat, and the
command of the army was given to the Generals, Brown and Fermer. In Sweden the
flagrant disgrace her arms had sustained, seemed to increase the animosity of
his Prussian Majesty's enemies against him, and without consulting the King,
the Senate came to a resolution of prosecuting the war with more vigor than
ever.

After the reduction of Schweidnitz, which surrendered April the 16th, 1758,
his Prussian Majesty had no enemies within his dominions. His credit was now
high, and his armies strong. He had a body of troops commanded by Count Dohna,
on the side of Pomerania, which overawed the Swedes and Mecklenburghers.
Silesia was covered by another body, posted between Wohlau and Glogau, while an
army of 30 battalions and 45 squadrons was formed in Saxony, under the command
of Prince Henry, his Prussian Majesty's brother, to face the army of the
empire, which was again become formidable; and those armies were all so
judiciously posted, that each had a communication with the other. His Prussian
Majesty's affairs wearing so promising an aspect, he resolved upon an offensive
war, and to make the untouched country of Moravia its theater. To conceal his
design, after the reduction of Schweidnitz, he ordered some troops to take post
as if he intended to invade Bohemia, but all of a sudden making a rapid march,
he opened trenches before the city of Olmutz, the barrier of Moravia, on the
27th of May. We may perhaps venture to say that the flattering prospect of
carrying the war to the gates of Vienna was his Prussian Majesty's main motive
in this expedition, which at first threw the Austrian councils into vast
perplexity. Marshal Daun was then in Lusatia, but marching through Bohemia, he
took the command of the army that was to oppose his Prussian Majesty, and
posted himself between Gewitz and Littau, by which situation he had at his back
the fruitful country of Bohemia, and could by his parties intercept the
Prussian convoys from Silesia. It soon appeared that his Prussian Majesty had
not sufficiently considered the difficulties attending his expedition. Olmutz
was a city of such extent, that his troops were not numerous enough completely
to invest it: so that Daun was enabled to supply it with provisions and every
thing necessary for making a vigorous defense, and he never showed himself so
complete a General as he then did. Perceiving that his Prussian Majesty had
taken a false step, he availed himself of it to the utmost; and took such
measures, that his royal antagonist, notwithstanding all his endeavors and
provocations, perceived it was impracticable to force him to a battle. In the
mean while, the besieged plied the Prussians with incessant sallies, by which
they ruined their works, and nailed up their cannon, not to mention their loss
of men. As to his Prussian Majesty, his situation was such, that by the
neighborhood of Daun's army, he found himself unable to employ above 10,000
men upon the siege, and they were in a manner themselves besieged by the enemy.
The country about Olmutz afforded them no subsistence, all having been
destroyed by the Austrians; and to complete the King's misfortune, Daun lay as
near to Silesia as he did, and by means of the country people, he was admirably
well served with intelligence. Hearing that a great Prussion convoy was arrived
at Troppau, he struck a blow which proved him to be a General of enterprise as
well as caution. He ordered two detachments from two very different places,
Muglitz and Prerau, to put themselves in motion, and prescribed them such
regulations for their march as that they should come up at the same time so as
to attack the convoy on both sides. To favor this maneuver, Daun made
dispositions as if he intended to fight the Prussian army under the King, who
had left the command of the siege to Field-Marshal Keith. This sudden change in
Daun's operations, gave the King some suspicions, and he sent a body of troops
under General Ziethen to support his convoy. Ziethen came too late to prevent
its being attacked, but it had repelled the Austrians. The latter, however,
were reinforced by Daun with fresh troops, who renewed the engagement next day,
defeated Ziethen, seized on the center of the convoy, while the rear
precipitately retired to Troppau, and but few of the Van reached the Prussian
camp.

This disappointment of the convoy before mentioned, was fatal to his Prussian
Majesty's aspiring views: July was now drawing on, and he had thrown away a
most precious part of the summer in unsuccessful operations, without having it
in his power, so judicious were the measures of his enemy, to display either
courage or generalship. The Russians had again taken the field, and their
Cossacks and Calmucks, were as usual, making cruel incursions into Silesia, and
Berlin itself was threatened. Such was his Prussian Majesty's situation, when
he took the secret, but unwilling, resolution of raising the siege of Olmutz.
By this time Daun had made a motion to Posnitz, which must have laid the
Prussians under still greater difficulties, and might have not only raised the
siege, but have ruined their army. Beset with so many dangers, his Majesty, by
an uncommon effort of genius, instead of retiring, resolved to advance into his
enemies dominions, a resolution equally wise and bold. Perceiving that Daun by
the change of his situation had left Bohemia uncovered, he ordered on the last
of July the siege to be carried on with more briskness than ever, but on the
night of the same day his whole army took the road of Bohemia, gained 24 hours
march of the Austrians, defeated all the parties that attempted to oppose him,
seized upon a grand magazine at Leutomissel, and arrived at the important post
of Konigsgratz in Bohemia with all his wagons, baggage, artillery and military
stores, and after defeating 7000 Austrians who lay entrenched before it, he
took possession of the place. All Europe was surprised that he availed himself
of this important conquest no farther than by laying it and the neighboring
country under contribution. But the danger his hereditary dominions were in
from the Russians justified his again evacuating Bohemia and marching toward
Silesia, where he understood that his barbarous enemies had entered the New
March of Brandenburg, and laid siege to the important fortress of Custrin.

Though Great Britain had hitherto sent but a few troops to the assistance of
Prince Ferdinand in Germany, yet her ministry had made incessant efforts for
distressing the French. The fears of invasion lay so heavy upon the spirits of
the people, that her ministry found themselves under a necessity of
endeavoring to remove them. The British Councils for some time fluctuated
between two measures proposed for that purpose. The one was to send a strong
body of troops to act in conjunction with Prince Ferdinand in Germany: The
other was to alarm the sea coasts of France by frequent descents upon them. The
first proposal was thought too much to break in upon the anticontinental plan
our Ministers had adopted, and the latter was espoused upon three principles.
The first was, that such descents would oblige the French to divide their
forces and to weaken their army in Germany, in order to guard the vast extent
of their sea coasts. The second was, that it would employ the natural strength
of Great Britain, her marine, which would give satisfaction to all parties
amongst us. And the third, that it would prove that the French were vulnerable
in their own dominions, and must therefore lay aside all thoughts of invading
ours.

Though we are little disposed to enter into political disquisitions, yet we
cannot help saying that the two first principles seem to have been mistaken. A
nation like France, that can bring into the field, exclusive of militia,
300,000 men, is not to be diverted from its main object by so inconsiderable a
force as we proposed to employ against it. The marine of Great Britain was
indeed exerted, but in a very disadvantageous manner. It served only as a
convoy to our land troops, but could be of little or no use to them after they
were set on shore; while the difficulties of the coast, and the uncertainties
of wind and weather, rendered it extremely hazardous for our ships to continue
in any one station so as that they could be ready to re-admit the land troops
after they had executed their commission; and* in fact, the frequent
debarkations and reembarkations which the service proposed required, proved it
by experience to be inconvenient almost to impracticability. The third
principle was better founded, though not without its exceptions.

The measure of making a descent upon France being resolved upon, the Duke of
Marlborough was appointed to command the land troops. He was the grandson of
the Great Duke of Marlborough, and from him inherited a strong passion for
military glory, especially against the French. In other respects he was in
private life a nobleman of the most amiable character, and had discovered upon
several occasions that he had studied the art of war, and that his abilities
were equal to such a command; so that no officer in the British service was
more proper either in point of popularity, or that of sufficiency, to conduct
such an expedition. The land forces under him consisted of 16 battalions and 9
troops of light horse.

To give the greater eclat to this expedition, a most formidable naval armament
was fitted out. We wish we could say that this equipment had been as judicious
as we presume it was well intended. On the 1st of June, Admiral Anson, with the
fleet under his command, sailed from St. Helens, as did Commodore How with his
squadron, and all the transports about two hours after. The Admiral directed
his course down the Channel, and the Commodore his for the coast of France: the
ships under the Admiral were the Royal George, 100 guns; Duke, 90; Neptune, 90;
Ramillies, 90; Barfleur, 90; Union, 80; Newark, 80; Magnanime, 74; Norfolk, 74;
Alcide, 74; Chichester, 74; Duc d'Aquitaine, 64; Fougueux, 64; Achilles, 60;
Intrepide, 60; Norwich, 50; Dunkirk, 60; Southampton, 36; Acteon, 36; Tartar,
20; Leostoft, 20; and Coventry, 36. There were on board the fleet 16 regiments,
nine troops of light horse, and above 2000 marines.

The ships under Commodore How were the Essex, 70 guns; Rochester, 50;
Deptford, 50; Portland, 50; Pallas, 36; Brilliant, 36; Richmond, 36; Active,
36; Maidstone, 20; Flamborough, 20; Rose, 20; Diligence, 16; Success, 16;
Saltash, 16; Swallow, 16; Speedwell, 16; Pluto fireship, 16; Salamandar ditto,
16; Infernal bomb, 16; Granada ditto, 16; Cormorant, 14; 10 Cutters, each 10
guns; 100 transports, 20 tenders, and 2 storeships.

When this fleet sailed, the public imagined that the whole was to burst upon
the coast of France, but they were soon undeceived. The powerful squadron under
the Lord Anson soon parted from that under Commodore How, but left, under the
command of the latter, all the transports with the land troops, and his
Lordship proceeded for the bay of Biscay, in order, as was said, to alarm the
coasts of France, and to observe the French squadron in Breast. Whether either
of those two purposes were objects worthy so prodigious an armament, we shall
not presume to determine, because we are not fully informed as to the effects
it produced, or whether they were answerable to the high station of the
Commander, and the prodigious expense of the equipment.

The lesser squadron, under Commodore How, proceeded with the transports to
the coast of France, and without any material accident, arrived at Cancalle
bay, on the coast of Britanny, on the 5th of June, about 7 miles distant from
St. Malo; which whether it was the original, or the accidental object of the
expedition, we shall not determine; but they resolved to attack it, if
practicable. After the troops were landed, the strictest discipline was
observed, and though the inhabitants of Cancalle had fled in their first
consternation; yet all excesses committed upon their effects by the British
soldiery were punished with the utmost rigor. This humane regularity of
discipline had excellent consequences. The inhabitants of the country returned
to their habitations, and treated our troops not as their invaders but their
friends. After fortifying a post near Cancalle, the army under the Duke of
Marlborough, set out toward St. Malo, where they soon found, what some may
think they ought to have known long before, that the place was unassailable by
the force they had with them, being situated at the extremity of a long narrow
causeway. His Grace, however, did all that was possible to be done with the
force he had. On the 12th of June, he burnt one man of war of 50 guns, one of
36 (and, to use the words of the Gazette, the best authority we can follow) All
the privateers, some of 30, several of 20 and 18 guns, and, in the whole,
upwards of 100 ships, notwithstanding they were under the cannon of St. Malo;
but finding it impracticable to attack that place, and receiving intelligence
of troops being on their march from all sides, his Grace thought it necessary
to march back to Cancalle: Commodore How had made so good a disposition of the
boats and transports, that four brigades, and ten companies of grenadiers were
embarked in less than seven hours, the enemy not having attempted to attack
them; and on the 12th all the troops were on board, waiting to take advantage
of the first wind, to pursue the farther objects of his Majesty's instructions.
It is extremely remarkable that during the execution of an enterprise, which
did such infinite damage to the French, the detachment employed in it met with
no opposition, not even from a single shot of the enemy, and they returned
equally unmolested to Cancalle.

The re-embarkation being made, the Duke of Marlborough and the officers under
him proceeded to the coasts of Normandy, where they reconnoitred the town of
Granville, which they did not think fit to attempt, because a large body of
French troops lay encamped in its neighborhood. They then moved toward
Cherbourg; but the weather proving unfavourable, the fleet running short in
provisions, and the crews sickly, all further attempts were judged
impracticable, and the fleet arrived, on the 29th of June, at St. Helens; and
the Duke of Marlborough was appointed to take the command in chief of the
British troops serving in, or destined for Germany.

Had it not been for the prodigious force of the British fleet on its first
sailing for this expedition, it is more than probable that the public would
have been much better satisfied with the event of it. The damage done to
France, however, was very considerable, and the people were pleased with the
reflection that we in reality had subjected her to the hostilities with which
she had only menaced us. If no excessive joy was expressed, no murmuring was
heard in public; and the spirit of the nation was kept up by the declarations
of the ministry, that the remaining part of the season would be employed in
action. In less than a month after the return of the armament under the Duke of
Marlborough, another, but not of equal strength, was fitted out.

General Bligh was appointed to command the new armament, as was before
mentioned; he had served with great reputation in the late war, and it was
judged necessary to prove the minister to be in earnest, notwithstanding, the
smallness of the land force, which was not 6000 men complete, that the second
Prince of the blood, Prince Edward, since Duke of York, should serve on board
the fleet. Like the great Czar of Muscovy, he resolved to go through all the
subordinate duties before he arrived at the higher commands. Commodore How had
the command of the fleet, and General Bligh of the land forces, the Duke of
Marlborough having by this time been nominated to the command of the British
troops who were ordered for Germany.

It was the first of August before the fleet sailed from St. Helens, and on the
6th it appeared off Cherburg. This is a seaport in the very middle of the
channel, and therefore commodiously situated for distressing the English
navigation by privateering, and even for facilitating an invasion. The place is
naturally weak, but the convenience of its situation for the above purposes had
induced the French court to lavish most immense sums in supplying the defects
of nature by enlargeing and deepening the harbor, raising fortifications,
making Sluices, building a mole, opening floodgates, and forming a basin, so
that the whole was justly deemed a stupendous undertaking, and worthy the
genius of Monsieur Belidor, the famous engineer who had projected it. Happily,
perhaps for us, either the wisdom or the parsimony of Cardinal Fleury did not
keep pace with the vastness of the design, but enough was finished to give
every Briton an idea that another Dunkirk, more dangerous than that which had
been demolished, would arise in Cherburg, that it would prove to England what
Carthage was to Rome, and therefore it was necessary to ruin it.

The British fleet coming to anchor before this important place, it soon
appeared that the French had more than suspected its destination. They had
strengthened the landing places with forts, and a large body of militia, while
three regiments of regulars lined the shore, so that a resolute opposition was
expected. Intrepidity is often the cheapest way of making war, and that of the
British Commodore upon this occasion saved blood. His dispositions were so
just, and yet so bold, that the troops landed almost without loss under the
fire of the ships, and the amazement of the French at their courage seemed to
take from them the powers of resistance, though favored by all that art could
contribute to render it effectual. They abandoned fort after fort, and one port
after another, so that the British troops may be said to have walked rather
than to have marched into Cherburg, the day after their landing. The design of
the expedition was soon answered; a few hours quickly laid in ruins the labors
of half an age, and the product of 40 millions of livres. A most superb train
of brass artillery fell into the hands of the conquerors, who behaved with so
much humanity and good manners to the desenceless inhabitants, that when the
ships in the harbor were burnt, and the work of demolition was over, they
appeared to be visitors rather than invaders.

Were not the fact recent and unquestionably attested, it would appear highly
improbable, that 6000 British troops should remain unmolested for ten days in
France, which proudly, perhaps justly, boasts herself to be the greatest land
power in Europe; that they should without opposition take hostages for payment
of contributions, and reimbark, as commodiously and safely, as if they had been
in their own country. The artillery was sent to England, and September 16th
drawn in triumph from Kensington to the tower of London with a pompous
attendance of guards, horse and foot, and every circumstance that could serve
to awaken in the minds of the people the ideas they had formed of the military
glories of their ancestors.

After the reimbarkation was completed, the fleet was driven toward the coasts
of England, but soon after made for the bay of St. Lunar, where the land troops
made a second descent near the town of St. Malo. The most favorable
construction that can be put upon this attempt is, that it was possible the
French in St. Malo might have been off their guard, or like those of Cherburg,
intimidated from making resistance. This supposition proved groundless, and
after the troops were landed, their commanders could not figure in their own
minds a practicable object of attack, while the rockiness of the bay rendered
it so dangerous for the Commodore to continue there with his shipping, that he
was obliged to move three leagues westward to the bay of St. Cas. This
separation of the fleet from the army, and the operations of the latter, which
were visibly undetermined and useless, gave spirit to the French. The Duke
d'Aguillon, governor of Brittany, who in point of reputation was then at the
head of the second rate French Generals, and perhaps now deserves to be ranked
amongst the first, got together 12 battalions, 6 squadrons of regular troops,
and two regiments of militia, which are little inferior to regulars, and
advancing within six miles of the English army, was now arrived at the village
of Matignon, after repelling all the flying attacks made upon them by the
enemy. The inequality of the force, and the disadvantages of situation soon
determined the British commanders to make the best of their way to St. Cas,
which lay at the distance only of three miles. The march of those three miles
however contained in it circumstances and incidents more puzzling and
unaccountable than that of Hannibal over the Alps, and we are better acquainted
with the particulars of the latter than of the former. It is sufficient to say,
that, to the eternal disgrace of the French, every man of the English was not
destroyed or taken. The French were so cautious in their approaches, that the
English proceeded unmolested in their march, though it was so intersected by
incidents and their ignorance of the country, that it was in the power of the
Duke d'Aguillon entirely to have cut off their communication with their fleet,
an advantage which a British officer would have esteemed to be his highest good
fortune had the French been under the like circumstances in England. The Duke,
however, more prudently perhaps, permitted all the English but their rear,
which was mostly composed of the foot guards and grenadiers, to embark, and
then he marched down from the heights that environed the bay to attack the
English. The resistance of the latter did honor to their country, but besides
the disadvantages of numbers, the French being above twelve to one, they were
under the irreparable one of falling short of ammunition. The bravery of their
fellow subjects contributed to their misfortune. Commodore How seeing their
danger, ordered himself to be rowed in his own shallop, attended by the boats
of the fleet, as near the shore as possible to assist in bringing off his
countrymen. By this time the small handful of British soldiers had been
entirely broken by the vast superiority of the French, who refused them quarter
while the fire continued from the fleet. That ceasing, about 600 were made
prisoners, and it appeared that about 400 had been killed, amongst whom was Sir
John Armitage, a young gentleman of large fortune in Yorkshire, and a volunteer
in the service. General Drury was likewise amongst the dead, being drowned by
endeavoring to escape to a boat. But we are now to attend a more important and
a more fortunate expedition in another quarter of the world.

The year 1757 was far from being favorable to the British arms either by land
or sea. In America, where the Earl of Loudohn commanded in chief, an expedition
had been planned against Crown Point; but it was dropped, and it was resolved to
attack Louisbourg. Admiral Holbourn was appointed to command the fleet, which
was strong and well provided, and sailed from Cork with 6000 land troops on
the 7th of May. We shall omit the ill-natured reflections which were given out,
as if an opportunity had been lost, during the voyage, of fighting the French
fleet. It is certain that the Admiral landed at Hallifax the beginning of July,
where he was met by the Earl, at the head of 6000 men, brought with him from
New York. When this formidable armament was preparing to proceed to the place
of its destination, a kind of a panic seized the land forces, upon an
intelligence that was pretended to have been received, that 17 French ships of
the line, besides frigates, with all kind of ammunition and military stores,
were arrived in the harbor of Louisbourg. One English officer, Lord Charles
Hay, was for proceeding; but he was put under arrest, not without strong
suspicion of his being a madman, and afterward tried for his life, on an
accusation of mutiny. He was almost single in his opinion, and the council of
war (though it does not appear that any enquiry into the report was made) agreed
in opinion for laying aside the expedition by land for that season. As to our
fleet, they sailed, as was said, to block up Louisbourg harbor, and to provoke
that of France to an engagement. The Admiral was disappointed in both. The
French, whose force was greatly inferior to his, were too wise to attack him,
and on the 25th of Sept. such a storm arose as drove the Admiral from before
the harbor, and obliged him to return to England, in a most shattered
condition, after losing one ship, and having eleven dismasted.

Disgrace succeeded disappointment, and our proceedings in America during the
remainder of this year formed a series of melancholy miscarriages. The French,
who had taken Oswego, were masters of the Lakes, and we abandoned to their
mercy both the friendship and the protection of the five Indian Nations. So
that at last, falling from one blunder into another, our forts were demolished,
our communication with the Indians, our allies, was cut off, our frontiers
invaded by the French, and their Savages, who destroyed all our fine
settlements on the Mohawks river, and the German flats; and at last the siege
of Fort William Henry, built on the Southern edge of Lake George, was formed, a
place of the utmost importance for covering that frontier.

The reflections arising from so many ruinous disgraceful events were the more
mortifying, when it was considered that America had never seen in one body so
great a British force as it did that year; a force which was thought sufficient
to have driven the French out of that continent. There was a garrison of 2500
men within Fort William Henry, and General Webb lay near it with 4000 more.
Mons. Montcalm, the French General, had not in the whole above 8000 men,
including the Canadians and Indians. In war incredulity and credulity have
often the same fatal effects. Montcalm's intentions, and preparations, though
sufficiently public, were disbelieved. No care was taken to bring the militia
together, which had it been done, would have rendered the English far superior
to their enemies. Montcalm was encouraged to proceed in the siege by the small
resistance he met with, and on the 9th of August, which was six days after the
siege was formed, the place was surrendered; the garrison engaging not to serve
against the French for eighteen months; but obtained the favor of marching out
with their arms and baggage. The French Savages, paid so little regard to the
terms of the capitulation, that they plundered the English soldiers as they
marched out, and scalped the Indians and Blacks, that had been in the garrison,
and practiced a thousand other inhumanities, from which the French Generals
pretended to restrain them, but to no purpose. It was however strongly surmised
in England that the Savages were privately instructed to act as they did;
because, had the French General encouraged the English to stand to their
defense, and made dispositions of his own men for supporting them, as the laws
of war required him to do, the Savages durst not have ventured to be so
outrageous.

After demolishing the fort, and carrying off all they found in it, the French
put an end to the campaign, and the world saw with amazement 2000 regular
troops, besides a great number of Provincials, and a vast naval force of 20
ships, provided with every thing that could render war glorious and successful,
loiter away a whole year, at the expense of twelve millions to their mother
country, in doing worse than nothing, against an enemy, whose only strength lay
in the avarice of those, whose unprecedented appointments had rendered it their
interest to protract the war.

The indignation conceived by the people of England at this inglorious campaign
in America roused the national spirit. The new ministry, and the old, concurred
equally in cherishing it; and it was resolved to change hands, and to employ
other commanders, both by land and sea, in making a new attempt upon Louisbourg.

On the 19th of February Admiral Boscawen sailed with a powerful fleet of ships
of war and transports from England to Halifax; from whence he sailed with 157
ships, great and small, and about 14,000 land troops, under the command of
General Amherst, and on the 2d of June appeared before Louisbourg. The French
in America on this occasion behaved better than their countrymen in France did
in the descent upon Cherbourg. They raised batteries all along the coast where
a landing was practicable, and the surf was so great that for six days no boat
could approach the shore. At last the surf subsiding, dispositions were made
for landing in three divisions; the left, where the hottest service was
expected, being under the command of General Wolf. The frigates of the fleet
were posted to the right and left, to rake the enemy on their flanks. General
Wolf's division moved in boats toward the land, and nothing but the greatest
intrepidity of that brave commander and his soldiers could have rendered the
landing effectual. The enemy reserved their sirc till the British troops were
near the shore, and then gave it with full effect both from their cannon and
musquetry; but neither the slaughter of men, the overseting and wrecking of
boats, nor the advantageous position of the enemy, could daunt the assailants.
Each encouraged his neighbor. They who could not jump waded ashore, and at
last the whole fell upon the enemy and drove them from their posts; upon which
the other two divisions made good their landing with far less loss than could
have been expected.

The surf on the shore returning, rendered it difficult to land the artillery
and the implements necessary for the siege; and the French had in the harbor
of Louisbourg five men of war that could bring their artillery to bear upon the
approaches of the British troops. Perseverance, intrepedity, and judgment,
surmounted all those difficulties. General Wolf on the 12th of June took from
the enemy a post, called the light-battery, by which he could annoy the enemy's
ships, and the batteries on the other side of the harbor. And on the 25th he
silenced what was called the island battery, which bore the hardest upon him.
Notwithstanding this, t e enemy continued to make a brave resistance; but on
the 21st of July one of the French ships of war blew up, and the explosion
being communicated to other two, all the three were destroyed. This loss seemed
to damp the garrison, and the Admiral now thought it practicable to destroy the
two remaining ships in the harbor. For that purpose a detachment of about 600
seamen were sent in boats, under the command of Captains Laforey and Balfour,
who executed their instructions with amazing intrepidity and success. They
towed one of the ships out of the harbor, and burnt the other, which ran
aground. Upon this a council of war was held within the place, and it was
determined to treat about a capitulation. Drucour, the Governor, at first
demanded the terms that had been granted to the garrison of Fort St. Philip in
Minorca, but the British Admiral and General in a joint letter informed him,
that the English were about to enter the harbor, and batter the town, in which
case he must stand to all the bloody consequences, if he and his garrison did
not immediately surrender themselves prisoners of war; which they accordingly
did.

The taking of Louisbourg, though attended with some loss, was a greater proof
of the debility of the French Government than of the cowardice or the
mismanagement of their troops. It is true the garrison, which surrendered the
26th of July, amounted to 5637 troops, and they were provided with 221 pieces
of cannon, 18 mortars, and a considerable quantity of stores and ammunition; so
that it ought to have made a better defense than it did. But on the other hand,
the fortifications of the place, considering its vast importance to the French,
had not been sufficiently attended to; and in any event had the siege
continued, famine must have obliged it to surrender. Add to this, that the
French court failed in all its promises to Drucour of sending him a force from
Canada sufficient to raise the siege. The surrender of Louisbourg brought on
that of the island of St. John, and of all the French stations for carrying on
their fishery toward Gaspesie and the bay de Chaleurs.

The British nation had, for years before this important event happened, been
so accustomed to miscarriages in America, that they could scarcely credit their
good fortune when the news of the surrender of Louisbourg arrived. The
acquisition of the place was not of greater service than the spirit it raised
in the nation; and both we and our confederates were now convinced, that the
high ideas we had entertained of the French power had been the chief means of
their success. We had seen them insulted in their mother country, and deprived
of the strongest, as well as the most convenient place they held in America;
for Louisbourg was the place of rendezvous for all their vessels employed in
the cod fishery, and all the troops they sent to Canada. The views of the
British government now enlarged, and it was judged expedient, if not necessary,
to drive the French from Ticonderoga, deemed their most impregnable pass on the
continent of America, and Crown-Point, which Ticonderoga covered. General
Abercrombie, who had succeeded Lord Lo dohn as Commander in chief of the
British forces in America, undertook this expedition. On the 5th of July, he
embarked upon Lake George, with almost 16,000 troops, regulars and provincials,
and a numerous well provided artillery; and next day he effected his landing
without opposition; the advanced guard of the French retiring before them. No
man, who has not been in person in America, can have a just idea of the face of
the country, which lies between the place of landing and Tigonderoga, and which
had, perhaps, never been trod by humane feet, if we except the savage, thinly
scattered, natives. The British troops had no direction for their march but the
quarters of the heavens; and even these were intercepted by the trees of the
woods through which they were obliged to pass. It was therefore no wonder if
the officers and soldiers, many of whom, perhaps, were not expert astronomers,
lost their way in this more than bewildering march. The French advanced guard
did the same, and a rencounter ensued, in which about 300 French were killed,
and 148 taken prisoners. But this rencounter, though the English were
victorious, cost them dear, for in it was lost the gallant Lord How, whose
name interrupts the narrative of history to commemorate his virtues. He was the
Scipio of his age and country; formed for all that was amiable in society, and
great in war; while he issued the order, he set the example; and by his
behavior toward his superiors, he taught his inferiors their duty toward
him. But those are qualifications that enter into the character of every
complete officer. Lord How, to great merit as an officer, joined great genius
as a soldier. He had the spirit to adapt himself to the service he was engaged
in, discouraging and difficult as it was, by retrenching in his own person
every incumberance that could arise from his rank, either as a nobleman or an
officer, even to the cutting off his hair. The common soldier saw him fare like
himself, nor did he seem to affect the least preeminence but in his forwardness
to encounter danger and endure fatigue; so that he appeared to be rather
imitated than obeyed by all under his command.

On the 28th of July the British army, which had marched in four columns,
appeared before Ticonderoga, which is situated on an isthmus between Lake
George and a gut which communicates with Lake Champlain. The French, who had
been apprized of the expedition, had omitted nothing to render the pass
impregnable. It was accessible only in the front, where a large morass was to
be passed, the vacuities of which were supplied by a fortification eight or ten
feet high, well furnished with cannon, and lined by above 5000 men. The ground,
as usual, was reconnoitred by General Abercrombie's order, and the engineer
reported, that he thought the intrenchments were practicable by small
artillery. This fatal report produced an order for an attack, without waiting
for the great artillery, which was slow in coming up; least the French should
be joined by 3000 troops, who were said to be on their march to Ticonderoga.
The attack was made with that vigor and intrepidity which is peculiar to the
British troops, and they performed every thing but impossibilities. The pass
was not only fortified, as has already been described, but shut up with vast
trees felled down with their leaves toward the assailants, so as both to
conceal and favor the French. The carnage was horrible, and the General being
convinced that the attempt was impracticable, ordered a retreat, after losing
about 2000 men killed, wounded, or taking prisoners in the action, which lasted
about four hours. That this attack was unfortunate cannot be denied; and it was
the more so, because the loss fell upon the bravest of our troops, who had not
the satisfaction of dearly selling their lives; so inaccessible were their
enemies in their entrenchments. There was plainly a defect of judgment, but
the public is not yet agreed where the blame ought to lie. According to the
General's account he was misinformed by the engineer. Be that as it will, the
retreat seems to be the wisest part of the expedition as well as the speediest;
for the evening after the action, the British army regained their camp to the
Southward of Lake George.

The unfortunate attack upon Ticonderoga did not prevent our operations in
America, during the year 1758, from being in the main successful. To make the
best of our miscarriage, Colonel Bradstreet was sent with 3000 provincials
against Fort Frontenac, the garrison of which was understood to be weak. The
great difficulty of this expedition lay in the length of the way which the army
had to surmount before they could come at their object. At last, with
astonishing perseverance, it arrived at Oswego, embarked on Lake Ontario, and
the 25th of August came before Fort Frontenac, which stands near the
communication between that Lake and the river St. Lawrence. It could not be
expected, that a place garrisoned as that was, only by 150 men, could make any
considerable resistance. The Colonel, two days after he came before it, took it
without the loss of a man, and destroyed within it a large magazine of
provisions that was to have supplied their Southern forts. Nine armed sloops
were likewise taken and burnt, and the fort was destroyed, because as matters
were then circumstanced, it would have been sacrificing men to have left a
garrison within a place, where a communication with our other settlements was
extremely difficult, if not impracticable. The execution of an expedition
against Fort du Quesne, a post of vast importance for commanding the Ohio, and
for breaking the chief link of that chain of forts which the French had erected
for effecting a communication between Canada and Louisiana was committed to
General Forbes, an officer of experience, bred up under General Campbel, who
lost his life at Fontenoy, and present at most of the considerable actions in
Europe during the last war. He marched from Pennsylvania with a considerable
army, through countries which no Europeans had ever before passed; and infested
on every side by the enemy's Indians. Major Grant with a body of Highlanders
and Provincials, as being most proper for that service, had the command of the
advanced guard, which consisted of about 800 men; but advancing too near the
fort, in hopes possibly of surprising it, he was defeated by the garrison with
some loss. The main body of our army coming up, the garrison which consisted of
between 4 and 500 men, after damaging their works fell down the Ohio, and left
the General at liberty to enter the place; which he repaired, and it now goes
by the name of Pitsburgh, so called from the gentleman who was looked upon to
be the soul of all our prosperous undertakings.

The successes of the British arms in America this year, though not striking,
were solid, because they directly regarded the primary object of the war on our
part, which was the security of our back settlements, and consequently of all
our interest in North America, which was not only effectually done, but the
enemy by the loss of Louisbourg, the American Dunkirk, was deprived of that
reservoir which supplied the channels of war through all their other settlements.
It is possible, that had they not been so infatuated, as to imagine they could
retrieve in Germany all that they had lost in America, the British court in the
beginning of the year 1759 might have listened to terms of accommodation. But
nothing could convince the French, that by multiplying the dangers of Hanover
and the King of Prussia, they could not force our court to a peace on their
other terms; and this brings me back to the affairs on the continent of Europe.

On the 1st of June, Prince Ferdinand, who could not prevent the French from
passing the Rhine, pursued them across that river, which he passed at Herven
and Rees, in sight of all their army, which was so much astonished at the
boldness of the passage, that they retired toward Meurs, while it was plain by
the motions of the Prince that he designed to pass the Maese, and thereby
oblige the Prince de Soubise to abandon an enterprise he was meditating against
Hesse Cassel. To prevent his executing this scheme, the French at last made a
stand at Crevelt, with their right toward the village of Vischelon, and their
left toward Anrath; Crevelt lying in the front of their right. In short, their
situation was strong, their dispositions judicious, and it required great
exertion of military genius to attack them with any appearance of success. A
wood covered their left wing at Anrath, and the Prince after accurately
reconnoitring all their visible posts, and informing himself of the nature of
the ground, judged an attack on the flank of their right wing was the most
practicable, but that it must be favored by two other attacks, which, though
real, were in a great measure to be continued or discontinued according to the
success of the main one, and which was to be commanded by himself. He
accordingly advanced at the head of the grenadiers against the enemies lest
wing, which suffered from the superior fire of the Hanoverian artillery; but
the French, favored by the wood, still maintained their posts, which made it
necessary to disoodge them by a closer engagement. This was begun by the
gallant Hereditary Prince of Brunswick, at the head of the first line of foot,
with which he formed a front against the wood, and the fire of the musquetry
here continued incessantly for two hours and an half. The Hanoverian infantry
at last penetrated into the wood, where they found two ditches lined with
troops, which were successively forced. This intrepidity threw the French into
a disorder which was a prelude to the defeat of that wing; but a defeat which
in its consequences was no way correspondent to the courage and conduct of the
conquerors. The French cavalry were not to be broken by the utmost efforts of
the Hanoverian horse, and notwithstanding a most dreadful fire, maintained
themselves in good order upon the plain, and covered the remains of their
infantry of the left wing as they were driven out of the wood. The two other
attacks went no further than cannonading, but though the enemy suffered by it,
their wing and center retired in good order to Nuis. We are apt to believe that
the loss on both sides was carefully concealed. That of the French in killed,
wounded and prisoners, was about 7000, according to the best accounts, and the
loss of the Hanoverians exceeded 3000; but it is difficult to ascertain the
loss of an army that is victorious and keeps the field of battle. In this
engagement was killed the Count de Gisors, the only son of the Marshal Duke de
Belleisle, a young nobleman who at the time of his death was not above 25 years
of age, but so amiable in his manners, and so accomplished in his person, that
in him seem to have expired the lingering remains of French urbanity and
virtue. Books, traveling, conversation and study, had given him every kind of
knowledge but that of war, which he resolved to acquire by experience; but he
fell at the head of his regiment in his first essay.

Though all concurred in doing justice to the military merits of Prince
Ferdinand, and the courage of his troops, yet some wished they had been
employed on an occasion in which success might have been attended by decision.
The French, notwithstanding, their repulse at Crevelt, were in the
neighborhood of their own country, from whence they drew such resources that
not only made them stronger than ever in the field, but enabled them to
reinforce the Prince de Soubise. Prince Ferdinand, conscious of his
inferiority, sought to avail himself of his victory. He passed the Rhine, and
on the 28th of June he appeared before the important city of Dusseldorp,
situated on that river, belonging to the elector Palatine, and the capital of
the Duchy of Berg. It was garrisoned by 2000 French; but after a brisk
bombardment it surrendered to the Prince on the 7th of July, and the garrison
was suffered to depart with the honors of war. By the taking of Dusseldorp,
Prince Ferdinand was enabled to secure his retreat over the Rhine, which it was
too apparent he must soon be forced to make. After leaving three battalions of
Hanoverians to garrison Dusseldorp, he spent several days in facing the French
army, and watching his advantages. But both parties had their reasons for
declining a second engagement. Prince Ferdinand flattered himself that the
Hessian General, the Prince of Ysenburg, would cut out work for the Prince de
Soubise, till he could carry the war into the enemies country by passing the
Maese, the effects of which probably must have been, that the Prince would have
fallen back upon the main body of the French army, which was now commanded by
the Marshal de Contades. The hopes of his Serene Highness soon vanished; for on
the 23d of July, the Duke de Broglio defeated the Hessian army of 7000 men near
Sangershausen; by which they came to the command of the river, and masters of
all that part of Westphalia.

By this time the English ministry were convinced of the necessity they were
under to support the German war with British troops as well as British money.
The King of Prussia could spare no troops to Prince Ferdinand; none were to be
expected from the few Princes of the empire, who had the courage to appear
openly for the Protestant interest; his Danish Majesty's declared intention was
to remain neutral; Hanover and Hesse could bring no more to the field than they
had done; the Dutch had absolutely refused to join us; and to receive
assistance from the Swiss, or any other power, was impracticable; and at the
same time it was thought that 12 or 14,000 men, especially British troops,
would turn the scale of war in our favor. Our ministers had in their eye
another consideration, which was that of diverting the French from interrupting
the vast designs they now meditated in America and the East Indies. All those
considerations, joined to the dispositions of the public in their favor,
encouraged them to agree to send a body of about 10,000 English troops, under
the Duke of Marlborough, to Hanover, and they had landed at Embden about the
time the unfortunate battle was fought at Sangershausen. The reader, however,
must observe, that by this time the new establishment of the militia went on
with so much success, that so considerable an evacuation of regular troops was
neither felt nor dreaded by the public. But Prince Ferdinand and our friends in
Germany were apprehensive that the French, after their late advantage in Hesse,
might intercept the army under his Grace before they joined the Allies. Prince
Ferdinand would gladly, in so disagreeable a situation, have fought the French,
but they had taken their measures so well that he could not bring them to a
battle. He would have repassed the Rhine, but the roads he was to march through
had been rendered almost impracticable by the rains that had fallen, and the
overflowings of the rivers, nor, till these were abated, could he pass the
bridge at Rees, which was covered by Baron Imhoff with about 3000 foot and four
squadrons of cavalry, in order to secure the junction of the British troops
with those of their Allies.

Mons. de Chevert, the most active of all the French officers, had been
detached from the French army, which was now under no apprehensions; but the
rains and other accidents prevented the execution of Baron Imhoff's designs as
was before mentioned: he therefore strengthened himself with draughts from
garrisons, which increased his army to about 12,000 men, with a design to
attack Imhoff. But while the French General thought himself secure of his blow,
a resolution, not perhaps wholly uninfluenced by despair (for he could obtain
no succors from Prince Ferdinand, because the swell of the waters still
continued) prompted Imhoff to become the aggressor. He then lay near Mere, to
the right of the Rhine, and on the 5th of August his detachment, with their
bayonets fixed, attacked all the army under Chevert, while they were in
difficult grounds and in a critical situation. An attack so spirited and
unexpected, struck the French with a panic, from which all the efforts of their
General could not recover them. Their resistance did not continue half an hour;
for they took refuge under the cannon of Wesel, leaving many dead upon the
field, with a great number of prisoners, and 11 pieces of cannon, in the hands
of the Hanoverians. After this victory, which did Imhoff great honor, he
secured his magazines at Mere, and after receiving a few reinforcements, which
passed the Rhine in boats from Prince Ferdinand's army, he marched to meet the
Duke of Marlborough, whom he joined without farther trouble.

Prince Ferdinand was now to repass the Rhine, which he did under great
difficulties. The Hereditary Prince forced a strong post possessed by the
French at Wachtendonck, being the first who plunged into the river to attack
it, and was followed by his grenadiers, who dislodged the enemy with fixed
bayonets. This bold action increased the terror of the French; and though the
bridge at Rees continued still impassable, he effected his passage on the 9th
and 10th of August at Griethuyster, a little below that bridge.

Upon the whole, however, the campaign in those parts this year was rather
bloody than advantageous to either party. Prince Ferdinand had not been able to
improve his victory at Crevelt, nor the French theirs at Sangershausen, the
Prince of Ysenburg, after his defeat, having retreated to a strong encampment.
Reputation was all, in reality, that either side had lost or won, and in that
respect, the advantage lay clearly on the side of Prince Ferdinand and his
troops.

The Russians had now penetrated into the New March of Brandenburgh, where
they besieged Custrin, and a few days would have led them to the defenseless
gates of Berlin. The Swedes had gained ground upon the Prussian Generals, Wedel
and Manteufel, in Pomerania, and the army of the Empire with a body of
Austrians under General Haddick, were not only possessed of many strong posts
on the frontiers of Misnia; but began to pinch the quarters of Prince Henry of
Prussia, who lay with about 20,000 men at Diepoldswald. While matters were in
this situation, his Prussian Majesty had no choice left, but to clear his own
dominions, if possible, of the Russians; while Marshal Daun, neglecting all
other objects, was intent upon recovering Saxony from the Prussians. But
through his natural caution he several times altered the plan of his
operations, sometimes pointing them toward pursuing the King of Prussia into
Silesia, sometimes against Berlin; but at last leaving the Generals Harg and de
Ville on the southern frontiers of Silesia, to amuse the Prussians he began his
march by Zittau, Gorlitz, and Bautzen, toward Dresden. By crossing at Meissen
he might have cut off all communication between Dresden and Deipsic, and by
attacking Prince Henry, who was now encamped at Seidlitz, he might have put him
between two fires, that of his own army, and that of the army of the Empire.
But the vigilance of the Prince, who secured a communication with his brother,
and took care to keep Dresden at his back, frustrated for that time all the
schemes of that cautious General.

Mean while, his Prussian Majesty, notwithstanding all the interruption given
him by the Generals Jahnus and Laudohn, marched by Wisoca, Politz and Landshut,
and on the 20th of August he reached Franckfort on the Oder, where he joined
Count Dohna, who lay there with some troops, but too inconsiderable to act
against the Russians, who ever since the 15th had been throwing bombs and
red-hot shells into Custrin; by which the place was set on fire, and the
inhabitants reduced to the most deplorable state that imagination can form, and
to complete their misfortune, their principal magazine had blown up. On the 23d
his Prussian Majesty passed the Oder about 20 miles to the north-east of
Custrin.

As the greatest Generals have never been known to be without their failings,
that of his Prussian Majesty is, perhaps, a too great disregard for his
enemies. He considered the Russians as being Barbarians, without reflecting
that they were Barbarians who never knew how to yield, and that they were
commanded by officers of experience, who knew how to turn that barbarism, which
he affected to despise, into steady courage and military discipline, so as to
baffle all the efforts of more active valor. On hearing of his having crossed
the Oder, they took post between the villages of Zwickau and Zorndorff. His
Majesty at first attempted to put in practice one of those military motions in
which he had been often successful, by turning the left flank of the enemy and
attacking them in the rear; but the Russians foreseeing his design, had thrown
themselves into a kind of hollow square, which presented him every way with a
front fortified by artillery and chevaux de frize. It was therefore necessary
for the King to attack them with his artillery. The cannonading began at nine
in the morning by a most dreadful discharge of great and small artillery, in
which the Prussians were greatly superior, and which did amazing execution upon
their enemies, who stood as if they had been invulnerable, and supplied every
vacuity in their ranks with unparallelled readiness and alacrity. This
behavior was new to the Prussians, who, seeing their enemy, in a manner, court
death, made a pause, which the first line of the Russians, having exhausted
their shot, improved into a panic, by breaking in upon them with their swords
and bayonets, and which forced the hitherto impenetrable body of the Prussian
infantry to recoil. This change in the fortune of the day, effected by their
broken and defeated battalions, was so unexpected by the Russian Generals, that
they had made no dispositions for supporting their infantry by their cavalry;
but his Prussian Majesty, whose presence of mind never fails him, brought the
whole of his cavalry under General Seidlitz to his center, and they made head
against the fatigued Russians, while the Prussian infantry recovering from
their disorder, and stung with what had happened under the eye of their
sovereign, formed behind them, and made so dreadful a charge upon the
unsupported Russian battalions, that they recovered the field. When the
Russians are beat, instead of flying they grow stupid, unless they are
commanded by Generals in whom they have a great confidence; but at this time
they were under no command, and unable to advance further, they remained where
they were, plundering their own baggage, and drinking brandy wherever they
could find it. To increase the confusion, the wind blew the dus^ and smoke
directly into their faces, while their cool enemies, by their King's
directions, improved every advantage. The Russians, now unable to distinguish
friends from foes, attacked each other, and being at last wedged very close
their first and second lines must have been totally destroyed, had not their
Generals with their unbroken cavalry, fallen upon the right wing of the
Prussians, now fatigued with conquest and carnage, and favored the broken
Russians so far as to give them an opportunity of forming anew, and marching to
an advantageous ground. The loss of the Russians in this battle amounted to
above 21,000 men, in killed, wounded and prisoners, amongst whom were 939
officers. Ten thousand were killed upon the spot, and the wounds of above 6000
more proved mortal. That of the Prussians did not exceed 2000 in the whole, and
the Russian military chest, and a noble train of artillery, fell into their
hands.

The Russian Generals having collected the broken remains of their army, gave
orders for a retreat, and they marched to Landsperg on the frontiers of Poland,
while their General in chief, Fermor, requested the King of Prussia for leave
to bury the dead.

The glorious victory as was before mentioned, gave no relief to the King of
Prussia; laurels and thorns grew on every side of him. He made dispositions for
improving his victory, but danger called his attention toward Saxony, where
Marshal Daun, whom nature did not seem to sit for offensive measures in the
field, unless he was either compelled to them by necessity, or invited by a
certainty of success, was encamped at Stolpen to the Eastward of the Elbe; a
situation in which he found more safety than glory, though it covered the
operations of the Austrian arms under the Generals Harrach, de Ville, and
Laudohn. The resolutions of the Imperial court in all matters of war are taken
with the utmost secrecy, and every minister and auli^ Counselor there, is
either a General or a judge of Generals; so that it was next to impossible to
pronounce whether Daun's not proceeding to offensive operations, in the absence
of his Prussian Majesty, against Prince Henry in Saxony, over whom he had so
great a superiority, did not proceed from the selfishness of the court of
Vienna. They had promised the King of Poland and all their allies, that the
recovery of Saxony should be the chief, if not the only object of the campaign;
but it is presumable that they would have been much better pleased to have
recovered Silesia. While Count Daun overawed Prince Henry, and his Prussian
Majesty was employing his army against the Russians, Laudohn lay upon the
borders of Brandenburgh with the apparent intention of drawing the Prussian
troops to the Northern, while Harrach, and de Ville acted in the Southern parts
of that Province. The strong fortress of Sonnestein in the neighborhood of
Dresden, which had long overawed Daun, surrendered in a very unaccountable
manner after a few hours faint resistance, with a garrison of 1400 men, to the
Austrian General Maguire, on the 5th of September. After this Daun proposed to
execute the plan he had formed in the beginning of the campaign, that of
passing the Elbe and putting Prince Henry between his fire and that of the army
of the Empire, and thereby cutting of the communication between the Prince and
Dresden; but his Prussian Majesty was by this time, September 11, on the
borders of Saxony. The terror of his approach obliged Laudohn to forego his
advantages in the Lower Lusatia, and to fall back upon Daun, who was so far
from executing his grand plan that he retired to Zittau, so as to have Bohemia
at his back, while the army of the Empire remained inactive in the strong post
of Pirna which they had seized.

All those glorious successes of his Prussian Majesty, who in one campaign had
performed actions that in other ages would have acquired Empires, gave him
rather respite than security. The Swedes on hearing of his victory at Zorndorff
had retired in disorder, but still kept their arms in their hands without
evacuating his dominions. The Russians had still a strong footing in the most
populous parts of his territories, and he had no superiority in Saxony but that
of generalship and reputation. As no remarkable action happened between him and
his enemies till the 14th of October, we are in the interval to attend the
operations of the French and the allies on the side of Westphalia.

Prince Ferdinand had made an admirable disposition of his army along the
Lip, and the Prince of Ysenburg, with the few forces he had under him,
maintained his posts upon the Weser; so that the French had hitherto made very
little progress either against Hesse or Hanover. The French therefore came to a
resolution of strengthening the Prince de Soubise's army, so as to enable him
to dislodge the Prince of Ysenburg from the Weser, and to open a passage into
the Landgraviate. Prince Ferdinand, aware of their intention, sent the Prince a
detachment under General Oberg; but after it had joined him, all the force of
the allies in the Landgraviate did not exceed 15,000 men. They were attacked on
the 30th of September at Lanwerenhagen by the Prince of Soubise, at the head of
about 30,000, defeated, and forced to take shelter in some strong grounds
covered with woods in the neighborhood, with the loss of about 1500 men.
Prince Ferdinand flow to their relief so critically, that the Prince was
enabled to join him at Rheda. The defeat however enabled the French to push
their parties of light horse to the very gates of Hanover.

The insincerity of the court of Vienna, appeared now more glaringly. Daun
instead of pushing the advantage he had obtained at Hohkirch, by attempting the
relief of Saxony, through his inactivity and the few motions he made, plainly
evinced that all he intended was to cover the operations of the Austrian
Generals in Silesia, where they had already besieged Neiss a city 20 miles
South by West of Breslau, and lying near the confines of the Austrian Silesia.
The point was embarrassing to his Prussian Majesty, whether he should hazard a
battle, leave Saxony exposed, or march to Silesia. He soon determined his
operations. Having received large reinforcements from his brother's army, he
left his camp at Dobreschtz the night of the 24th of October, and without
opposition from the enemy reached the plain of Gorlitz; where he defeated a
party of Austrians who wanted to fortify themselves there. This march eased him
of all apprehensions from Daun's army, and, in fact, blasted the laurels he had
acquired at Hohkirch. Daun, as if ashamed to be outwitted, sent Laudohn to
harrass his Prussian Majesty with 24,000 men, and strong reinforcements to the
Generals Harsch and de Ville, who had not only besieged Neiss, but blockaded
Cosel. His Prussian Majesty, notwithstanding all those impediments, continued
his march; and Daun seeing that he could not prevent the relief of Silesia, on
the 6th of November passed the Elbe at Pirna, and advanced toward Dresden,
from which the Prussian army, weakened by the detachments the King had drawn
from it, had been obliged to retire to the Westward; but before Daun could cut
off their communication with that city, as the army of the Empire had cut it
off from Leipsic, they threw themselves into Dresden all at once.
Notwithstanding, the advanced season, three great sieges were undertaken in
Saxony; that of Dresden by Daun; that of Leipsic by the imperial army; and that
of Torgau by detachments from both.

By this time his Prussian Majesty's approach toward Neiss, the garrison of
which had defended themselves with incomparable bravery ever since the 4th of
August, on the 1st of November, both raised that siege and the blockade of
Cosel, and obliged the Austrians there to fall back upon Bohemia and the
Austrian Silesia. Upon this, his Prussian Majesty again set out for Saxony,
where Daun had besieged Dresden with 60,000 men. General Wedel, who had rid
himself of the Swedes in Pomerania, defended Torgau, and drove the Austrians
from it as far as Eulenburg. Count Schmettau commanded with an army of 12,000
men in Dresden. The Electors of Saxony had long been the patrons of ingenious
arts and manufactures. Their subjects had rivalled the ancients in many curious
works of the chisel, the furnace, the laboratory, the needle, the loom, and the
pencil, and they had greatly exceeded the Easterns, even the Chinese
themselves, in their boasted productions of Porcelane. The soil of the country,
and the genius of the inhabitants, were wonderfully well adapted to the
improvement of every manual art, and a long track of internal tranquillity,
while the flames of war raged all round, had rendered Saxony the paradise of
Germany. Even the expense of its court, the most luxurious of any in Europe,
had contributed to enrich the inhabitants, who gave specimens of their wealth
in the magnificence of their buildings. The suburbs of Dresden, where the most
considerable nobility, merchants and manufacturers reside, formed of themselves
a most superb city; but unfortunately the builders of the houses had not
reflected, that it was possible some time or other Dresden might be besieged;
for the platforms of the suburbs looked down on the battlements of the city.

Schmettau knew what advantage this circumstance presented to Daun, and that
the suburbs were untenable. He gave Daun his option, either to see them in
flames, or desist from his operations. Daun threatened him with the
consequences of so barbarous a proceeding, and so contrary to the rules of war.
Schmettau justified himself by necessity, which supercedes all other
considerations, and by the duty he owed to his master, to whom alone he was
accountable. Daun threatened to make him personally answerable to himself; upon
which Schmettau replied, that he not only would burn the suburbs, but if the
city was attacked, that he would defend it street by street, and at last take
refuge in the castle, where the Royal Family resided, and defend that likewise.
This answer being made public, brought the magistrates and the chief
inhabitants upon their knees before Daun, and the Royal Family implored him
with all the moving eloquence of distress to change his resolution, which, if
executed, would leave them destitute of a habitation. Schmettau's answer was,
that Daun, and not he, could grant their request; and instantly ordered the
houses of the suburbs to be filled with combustible materials, and at three in
the morning, November 10, they were fired, and the houses in which they had
been deposited were reduced to ashes.

Though the fact of this conflagration is literally as we have related it, yet
it admits of many alleviations. Schmettau did no more than barely what he was
compelled to by necessity. He even communicated to the magistrates and
inhabitants the time and manner in which he was to proceed, assisted them in
removing their goods, consulted with them upon the most favorable way of
executing his disagreeable orders, which was done so gently, that not above two
hundred and fifty houses were consumed; all which appeared afterward from
authentic evidences, judicially given by the magistrates of Dresden, and the
parties themselves who were the chief sufferers, and which were published by
his Prussian Majesty's command, to confute the exaggerated representations of
the court of Vienna and its allies on that occasion.

In the mean while Marshal Daun had returned to his almost impregnable camp at
Stolpen, while the King of Prussia took post at Bautzen; a situation by which
he was enabled to act as he pleased on the side either of Misnia or Lusatia,
his right wing extending to Holkirch. By this position of the two armies, it
appeared that the Marshal intended to cut off the King's communication with
Silesia, and the King to cut off that of the Marshal with Bohemia. The
situation of his Majesty, however, was, upon the whole, the most advantageous
of the two. It will, perhaps, be ever a secret by what means Marshal Daun came
to have intelligence that the Prussians were more carelessly encamped and more
remiss in their quarters than usual. He had before concerted measures with the
Prince of Deux Ponts, who commanded the army of the Empire, for a general
battle, and in the dead of night, on the 14th of October, he ordered his army
to decamp in three columns, and to march by different ways with the utmost
silence, so as all the three divisions should meet together near the Prussian
camp at five in the morning. His orders were obeyed with astonishing secrecy
and precision. The divisions in falling in with one another formed a regular
line of battle, and almost instantaneously attacked the Prussian camp toward
Holkirch, where it was weakest. When one reflects upon the bravery and
discipline of Daun's army, and the advantages under which this attack was made,
he is apt to be astonished that a single battalion of the Prussians should
escape. Not a shot was fired by any of the Prussian out-guards, and their
enemies were in the midst of their encampment, while they imagined them to be
lying at Stolpen. It is said that Field Marshal Keith had the day before
pointed out some weaknesses in their encampment, which might be the reason why
he was the first Prussian General officer who got upon horseback and gave the
alarm to his quarter. It is thought to be by his vigilance the army was saved;
for the small party under him gained time for their fellow soldiers to put
themselves under arms. The Marshal, however, was killed upon the spot by two
musket balls, and the head of Prince Francis of Brunswick was carried off by a
cannon ball as he was mounting his horse. The death of those two great
officers, next in command as in merit to the King himself, seemed to portend
the entire loss of the army; but his Majesty had by this time assembled some
troops, and in person gave play to the Austrians till others were formed. He
perhaps never had so difficult a part to act; for he did not now fight for
victory, far less for glory, but for safety. He flew from post to post with
that inconceivable rapidity and presence of mind that so strongly marks his
character. As his right wing was in the greatest danger he reinforced it from
some battalions from his left, and endeavored to recover the important post of
Holkirch, from which his troops had been beaten in the beginning of the attack.
This reinforcement enabled him after four bloody charges to retake the post,
but the Austrians, who were well acquainted with its importance, recovered it
with a prodigious slaughter of their enemies, who in the mean time were on the
point of overpowering General Retzow, who commanded the right of the Prussians.
At last his Majesty, after maintaining the fight for five hours, and losing in
killed, wounded, and prisoners above 7000 of his best men, ordered a retreat
behind his artillery, which was placed in the middle of the camp, and which
with the help of his cavalry put a stop to all pursuit from the Austrians,
whose killed and wounded amounted to above 5000. All the further consequences
of this bloody action were, that his Prussian Majesty still kept possession of
Brautzen, but extended his right wing toward Weissenburg. The bare relation of
this affair excites in the mind of the reader more exalted ideas of his
Prussian Majesty's abilities in war that can arise from the most splendid of
his victories.

The Russians had been so severely handled at Zorndorff, that they remained in
their camp near Landsperg without making any motion till the 21st of September,
when they began their march toward Pomerania, and there laid siege to the town
of Colberg. This place, though inconsiderable in itself, was of infinite
importance to the Russians, by its being a seaport, from whence they might
receive provisions and reinforcements, without being exposed to the danger of
starving Brandenburgh, or to marches insupportably long and laborious. Hitherto
his Britannic Majesty had ordered his Minister at the court of Petersburgh to
omit nothing that her Russian Imperial Majesty could reasonably expect or
desire, to buy off her inveterate enmity toward Prussia, and he was not
without hopes of success. But the siege of Colberg proved to all Europe, not
only that she was immovable in her purpose; but that the Empress Queen was
determined to sacrifice the safety of Germany, and even of her own dominions to
her resentment, since nothing had at all times been deemed more impolitic in
the Germanic system, than to suffer the Russians to get footing by sea in the
Empire. It was now more than suspected that her Russian Majesty had far greater
views than that of assisting her sister Empress, and that she intended to take
and hold. Colberg, though poorly garrisoned, and still more weakly fortified,
held out under Major Heydon, its Governor, for 26 days, against an army of
15,000 besiegers, who were at last shamefully obliged to quit their enterprise;
but they revenged their disgrace by perpetrating, wherever they went, the most
unheard of inhumanities upon the defenseless inhabitants; for the several
stages of their marches were traceable by fire smoke and ruin.

It was in vain for Daun while the flames were raging, as was before mentioned,
to renew, as he did, his threats against Schmettau. Perhaps they proceeded not
so much from concern for the sufferers, as from his conviction that he would
now find it extremely difficult, if not impracticable, to take the city. He
accordingly, upon the approach of his Prussian Majesty, decamped from before
Dresden on the 17th of Nov. and the King on the 20th after joining his troops
under Count Dohna and General Wedel, made a kind of triumphal entry into
Dresden. When we reflect upon the vast provocations his Prussian Majesty had
received, the dangers and labors he had undergone, the blood and treasure he
had expended, and the incessant bodily toils he was every day exposed to, but
above all the exhausted state of his finances, we need not be surprised that he
now forgot his usual moderation. He declared that he would no longer consider
Saxony as a deposite, but as a conquered country, and he inflicted some
unbecoming severities to oblige the Magistrates and chief inhabitants to draw
upon their foreign correspondents for large sums for his use. The exacting
those imposts, however, were not unjustifiable, if he considered Saxony as a
conquered country. The question is, whether it strictly was so; he certainly
once had received it as a deposite, and it did not appear, that either the King
of Poland, or the inhabitants, had done any thing against him to change the
tenure of his possession; so as to constitute that kind of opposition which
justifies conquest. Those points, however, cannot be here discussed. It would
be iniquitous to close our Martial Review for this year without doing justice
to the glorious actions performed by separate commanders at sea, the relation
of which is, properly speaking, unconnected with the plan of our narrative.

On the 28th of February the squadron under Admiral Osborne, between Cape De
Gatt and Carthagena, fell in with M. du Quesne in the Foudroyant of 80, the
Orphcus of 64, the Oriflame of 50, and Pleiade of 24 guns, as they were sailing
from Toulon, in order to reinforce the French squadron under M. de Clue at
Carthagena. They dispersed and took different courses on seeing the English
squadron. About seven in the evening, Capt. Storr, in the Revenge of 64,
supported by Capt. Hughes in the Berwick of 64, and Capt. Evans in the Preston
of 50 guns, took the Orpheus, commanded by M. de Herville with 502 men. Capt.
Gardener in the Monmouth of 64, supported by Capt. Stanhope in the Swiftsure of
70, and Capt. Hervey in the Hampton Court of 64 guns, about one in the morning,
took the Foudroyant, on board of which was the Marquis du Quesne, Chief
d'Escadre, with 800 men. Capt. Rowley in the Montague of 60, and Capt. Montague
in the Monarch of 74, ran the Oriflame ashore under the castle of Aiglos, where
she was saved only by the respect which the English had for the neutrality of
the Portuguese. One circumstance in the engagement does immortal honor to the
brave Capt. Gardener, who lost his life in it. It had been a vulgar notion that
the superior weight of metal which the French ships carry, rendered them an
overmatch for the British, even for those of an equal number of guns. It was
the apprehension of this that made Admiral Byng decline fighting Galissoniere
in the Foudroyant, while Gardener, who was then his Captain, publicly declared
that he should not be afraid to fight the Foudroyout in an English 70 or 64 gun
ship, and on this occasion he was as good as his word, though it appeared upon an
admeasurement, that the Foudroyant, not to mention her vast superiority in
weight of metal and number of guns, was as broad as an English first rate, and
12 foot longer. After Captain Gardener was killed in the beginning of the
action, his first Lieutenant, Carket, took the command, and behaved so bravely,
that after killing 200 of the Foudroyant's men, with the loss of 150 of his
own, he forced the French ship to strike. Before this could be done, Capt.
Stanhope in the Swiftsure came up, but though a superior ship to the Monmouth,
M. du Quesne would acknowledge no other conqueror but Carket, to whom he
politely resigned his sword.

This year likewise brought an account of a gallant action performed toward
the latter end of the last by Captain Forest in the West Indies, who with his
Majesty's ships Edinburgh, Dreadnought, Augusta, and a sloop, had blocked up
the harbor of Cape Francois for some weeks; but on the 21st of October they
were attacked by all the French fleet there, consisting of seven sail of large
ships, a schooner and a pilot boat, well manned with soldiers on board, and
their full compliment of guns. The engagement was very hot for two hours and a
half, and the French having lost about 300 men, and as many wounded, were beat
back to their harbor; but the English had suffered so much in their rigging
and hulls, that they were disabled from pursuing them.

On the 29th of May, the Dorset, Captain Dennis, of 64 guns and 520 men, gave
chase to the Raisonable, a French 70 gun ship, with 630 men on board, commanded
by the Prince de Mombazon, who, after having 61 men killed and 100 wounded,
struck to Captain Dennis, whose loss was 15 men killed and 21 wounded. The
Raisonable was a new ship, and one of the finest in France. It may be proper
here to observe, that the taking of the Foudroyant and Raisonable by ships of
inferior strength has ever since silenced the ridiculous boasts of the French,
who pretended that they were always an overmatch for us when we were not
superior in ships, guns, and weight of metal.

In August this year; the electoral finances of Hanover were so much exhausted
by the long continuance of the war, that his Britannic Majesty was obliged to
have recourse to a subscription for 200,000l. which was raised by way of loan
in London in a few days, or rather hours. We mention this incident the rather
because it serves to remove a prepossession as if his late Majesty had been in
possession of a vast personal estate, which he certainly was not, as he paid
the full legal interest for the above loan. On the 16th of September the public
was entertained with a magnificent display of the cannon and mortars taken at
Cherbourg, which passed in a grand procession from Hyde-Park, through the city,
to the Tower. We are likewise not to forget the trial and condemnation of one
Hensey an Irishman, who pretended to be a Doctor of Physic, for treasonably
corresponding with the enemies of Great Britain, whom he endeavored to
apprize, as far as his shallow information could reach, of the destination of
our fleets and armies. The government, however, found him so insignificant in
his profession of a spy, that he was pardoned.

At the opening of the year 1759, the Kingdom of Prussia was in the hands of
the Russians, and the Duchy of Cleves in those of the Austrians, but held by
the French. His Prussian Majesty was in possession of Saxony, and received from
Great Britain a subsidy of 750,000l. Notwithstanding this, his situation was
far from being desirable. Though he could raise money, he could not re-animate
men, and the fine armies with which he had done such wonders, were now no more;
nor was he longer assisted by the counsels of those able Generals, whom
fatigue, diseases, and the fate of war, had carried off. It was but a small
comfort to him that his enemies, the French particularly, were as much
distressed as he was, and the general bankruptcy, which was then said to
prevail in France, was found to be little more than a fiction, invented by that
court, to prevail with its subjects to replenish the royal coffers. The great,
and indeed the only, support of his Prussian Majesty was the wealth, the power,
the spirit, and prosperity of Great Britain, but even that could not penetrate
into the internal parts of Germany, where Prince Ferdinand had failed in an
attempt to dislodge the Duke de Broglio near Bergen. In the mean while, Prince
Henry of Prussia commanded in Saxony, and his army entered Bohemia in two
columns with great success. General Hulsen, who commanded one of the columns,
defeated a large body of Austrians at Pasberg, and made about 2000 prisoners,
with the loss of only 70 men, while the other column penetrated as far as
Loboschutz and Leimeritz, and both returned to Saxony with hostages for the
contributions they had exacted. After this the Prince entered Franconia by the
way of Hoff, and defeated a body of Austrians and Imperialists under General
Maguire. The consequence was that the Bishoprics of Bamberg and Wurtzburg were
laid under contribution, and the Prussians, in taking possession of Bamberg,
were guilty of some unjustifiable irregularities. During Prince Henry's absence
in Franconia, a body of Austrians penetrated into Saxony, and the Russians
advanced toward Silesia, while the French, who had been greatly elated by
defeating Prince Ferdinand at Bergen, made a most alarming process in Hesse,
and in the Bishopric of Paderborn.

In the mean while, a squadron of nine ships of the line, with 60 transports,
containing six regiments of foot, were sent by the British Ministry to attack
Martinico. The land forces were commanded by General Hopson, an officer whose
age and infirmities, as well as natural caution, disqualified him for such a
service, and the sea force was under the command of Commodore Moore. A landing
was effected upon the island, but through some fatality, the cause of which has
never yet been cleared up, the attempt proved ineffectual after repeated
efforts. The troops, however, had the spirit to desire to be led against the
island of Guadaloupe, an object of as much importance as Martinico, though of
less renown. It happened that General Hopson, who was a very worthy man and
good officer, died on the 27th of February, 1759, and his command devolved upon
General Barrington, who, after surmounting difficulties almost incredible, on
the first of May subjected the whole island and its dependencies to the British
crown. Scarcely was the capitulation which effected this subjection signed,
when M. Bompart, General of the French Caribbees, landed at St. Ann's, a port
belonging to Guadaloupe, with 600 regular troops, 2000 buccaniers, and a vast
quantity of arms and ammunition. But this body hearing of the capitulation
being signed, immediately disappeared, though had they landed but a few hours
before, the subjection of the island by the British arms must, at least, have
been doubtful. On the 25th of May, the island of Marigalante surrendered upon
much the same terms as had been granted to that of Guadaloupe.

It is more than probable that the great attentention which the French court
gave to the affairs of Germany, contributed not inconsiderably to the British
successes in America and the West Indies. This attention was so great, that
after Prince Ferdinand's defeat at Bergen, they took Ritberg and Minden, with
several other places of consequence; and at last d'Armentieres, one of their
Generals, besieged and made himself master of Wesel, where the garrison of 4000
men were made prisoners of war. The Marshal Contades, a young officer, of some
spirit but no great note, then commanded the French in Germany. He was a
favorite of the Duke de Belleisle, who directed all his operations, and who in
July 1759, thought that the conquest of Hanover by the French, was an event not
to be doubted of; and the most sensible people in England were not of a very
different opinion. The archives and most of the valuable effects of that
Electorate were sent to Stade, to be conveyed with the first opportunity to
England, and the disposition of the French army near Minden was such as
encouraged them to boast and believe, that the allied army under Prince
Ferdinand would lay down its arms without a stroke. They were then encamped at
Petershagen about nine miles from the French.

They who are conversant in history know, what a great share fortune has in the
most decisive military operations, and how very apt mankind is to attribute
fortunate events to sagacious foresight and wise dispositions. Without
derogating from those of Prince Ferdinand, we must be of opinion, that his
glorious success at the battle of Minden was, in the main, owing to causes he
could not reasonably foresee.

On the 28th of July he detached the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick with 6000
men, with orders to take a compass toward the enemy's left flank, and to cut
off their communication with Paderborn. Next day, Prince Ferdinand left his
camp on the Weser, but left a strong body of his troops under General
Waggenheim entrenched on the borders of that river, and supported with
artillery. Thus the allied army i^ fact was divided into three bodies, and the
defea^ of any of them probably must decide the fate o^ the other two. The
French thought nothing was more easy than to defeat the body under Wangenheim,
by which Prince Ferdinand must be cut off from all communication with the
Weser, and be thereby compelled to surrender at discretion. This was deemed to
be the more practicable, as Prince Ferdinand, with the division under his
command, was then supposed to be at Halen, by which position the French were in
hopes of being able to cut off his communication with Wangenheim's corpse, which
was to be first attacked by the Duke de Broglio. Early on the 1st of August the
French left their advantageous post near Minden, and advanced with the utmost
assurance of having a cheap conquest of the division under Wangenheim: but
Broglio gaining some heights, was amazed at seeing the whole allied army drawn
up in good order, so as to form in fact but one body. He advanced so far that
he could not retreat without fighting, and the disposition of their army was
such as indicated that they did not expect to fight at all, their center being
composed of their cavalry. The English infantry had at once the post of danger
and glory. They were attacked by the French cavalry, which were deemed to be
irresistible, and were supported by their infantry on the flanks; but nothing
could withstand the address, courage, and intrepidity of the British infantry,
supported by a very few Hanoverians. Their boasted cavalry gave way before the
regiments of Walgrave and Kingsley, nor was there a musket in the British army
that was not choked with the blood of their enemies; so irresistably did they
handle their bayonets. As soon as the French began to fly before the British
fury, Prince Ferdinand, who certainly had no just reason to expect a victory,
ordered the British cavalry to advance and complete the rout. The order was not
precise, and, upon the face of the evidence given on the trial of the noble
Lord who commanded them, could not be complied with without explanation, and
while that was obtaining the French found means to retreat to Minden, but
without being so totally defeated, as they must have been had the British
cavalry acted. In the mean while, the detachment under the Hereditary Prince of
Brunswic, defeated a division of the French army under the Duke de Broglio, and
forced it to take refuge in Minden, by which the French lost all their
advantageous posts on the Weser, and were obliged to resign all the promising
glories of the campaign. Their loss on this occasion amounted to about 7000
men, and that of the allies to about 2000, of whom about 1200 were British.

The eclat attending this battle made an impression on the mind of his
Britannic Majesty, which was by no means favorable for the noble Lord who that
day commanded the British troops. Prince Ferdinand had in an oblique manner
reflected upon his backwardness, and the noble Lord was incautious enough to
insist upon a most unconstitutional trial for disobeying the orders of a
General, who by the laws of England was not qualified to give him orders,
though he had submitted to receive them. The event of the trial was
unfavourable for his Lordship; but with what justice let those determine who at
this day read it cooly and dispassionately. We may venture to affirm that the
victory of Minden was one of those hasty, but happy, productions of a next to
enthusiastic valor; and owing to that rapidity of courage peculiar to the
English, of which foreigners can have no idea, and which sets at naught all
systems of war.

It is with regret we mention, that the consequences of the battle of Minden
were not answerable to the amazing valor and conduct which obtained it. War is
the trade of soldiers of fortune, and a gainful trade it is. Prince Ferdinand
obliged the French to retire toward Cassel, but it was the 11th of September
before the inconsiderable castle of Marpourg surrendered to the allies, after
having kept them at play so long, that, at the end of the campaign, the French
found themselves in a condition to begin another. Munster still continued in
their hands, and Imhoff, a Hanoverian General, was detached by Prince Ferdinand
to besiege it; but he was obliged to raise the siege by d'Armentieres. We are
not authorized to make any reflections on the subsequent operations of this
campaign. It is sufficient to say, that the despondency of the French is an
evidence that the General of the allied army did not improve it to the full
advantage which the British valor had thrown so unexpectedly into his lap.
Contades and Broglio recriminated on each other, and d'Etrees, a General of
greater experience and capacity than both, was sent to their camp to prevent an
open rupture; and to reduce the troops, who held their Generals in the utmost
contempt, to their duty; which he effected at the mortifying expense of serving
under his giddy-headed inferiors; an example which it is to be wished might be
copied by British commanders.

To do the French justice, they are seldom at a loss for resources. They had
been unfortunate and disgraced in Germany; but a masterly and powerful invasion
of Great Britain, toward the close of the year 1759, was to remedy all
miscarriages. Three embarkations for that purpose were mentioned. One under
Thurot was destined against Scotland. This Thurot was an intelligent,
enterprizing adventurer, humane in his manners, and fortunate in his
undertakings. His birth was obscure, but his notions, at a time when a total
degeneracy of the French prevailed, rendered, in France, those abilities
illustrious, which, in England, could not have entitled him to a lieutenancy on
board a ship of war. The second embarkation was to have been performed at
Havre, and the other seaports of Normandy, and was designed immediately
against England. The third was to have been made from Vannes, in the Lower
Brittany, under the Duke D'Aiguillon, who, from his unmanly discomfiture of the
English at St. Cas, had now acquired some reputation in arms. Those appearances
were threatening, and the more so, as Admiral Boscawen, who commanded the
English fleet in the Mediterranean, was obliged to sail for Gibraltar to refit,
and to leave the French squadron at Toulon at liberty to come out of that
harbor. The French made the best of their opportunity, and sailed under the
command of M. de la Clue. Boscawen sailed August the 14th, and had with him
fourteen ships of the line, besides frigates. Those under de la Clue were only
twelve, but their force, upon the whole, far exceeded that of Boscawen's
squadron. They had arrived near Gibraltar, when the English Admiral, hearing of
their sailing, in two hours put to sea, and overtook some of their ships at
Cape Lagos in Portugal, where, after an engagement, in which his coolness and
intrepidity were equally remarkable, he gave them a total defeat. The Ocean and
Redoutable, two of the best ships in the French navy, were run ashore and
burnt. The Centaure and the Modeste, two other of their capital ships, were
taken, and the others, with great difficulty, took refuge in the harbor of
Cadiz.

This severe blow given to the French marine, did not deter them from their
intended invasion of Great Britain. A fleet was equipped at Breast, of which M.
de Conflans had the command, and which was to cover their grand expedition
against England. This fleet, however, was blocked up by Admiral Hawke, who at
the same time detached some ships to keep an eye upon Vannes, while Commodore
Boys was stationed before Dunkirk, and Admiral Rodney bombarded Havre. All this
happened in the depth of winter, when the French were favored by a violent
storm, which forced Admiral Hawke from his station off Breast to run into Torbay
with his whole fleet. The French lost no time, but put to sea on the 14th of
November, which happened to be the very day on which Admiral Hawke left Torbay,
and directed his course to Quiberon bay, where he expected the French fleet
would rendezvous, and where, after meeting with various disappointments through
contrary winds, he at last discovered the head-most ships of the enemy bearing
to the northward, between the main land of France and the island of Belleisle.
This happened on the 20th of November.

It is evident from what followed, that the amazing intrepidity of the British
Admiral and officers disabled the French both as to courage and conduct. They
had trusted to the danger of the navigation, nor did they imagine that the
English would dare to attack them on a coast to which they were strangers, and
which, beyond any almost of the known world, was full of shoals, sands,
shallows and rocks. Conflans, before he could resolve how to proceed, found
himself defeated. In two hours after he was attacked by Hawke, two of his ships
of the line were sunk, and a third struck. Hawke's great aim was at the Soleil
Royal, the most capital ship in the French navy, and commanded by Conflans in
person. He ordered the master of his own ship to pass all the ships of the
enemy, and to lay him along side the French Admiral, but before that could be
done, a French ship of seventy guns, which nobly interposed, was sunk by one
broadside of his reserved fire. In short, had not the French been favored by
night, their whole fleet must have been destroyed or taken.

Seven of their ships, after throwing overboard all their guns, escaped into
the river Vilaine, and about as many made for other ports. A dreadful hurricane
blew during all the night after this action, and nothing was to be heard but
signals of distress on all hands, friends and enemies being blended in one
common danger. Common humanity would have prevailed upon the English to have
assisted even an enemy amidst such indiscriminate distress; but they perceived
all efforts of that kind were impracticable, and could terminate only in their
own ruin, without affording the smallest relief to the French; they were
therefore obliged to wait for the return of day, and then they found that the
French Admiral had run his own, and another capital ship, the Heroes, on shore.
His own ship was burnt by himself, and the Heroes by the English. It was
thought, that this action, in which the enemy had four capital ships destroyed,
one taken, and the rest of their fleet disabled, shattered, and dispersed,
would have been decisive of all future marine operations between the English
and their enemies. The public resounded with exultations on that account, and
nothing but songs of triumph was to be read in our news papers.

An event which happened about the same time redoubled the exultations, as was
before mentioned. The French government authentically acknowledged itself to be
bankrupt, and stopped the payment of no less than eleven funds, for which their
public faith was engaged. As if that had not been enough, a kind of begging
ordnance was published, for all persons to bring in their plate to the mint;
his most Christian Majesty began with his own, and affected to retrench his
table, furniture, and plate, to those necessaries, which a man of 200l. a year
allows to his family in England. His example was followed by numbers of his
most zealous subjects; nor were even the church plate and ornaments spared.

It is true the money raised by this expedient fell short of what might have
been expected; but it is certain it did infinite service to the French
government. It awakened a spirit of what we may call compassionate loyalty, in
the breast of its subjects, who now considered nothing but the undeserved
distress to which their sovereign was reduced. Cities, Corporations, and
Companies, poured in their voluntary contributions for repairing their marine,
and their armies in Germany were recruited with greater facility and a less
expense than ever; so that their force at the opening of the next campaign was
far more formidable than was expected. But this was not all. The English and
their allies were imposed upon, and thrown off their guard by this pretended
show of poverty. The operations of the war languished, on a presumption that
the French could not continue it, and that they must of course agree to such
terms as Great Britain should impose. In all those presumptions we were
deceived, for the French at the very time when they declared themselves
bankrupt, had eleven millions sterling in ready money in their treasury; but it
is now time to visit a quarter of the globe we have not yet touched on.

The race of Tamerlane and the Moguls have continued from the time of that
great conqueror, after being expelled out of Tartary and Persia, to govern
India. Aurengzebe was the last Monarch who inherited the abilities of his great
predecessors; for, after his death, an universal degeneracy took place; and, as
is commonly the case with great Monarchies, those provinces which were the most
distant from the seat of government affected an independency upon the Emperor,
or, as he is called, the Great Mogul. In process of time the Governors of those
provinces, who are called Nabobs, were little more than nominally subject to
the imperial authority, and they acknowledged that shadow of dependency, only
because it gave a sanction to their own power. Amongst the most formidable of
those Governors was the Nabob of Bengal, who upon a frivolous pretext raised a
great army, and laid siege to the English fort of Calcutta, which the Governor
and the principal British inhabitants there abandoned, by saving themselves,
and their most valuable effects on board the ships. The place, however, was
bravely defended by Mr. Holwell; but on the 26th of June, 1756, it was taken by
the Nabob, or, as he is called, the Subah or Viceroy of Bengal. This barbarian,
irritated by the opposition he had met with, gave way to the inhumanity of his
officers, who shut up 146 British subjects in a narrow prison, where after
suffering the most excruciating torments by thirst, and all kinds of agonies,
no more than 23 persons came out alive next morning. Of those who were saved,
Mr. Holwell was one, and even the breast of the Subah seemed to be affected
with their sufferings.

The glory of the British arms in the East Indies, was, however, soon
retrieved. Admiral Watson in the beginning of the year 1756 attacked and
destroyed the residence of Angria the pirate, who had long been a declared
enemy to the English. The Admiral afterward sailed with no more than three
ships of the line from Madrass, and, after touching at the port of Balasore, he
entered the Ganges, where by taking Busbudgia fort he opened a passage to
Calcutta, which he reduced in one day, as he did Hugly, another settlement
higher up the Ganges. The Nabob drew together an army consisting of 10,000
horse, and 12,000 foot; but on the 5th of February, 1757, they were defeated by
a handful of English, and the Nabob was obliged to conclude a peace, by which
our East India company was reinstated in all its privileges and possessions,
obtaining an immunity from taxes, and an indemnification for all they had
suffered by the taking of Calcutta. It was very easy to see that this
accommodation with the Nabob would last no longer than suited his own
convenience, and that he would break it as soon as he had concerted measures
with the French. The two English Admirals therefore, Watson and Pocock, in
conjunction with Colonel Clive who commanded the land forces, attacked
Chandenagore, the chief settlement of the French in those parts, and lying
further up the river than Calcutta itself. Though the English fleet consisted
of no more than three ships, and the land forces under Clive amounted only to
700 Europeans and 1600 black soldiers, yet they attacked the place. The French
were prepared to receive them, and sunk several large vessels both above and
below their forts; for there were four in the whole. The operations of the
English, however, both by sea and land, were so vigorous, that the garrison
capitulated in less than three hours on the 24th of March. Five hundred
Europeans and 700 blacks surrendered themselves prisoners of war; 183 pieces of
cannon were taken, and a large sum in ready money, with a vast quantity of
goods, became the property of the captors. It was easy to perceive that the
Nabob Suraja Doula, the same who the preceding year had occasioned the massacre
at Calcutta, was still in the French interest. The ferocity of his manners had
disgusted even his own subjects, and as success is the only title that those
Nabobs can show for possession, Jaffier Ali Cawn, then a principal officer in
his army, and one who pretended a legal right to the Nabobship, put himself at
the head of a confederacy against him, and applied to the English for
assistance.

We have neither room nor inclination to enter upon particular discussions of
right between the two rival Nabobs, who are before mentioned. It is certain
that the English very wisely agreed to assist Jaffier, with whom they entered
into a treaty, and Colonel Clive immediately took the field in his favor. The
Admiral, to increase the Colonel's force as much as he could, undertook to
garrison Chandenagore, and lent him 50 seamen to serve as gunners, while a
twenty gun ship was stationed above Hugly, to preserve the communication
between the sea and land forces. By this time the Nabob Suraja had assembled an
army of 20,000 men, which were attacked by Colonel Clive on the 22d of June,
and entirely defeated. This astonishing event, Colonel Clive having with him
fewer men than the enemy had Ensigns in the field, encouraged Jaffier, who had
remained inactive in the late battle, openly to declare his pretensions to the
Nabobship, and on the 26th of the same month the English and his party marched
to Muxadavat, the capital of Bengal, where Colonel Clive placed him in the seat
of the Nabobs, and he received homages at Subah of Bengal, Bachar and Orixa. As
to Suraja his rival, finding himself deserted by his officers, he fled from the
field of battle, but being taken prisoner, he was put to death, probably by the
authority of the conqueror.

Thus, a few English gave a master to one of the richest, largest, and most
populous kingdoms in the world in about 13 days. The new Nabob thought he could
not exceed in his gratitude to his British friends; he concluded a perpetual
alliance, offensive and defensive, with them; he enlarged the limits and the
privileges of their East India company, and distributed above 600,000 l.
amongst their troops and seamen, paying at the same time two millions sterling,
as an indemnification to the East India company for their losses at Calcutta.
Soon after thi^, Admiral Watson died, through the unwholesomeness of the
climate. The French, to retrieve so many blows, fitted out a new armament under
Mons. d'Ache, who commanded their marine, as did Lally, an officer of rank and
experience, the land forces, consisting of 2000 Europeans. It is probable the
French thought that this great strength would do more than retrieve their
affairs in the East Indies; but they were mistaken, for though they took the
fort and city of St. David, yet Admiral Pocock, who commanded the British
squadron there, defeated them in two engagements, and cut off their
communication between their marine and land troops. The truth is, the French
were not only dispirited by their repeated misfortunes, but destitute of
provisions, money, and almost every thing, excepting men, that could give
success to their operations. Many of the English sea officers, on the other
hand, misbehaved from very opposite motives; they were impatient to enjoy in
their own country, the immense riches they had acquired, and this impatience
relaxed their attention to discipline, so that the Admiral's efforts were
sometimes but ill seconded by his officers, which occasioned some part of the
French fleet to escape.

As to the land troops under Lally, their behavior was despicable beyond
description. Having no money to carry on his operations, he at first demanded a
sum from an Indian potentate called the King of Tanjour, and his request being
rejected, he besieged that Prince's capital, but was driven from it, though it
was little better than an open place, through the bravery of some English
gunners. Meeting with this disgraceful disappointment, he sought to repair it
by seizing a Dutch ship, but with the consent of the crew, where he found as
much money as enabled him to undertake the siege of Madrass or fort St. George.
The place was defended by Colonel Draper and Major Brereton with so much spirit
and courage, that Lally was obliged to abandon the siege, after lying two
months before the place. The remonstrances he sent home on this occasion, will
paint the horror and uneasiness of his mind at the cowardice, corruption, and
degeneracy of those he commanded; while the English not only triumphed over
him, but reduced the opulent city of Surat, on the western peninsula of India.
On the 16th of April, 1759, our army took the field under Major Brereton, who
possessed himself of the important town and fort of Conjiveram, while Major
Ford stormed and took the city of Masulipatam. Thus a seacoast of 800 miles in
extent, along a trading and manufacturing country, fell into the hands of the
English while the trade of the French was confined to Pondicherry, and a few
inconsiderable places in the neighborhood. The coast thus acquired by the
English, adjoined to the province of Bengal, out of which the French were
entirely driven by Colonel Clive. Those successes, however, were somewhat
balanced by a repulse which Major Brereton met with, in attempting to dislodge
Lally and his confederates from a strong post he held under the cannon of a
fort. This check, which happened in September, 1759, cost the English between 3
and 400 killed and wounded. Lally, upon this, was preparing to besiege
Trichinapoly, but Colonel Coote, on the 30th of November following, took
Wandewash, one of the most important forts on that coast, in three days time,
and made the garrison prisoners of war. Ten days after he took Carangoly, which
he obliged the garrison to evacuate. This great success determined Lally to
risk a decisive engagement, or to retake Wandewash, which he besieged with 2200
Europeans, and between 9 and 10,000 blacks. Colonel Coote, however, came up
with his army, consisting of about 17,00 Europeans and 3000 blacks, just at the
time when Lally was about to storm the breach he had made in the place. A
battle ensued, in which the French suffered an entire defeat, with the loss of
1000 killed. In this battle Brigadier General Bussy, the Chevalier Godeville,
Quartermaster General, Lieut. Col. Murphy, and 11 inferior officers, were all
wounded and made prisoners, and Lally now losing all hopes of farther success
retired to Pondicherry. The loss on the side of the English were 200 killed and
wounded, and amongst the former was the brave Major Brereton. This victory gave
vast credit to the English troops, because it was obtained over a General of no
small reputation for his conduct and courage. The English lost no time in
pursuing their victory, for they marched directly against Chitiput, which they
took, and then laid siege to Arcot, the capital of that vast province, on the
5th of February, and it surrendered the 10th, by which about 300 Europeans were
made prisoners of war.

The sea operations in the East Indies were prosecuted with equal spirit and
success. On the 4th of September, 1759, an engagement happened between M.
d'Ache, one of the best sea officers of France, and Admiral Pocock, in which
the former, though he had a great superiority both in ships and guns, was,
after a bloody dispute of two hours, obliged to retire under the walls of
Pondicherry. In this engagement, eight of the English ships sustained the fire
of the whole French fleet, consisting of 16 sail. Of the English, 560 were
killed and wounded, and above 1000 of the French. Pocock, having refitted his
ships, sailed for Pondicherry, and was there joined by Admiral Cornish. On the
5th of April following, the fortress of Caracal, with several places of smaller
importance, were surrendered to the English, and thus the main power of the
French in the East Indies was shut up in Pondicherry. -- We are now to attend
the most momentous scene that ever passed in North America.

The British ministry resolved on the reduction of Quebec, the capital of the
French empire there. For this great purpose, the command of the land troops,
which did not exceed 7000 men, was given to General Wolf, and that of the sea
forces to Admiral Saunders. Sir William Johnson had taken Niagara, and defeated
the French, while General Amherst had been successful upon lake Champlain.
About the 26th of July, the British fleet and army, after a prosperous
navigation, came before Quebec, and both the General and Admiral made most
excellent dispositions for reducing it; but they were baffled by the caution of
the French General Moncalm, who depended on the strength of the place, and the
insurmountable difficulty of the English troops landing to attack it. So well
was nature assisted by art, that even Wolf himself began to despair of
success, after being checked and repulsed. At last, by a train of stratagems,
which we have no room to particularize, a landing was effected, but under
greater disadvantages than any we read of in history; for the English, after
landing, were obliged to drag their artillery with them up a steep and
dangerous ascent, but gaining the top of the hill, they formed themselves.
Moncalm was now forced to risk a battle, in which the English were completely
victorious, but lost their brave General Wolf, who was killed on the field of
battle, and his second in command, General Monckton, being dangerously wounded
at the same time, the honor of completing the victory was reserved for General
Townshend, who drove the enemy from every post with the loss of no more than
500 men, while that of the French amounted to 1500, amongst whom was their
General Moncalm. Five days after, viz. September 18* the city of Quebec
surrendered to the English troops.

The great object of the French in America* in the beginning of the year 1760,
was the retaking Quebec. It is certain, that the obstruction^ which General
Amherst had met with and his no^ being able to give any assistance to the
English at Quebec, was of infinite prejudice to our affairs there. Besides the
other services to which our fleet was appointed, the season of the year
rendered it impossible for our ships to continue longer there. General Murray
had been appointed Governor of that city, and having received all the stores
and provisions that could be spared him, the fleet left him with a garrison
composed of about 7000 men, who had no other dependence but upon their own
courage. The Canadians knew that their troops after the battle of Quebec had
retired to the inland part of the country, where they could not be followed,
far less attacked; they saw that not a single ship of war had been left to
assist the garrison in case of danger, and they were sensible not only that the
English were greatly reduced in their numbers by sickness and other accidents,
but that the fortifications of the city itself were untenable. With so many
inviting appearances, Mons. de Levi, who commanded the French at Canada, was
encouraged to hope that he might be able to recover the city. Had he attempted
this by a resolute coup de main, while the river was frozen, it is hard to say
what the consequence might have been. But either through his want of
resolution, or being overawed by Vaudreuil, who was the French
Lieutenant General of Canada, he lost his opportunity, and having been
contented to spend the dead of the winter in skirmishes, in which he had always
the worst, he resolved to wait for the opening of the spring, when he could
form a regular siege, before the place could receive any succors from the
English fleet. Mean while, it is perhaps difficult to account for the reasons
that prevented the garrison from receiving some assistance from General
Amherst. Be that as it will, de Levi having assembled an army of 11 or 12,000
men, took the field on the 17th of April, and being well provided with every
thing for a siege, he sent his provisions, ammunition, and heavy baggage down
the river St. Lawrence* under the protection of six frigates from 44 to 26
guns; by which he entirely mastered the river, and after ten days march, his
army appeared upon the heights of Abraham, within three miles of Quebec.

The danger being pressing, General Murray had only two things to determine,
one was, to stand a siege within the ruined works of Quebec, and the other was
to march out and fight the enemy. He chose the latter, with equal spirit and
prudence, as well knowing the superiority of troops acting on the offensive,
and the great damp that a body of men receives by being shut up within almost
defenseless walls, where they can hope for no relief or assistance. But to his
great misfortune he was not able to bring to the field above 3000 men, after
leaving a garrison that was but just sufficient to overawe the inhabitants. He
resolved, however, to put every thing to the risk, as he could depend on the
goodness of the troops he commanded, and accordingly he left the city with 3000
men, and attended by about 20 field pieces. This daring undertaking seems to
have struck the enemy with some surprise. Their troops were advantageously
posted upon and under some woody eminences; but before they could put
themselves in a regular order of battle, their van, which was posted upon the
eminences, was attacked with so much fury by the English, that it was driven in
the utmost disorder, and with great loss, upon the main body, which was drawn
up in the valley below, and which was as yet unbroken. As this main body was
composed of the flower of the French troops in Canada, they formed themselves
in columns, and received the British troops with so hot a fire, that they were
staggered in their pursuit. The French endeavored to improve the disorder by
forming themselves into a kind of semicircle, by which they were in hopes to
have enclosed the flanks of the English army, and even to have cut off its
retreat to Quebec. Nothing but the utmost intrepidity on the part of the
English could have saved them on this occasion against an army that was almost
four times superior to them in numbers. Farther resistance would have been the
worst of madness, as they had already lost 1000 men out of the 3000. Their
retreat, however, was performed with great order and regularity, nor were they
pursued, and though they were obliged to leave their cannon, they killed about
2000 of the French.

All the flattering prospects which had been entertained in England concerning
the conquest of Canada, seemed now to vanish. General Murray, after the defeat
beforementioned, was thought to be irretrievably undone, especially as there
was no British fleet at hand to assist him in time; but he was so far from
losing his spirits that they seemed to be redoubled by his difficulties. He
supplied by his activity and diligence the weakness of the fortifications and
army, while the French, sensible of what importance time was to them, opened
trenches before the place the very night of the battle. Here it appeared of how
much importance practice is in the art of war, and how little any people can be
said to be self instructed as to its operations. The French are thought to have
a natural genius for the defense or attack of places; but they were such
awkward engineers before Quebec, that it was the 11th of May before they could
bring two batteries to bear upon the place, and even then their fire was most
miserably served. This gave the English General farther time to prepare for its
defense, and 132 pieces of cannon were mounted upon the ramparts; but this
numerous artillery was destitute of hands to manage it, and great part of it
must have been useless in case of a warm attack, which was every day expected;
so that considering the disproportion of numbers, it is thought that nothing
but the appearance of a British fleet, of which there was little or no
likelihood, could save the place.

At last on the 9th of May, two days before the batteries were opened, a vessel
arrived in the basin with an account that Lord Colville, who commanded a small
squadron of British ships at Hallifax, had entered the river St. Lawrence, and
would in a few days sail to their relief. On the 15th a ship of the line, and
another frigate arrived likewise, and the two frigates, as being fittest for
that service, were sent against the French squadron that lay above the town,
which commission they executed so completely, that in a few hours the French
ships were destroyed, taken, or dispersed. Levi imagined from the maneuvers of
the two frigates, that a strong fleet was at hand to support them, and upon
that presumption he threw up the game as being lost, by raising the siege with
disgrace and precipitancy, and leaving behind him all his artillery. The people
of England scarcely had heard of the danger which Quebec was in, when they
received an account of its being delivered. The transition from triumph to
consternation, and from that to joy were so rapid, that the public had no time
for condolence, till they had occasion for congratulation. Upon the whole, the
campaign of Quebec is a reproach both to the courage and conduct of the French,
and will be a lasting monument of their inferiority in both to Britons. They
had every thing requisite that could contribute to a long defense, and a
vigorous opposition. Their situation was so advantageous, they had deemed it
impregnable, and neglected to fortify the only pass by which the English could
possibly fight them with the appearance of equality. Their numbers were
superior, they fought pro aris et focis, in sight of their wives and families,
with a town strongly fortified on their side; they were commanded by a General
(Montcalm) whom they had often boasted to be one of the ablest in the world;
yet when they came to action, their resistance was so feeble, that their
enemies wished they had given them more room for glory, by rendering their
victory more difficult. Their behavior under Levi was still more contemptible.
And thus a country, which their own writers had always represented as being
equal in extent to that of the old Roman Empire, fell in a few weeks under the
power of his Britannic Majesty. But we are now to attend the operations of the
war in Europe.

In the beginning of the year 1760, the affairs of Europe presented themselves
with a very unaccountable aspect. The allies under Prince Ferdinand, without
receiving any remarkable check, repassed the Rhine and the Lip; he
maintaining his ground in the deserts of Westphalia, but abandoning the country
of Hesse, and scarcely able to cover Hanover; which the French General Broglio,
nothwithstanding the advantages he received at Bergen, could not enter. No
decisive event had followed the victory of Minden, one of the most glorious
that is to be found in history. The King of Prussia's situation was equally
unaccountable, for, without committing any blunder or mistake in his conduct,
he now was fallen into distress. Those considerations created many melancholy
reflections in England. The nation saw that the immense subsidies which his
Prussian Majesty had received had indeed suspended his fate, but had not given
him superiority. The flattering ideas which we formed of the weakness of the
French, the Austrians and the Russians, from their repeated defeats, had
deceived us, and it soon appeared that their resources in men were
inexhaustible. The Empress Queen was now obliged to exhert that strength, which
she had before spared, through the assistance of England. The territories which
were believed to be ruined, while she was receiving the British subsidies, were
now found to be rich and flourishing, both in men and money. Though the court
of Petersburgh could not some years before march a battalion to the assistance
of Great Britain, nor even put their troops in motion, without being previously
subsidized, yet, now that the quarrel was their own, they could undertake the
most tedious and hazardous marches, and fill the plains of Germany with above
100,000 fighting men, and when these were destroyed, replace them with as many.
Some people of distinguished rank at the British court reflected with the most
bitter regret upon those matters, and were of opinion that the King of Prussia
could support himself without our subsidies, as well as his two antagonists did.

Whatever were the thoughts of the British patriots upon the subject, as was
before mentioned, yet they had many reasons for concealing them. His Majesty
was now grown so venerable in the eyes of the people, that they would have
thought it worse than sacrilege to have interrupted his aged hours by an
unseasonable, however rational, opposition, and it was known that the affairs
of Germany were always uppermost in his heart. The successes of Prince
Ferdinand, which were rather splendid than solid, had impressed the public
with a high opinion of his martial abilities, and they flattered themselves
that every campaign would be decisive in his favor, if Great Britain continued
to support him. The ministry continued to enforce and improve the same way of
reasoning. And thus very few either within or without doors had the courage to
declare their real sentiments.

It could not, however, be disguised that the weight of the war in Europe lay
upon England, though she had immediately very little interest in the event. This
consideration, which was too glaring to be concealed, induced the British
Ministry to offer to open a negotiation, but however sincere they might be, it
is certain that his Prussian Majesty was by no means so when he compiled with
it. The two Empresses and France, not to mention Sweden and Poland, though they
could not flatly reject so plausible a proposition, were very little disposed
to accept of it, and threw such a damp upon all the expedients proposed by the
neutral powers, particularly King Stanislaus and the Dutch, that the proposal
came to nothing.

The winter of the year 1759 Germany suffered greatly from cold and scarcity of
provisions, which drove the poorer sort of the inhabitants into the armies of
their several masters; so that those of the Empress Queen were now more
numerous than ever. Though Great Britain was not afflicted with the like
calamities, yet her people, in their private capacities, showed a regard for
and sent a relief to their troops in Germany and America, that can be matched
in no other country. Some private gentlemen formed themselves into a society
for that purpose; and in the beginning of January, besides other generous
provisions for the widows and orphans of our soldiers, they sent abroad 6000
flannel waistcoats, 6000 woollen caps, 6000 half gaters, and 5000 pair of
woollen gloves; and the donations of the government were equally liberal. Our
army in Germany having suffered greatly in the preceding campaign, fix
regiments of foot, commanded by Major General Griffin, were sent to reinforce
it, and were followed by Elliot's light horse, so that in the beginning of the
campaign, the British troops in Germany amounted to 25,000 men; a greater army
of Britons than had ever served in one place, and at one time, under King
William, the great Duke of Marlborough, or indeed under any English General for
two centuries before.

The French were equally alert in their endeavors to make the campaign
decisive. Broglio, who had received a Marshal's baton of France, continued to
command; he had got the superiority over all his antagonists, and his army was
reinforced to the amount of 100,000 men, the finest troops in France, while
Count de St. Germain, with whom he was upon but indifferent terms, was at the
head of a separate body of 30,000 on the Rhine, that no disagreeable effect
might arise from any misunderstanding between the two Generals. Toward the end
of January the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel died. His death created many
melancholy apprehensions with regard to the future conduct of his son and
successor, but they were soon dissipated; for that Prince, notwithstanding the
strong prepossessions that lay against him, exceeded even his father, in his
zeal for the Protestant cause, by adding considerably to his troops that were
in the service of Great Britain.

The Swedes, who continued to be a party in the war, though always unsuccessful,
had been extremely troublesome to his Prussian Majesty. They had suffered but
little upon the main, and the people being in general bent on recovering the
countries that had been dismembered from the crown of Sweden, served with
cheerfulness, though under the disadvantage of being very ill commanded. The King
of Poland, Elector of Saxony, would willingly have appeared to decline any
share in the war, but he was obliged by the Queen of Hungary, and his own
family, as well as by the Empress of Russia, to suffer a body of Saxons to
serve in their armies. The Duke of Mecklenburgh Schwerin, though a Protestant
Prince, entered into all the schemes of France and Austria, for which he was
severely chastised by his Prussian Majesty, to whom we are now to return.

He had in the beginning of the war boasted, with great justice, that he had
seven Generals under him, who were not to be parallelled in all Europe; but in
a few years all of them were cut, off, without a possibility of their being
replaced; for though one genius may succeed another, yet nothing but practice can
supply experience. He however still kept up a creditable appearance, and from
time to time published such accounts of his resources and troops, as gave the
world very high ideas of his power. His successes were not answerable to those
reports. He performed prodigies, but he could not act impossibilities. The
Swedes* the French, the Russians, and the Austrians were still in the field in
the beginning of the year 1760, and though singly they were no match for his
troops, yet upon the whole he sustained great losses by the continued
repetition of their attacks. The Swedes invaded the open county of Pomerania;
the Russians had an eye upon Colberg, because it gave them a port in the
Baltic, and the possession of it would have saved them the march of many
hundred miles. He had all the extensive countries of Saxony and Silesia, which
border upon the almost inaccessible mountains of Bohemia to cover, while the
eastern part of his dominions was next to defenseless. Silesia is a strong and
fertile country, but the manners and maxims of his Prussian Majesty are far
from being of a conciliating nature to a people, who for many centuries were
taught to look upon the house of Austria as their lawful sovereigns, so that it
may be said with great truth, that nothing but force can keep them in awe.

Such was the situation of that Prince in the beginning of the year 1760; and a
more uncomfortable one can scarcely be conceived. He had nothing but empty
fame, and the applause of news writers, to counterbalance millions of dangers
and disappointments he was every hour exposed to, excepting the immense subsidy
he had from England. It would not perhaps be too bold to say that this subsidy,
every thing considered, brought upon him all the misfortunes he afterward met
with, because he depended too much upon it for the continuance of a war, to
which his power was by no means equal. At the time we now treat of he seemed to
be somewhat sensible of this, for he formed a plan of operations that were
entirely defensive. To give the reader an idea of his situation, is impossible,
farther than by acquainting him that his brother Prince Henry, commanded an
army about Frankfort on the Oder, in order to protect Silesia, the New March
of Brandenburgh, and Berlin, which, considering its importance, is one of the
most defenseless places in Europe. He himself in the mean time lay in a camp
most judiciously chosen between the Elbe and the Mulda, in an almost
impregnable situation, with 250 pieces of cannon in his front. The convenience
of this position was the greater, as he was by it enabled both to receive and
send succors to his brother.

His Prussian Majesty, however, was deceived in all his designs. The Austrians
were superior to him in force, and almost equal in discipline and courage.
Laudohn, a General who had hitherto made but an indifferent figure, was by the
policy of the court of Vienna set up as the rival of Count Daun, whom the
Empress Queen considered as a great General, but too inactive, too cautious,
and too unenterprizing. The character of Laudohn was the reverse. His Prussian
Majesty had placed one of his Generals, Fouquet, in whom he had great
confidence, near Glatz, so as to serve as an intermediate assistance, either to
himself or to his brother Prince Henry, according as circumstances should
present themselves. Laudohn's maneuvers imposed upon his Prussian Majesty and
all his Generals, and were so mysterious, that Fouquet believing his intention
was to besiege Schweidnitz, left Glatz uncovered, upon which Laudohn made
himself master of Landshut, and Fouquet in a most unsoldier-like manner
abandoned the protection of Schweidnitz, and marched toward Landshut, from
whence he drove the Austrians.

This was what Laudohn had foreseen and expected, and in the mean time he
secretly made such dispositions, that Fouquet was in effect surrounded without
a possibility of being relieved, while he was obliged to detach 2000 out of the
15,000 men he commanded to preserve his communication with Schweidnitz. It
happened at this time that the Austrians were animated with a more than
ordinary resentment against the Prussians, nor could all the precautions which
Fouquet had taken to fortify his camp withstand it. The Austrians knew of the
masterly dispositions their General had made, and that they must depend upon
their own courage for success. Their behavior was equal to their high
expectations, and it is hard to say whether the attack or the resistance was
the most glorious, but the Austrians were superior not only in their numbers
but in their condition. The Prussians had lain long on the defensive, and had
been but poorly supplied with provisions, and consequently low in spirits. The
Austrians, on the other hand, had lived in free quarters, and were in want of
nothing that could give them either strength or courage. Notwithstanding all
those disadvantages, the Prussians behaved with admirable resolution, and
maintained to the last every post they possessed, till they were driven by main
force from one entrenchment to another, and at last 4000 of them being killed,
the remainder, who amounted to almost 8000, were obliged to surrender prisoners
of war, with 58 pieces of artillery, besides colors, though it was said the
Austrians lost 12,000 men.

It is remarkable in this war that his Prussian Majesty, who we have some
reason to believe supervised the accounts of all his campaigns, found means to
exaggerate the losses of his enemies, and in a surprising degree to extenuate
his own, so that, heartily speaking, the true state of his affairs were known
only by the consequences. But the defeat of Fouquet could neither be concealed
nor palliated, and its effects appeared in every department of the war. Laudohn
took one part of Glatz by storm and the other by capitulation* though it was
defended by 2000 men and above 100 brass cannon. This, perhaps, was not the
greatest loss. The important situation of the place, and the prodigious
magazines it contained were irretrievable, and Silesia was now open to be
penetrated by the Austrians.

Thus the city of Glatz was, to the Austrians, the first fruits of this
complete victory, which, from the place near which it was fought, is called the
battle of Landshut. His Prussian Majesty knew nothing of the prodigious loss he
had suffered till he had heard that Laudohn was preparing to besiege Breslau,
the capital of Silesia, and by far too capacious either for its fortifications
or garrison. All that he could do was to pursue a plan like to that of Laudohn,
but still more mysterious, which was suggested by his own genius, ever fertile
in expedients. All Europe gave him up as lost, and the discontented in England
began, notwithstanding all the public prepossessions in favor of his Prussian
Majesty, to complain that we had gone too far in supporting him, as his system
either of offense or defense was equally impracticable, and that our
perseverence in his cause would hurt us, without being of any benefit to him.

They were soon undeceived. As it was natural to expect that he would endeavor
to retrieve his affairs in Silesia, the defense of which was his main point, he
made preparations for that purpose. Daun, who commanded not only his own army
but in fact that of the Empire, had not the least doubt of his intentions, and
leaving General Lacy in Saxony, followed his Prussian Majesty through Lusatia.
In this march the great foresight and penetration of his Prussian Majesty
eminently appeared. Daun's great object was to outmarch him. He had taken the
south road, and the King after passing the Elbe and marching through a woody
country was on the northward; so that he had the disadvantage of Daun in what
we may call their race to Silesia. Daun knew this, and availed himself of his
success by accelerating his motions; so that he gained two full days march of
his Prussian Majesty, reached Gorlitz, and proceeded with great rapidity to
Lauban. This was what his Prussian Majesty expected and wanted; and he had the
admirable address to appropriate to himself the advantage of Daun's two days
march; for he instantly fell into the route by which Daun had advanced; and
passing the Spree at Bautzen he appeared before the gates of Dresden; so that
the war now assumed another aspect.

The King of Prussia though he could not cope with Daun's, the Imperial, and
Lucy's army, was superior to the two latter, so that the first was obliged to
retreat and the other to change its situation, and the King of Prussia being
joined, according to previous, but eventual, orders, by his Generals Hulson and
Ziethen, left Prince Henry, who was at Glogau, at liberty to act as occasion
should require, while he himself formed the siege of Dresden.

We are here to observe that every plan concerted by the court of Vienna, is,
like the laws of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, and the deviating from
it, if not attended with success, be the motives ever so rational, has often
proved fatal to their Generals. The Empress Queen to please her sister of
Russia, and out of mere decency, had instructed Daun in the campaign to make
the preservation of Dresden his capital object. He was then in Silesia, where
he durst not for the reasons I have given, pursue his advantages; and
astonished as he was at his Prussian Majesty's masterly conduct, he found
himself, against his better judgment, obliged to return to Saxony that he might
preserve Dresden; and his return left Prince Henry at Liberty to move toward
Silesia. All the motions of this campaign had hitherto been so skilful, that
the reader, who understands the game at chess, can scarcely fail to find out
the similarity. The King of Prussia made the most surprising and the finest
moves; but Daun showed himself to be as sure a player. His return from Silesia
was much more quick than was expected from his phlegm and regularity; for on
the 19th of July he and his army appeared within a few miles of Dresden.

His Prussian Majesty, however, did not fail to avail himself to the utmost of
the start he had gained. He besieged Dresden, which was defended by General
Maguire. The operations of the siege, unless we were to recount particulars,
can convoy no new instruction to a reader who can form an idea of the most
determined attack on the one side, and the most intrepid defense on the other;
and the ruin of the finest buildings that any city in the world contained, by
the incessant fire from three batteries of cannons and mortars; while each
party equally practiced every art and maneuver usual in such cases. The
approach of Count Daun served to redouble the fury of the Prussians, but at the
same it confirmed and increased the resolute intrepidity of the besieged,
especially when Daun found means, as he did, to throw into the place 16
battalions during the night of the 21st. After such a reinforcement, and while
three armies were in the neighhood (for the army of the Empire and that under
Lacy had returned by this time) it would have been worse than madness for his
Prussian Majesty to continue the siege, and therefore he raised it, but without
molestation from his enemies. Thus ended this mighty trial of skill between
great genius and great sagacity, and each supported by a proportionable degree
of courage and experience; so that on the whole we may allow the conduct of the
Prussians was the most brilliant, and that of the Austrians the most solid; but
in the main, if any advantage was gained, it lay on the King's side, though in
fact the great game that was played between them remained still precarious.

Laudohn, who was all this while in Silesia, trusted to his being joined by the
^^^ssians, but through their unwieldiness and irregularity they did not arrive
soon enough to make the campaign decisive on that side. Being still, however,
in hopes of their junction, on the 1st of August he had his cannon and mortars
in condition to play from their batteries upon Breslau. Count Tauenzein
commanded for his Prussian Majesty in that city, and a kind of military
ceremonial at first passed between the two Generals. Laudohn partly in
civility, partly in compassion, took pity upon Tauenzien's weakness and that of
the place, and employed various arguments, which had more the air of a French
than a German General, to persuade him to accept of an honorable capitulation.
Tauenzien was too obstinate and too unpolite to believe one word he said, and
thus after they had fought through all the weapons of soldier-like courtesy
they drew the sword, and nothing was wanting that could do honor to the
besieged or the besiegers. For a relation of what passed on this occasion we
must refer our readers to what we have just now said concerning the siege of
Dresden. Laudohn from hostilities returned to compliments, and was answered
only by reproaches for doing the same thing against Breslau that his Prussian
Majesty was doing against Dresden, that is ruining the town without damaging
the fortifications. Mean while there was no account of the approach of the
Russians, but on the 5th of August an account came that Prince Henry was within
a few miles of the Austrian camp, which induced Laudohn in a kind of a regular
hurry to break up the siege.

A philosophical reader (if any such I have) will here make a pause and reflect
on the extreme folly and cruelty of the greatest and most humane Generals. His
Prussian Majesty avows himself to be a philosopher, and therefore he may be
said to be a professor of humanity. Count Daun is remarkable for coolness,
placability, and his not having the least tincture of harshness in his temper,
even to his enemies. Yet what devastations, what bloodshed and what
inhumanities did not each of them this campaign commit, without either of them
bettering his situation! The reader will pardon this reflection, which may not
suggest itself during the piecemeal reading of news papers, but appears in
full force, when, as in these pages, they are brought into one point of view.

The operations between the French and the allies this campaign were far from
answering the great preparations and reinforcements which both sides had made
and received. The truth is, at the opening of the campaign the chief business
of both armies was to eat rather than to fight, and all the motions of all
their parties were toward getting a meal rather than a victory. The winter had
been severe, the country consumed, and the spring late; calamities that were in
common to both, and each had a kind of fellow feeling for the other. The reader
must have a personal view of the country before he can judge of the situations
of the allies, especially the English, the great, and indeed the sole
dependence of their army. When the rigor of the season abated, the superior
providence of the French over our German commander appeared, for, while they
lay in their cantonments, they were supplied with provisions from the Rhine,
the Main, and the Moselle, while the allies were disabled by want and
indigence to undertake any enterprise that was worthy the immense expense to
Great Britain at which they were serving. All that is worth mentioning was
performed by the young hereditary Prince of Brunswick, who laid Fulda under
contribution, and expelled the French from it at the head of some British
troops. Happily for the allies, a misunderstanding prevailed between the two
French Generals, Marshal Broglio and Count de St. Germain. Instead of the one
advancing by Munster and the other through the Landgraviate of Hesse, and
leaving strong posts to the eastward of the Weser, operations that might have
proved fatal to the allies, the whole of their grand army united into one body;
a measure so discordant with the original and indeed rational plan of their
operations, that St. Germain, who is said to have the truest military genius of
any French officer, was disgusted, but, at first, without retiring from his
command. Notwithstanding this, the French took Marburg and Dillenburg, the
first on the 30th of June, the latter on the 16th of July, and made the
garrisons of both prisoners of war. The inactivity of the German General in
this perilous situation is a little unaccountable, but the hereditary Prince,
at the head of some British regiments, endeavored to retrieve it. The French
had hitherto moved in two bodies, and that under St. Germain was known to have
advanced to Corbach, so that the Prince resolved to attack him, and to drive
him from that post. But by this time the junction of the French was formed, and
the Prince instead of encountering 10,000 foot and 17 squadrons of horse, which
were the number St. Germain commanded, fell in with the whole French army, and
that too with such resolution, as rendered his retreat, after he had discovered
his mistake, almost impracticable. Nothing but the valor of the English could
have remedied this mistake. The French were fresh, numerous, and well formed.
The Germans, both horse and foot, gave themselves up to a despondency (to call
it no worse) which threatened a total rout, while the French were every moment
pouring in reinforcements, chiefly of cavalry, to complete their destruction.
In this desperate situation the Prince put himself at the head of Bland's and
Howard's dragoons, who soon checked the ardour of the French cavalry, covered
the retreat of the Germans, and thus saved the army at the expense of 900 men
killed, wounded, or taken prisoners, and 15 pieces of cannon, which were left
in the field of battle, besides a wound which his Serene Highness himself
received.

The allies, during the action as was before mentioned, after retreating
toward the Dymel, were encamped at Saxenhausen. Military men were amazed that
Broglio did not pursue his advantage, nor can the reasons of his inactivity be,
to this day, accounted for. The Hereditary Prince unjustly charged himself with
being the author of a defeat, which did him and the English so much honor, and
formed a daring resolution to repair it. He knew that Glaubitz, a French
General, was at the head of a considerable detachment, which were marched
toward Zegenhagen in Hesse, to make himself master of that important post. For
this purpose his Serene Highness put himself at the head of six German
battalions, two brigades of hunters, a regiment of Hussars, and Elliot's
regiment of light horse. The last regiment had been raised only in the
preceding spring and winter, and had been formed chiefly out of English
journeymen, who rather chose to serve in the army than submit to, what they
called, the unjust demands of their masters. Not a man amongst them had ever
been before in the service, but they liked it so well that they were soon
disciplined, and made an excellent appearance, so that the Hereditary Prince
chose them to form part of his detachment. He was at this time above 60 English
miles distant from Glaubitz, which rendered the latter perfectly secure. The
Prince, however, led his detachment, unperceived, within sight of his camp, and
after reconnoitring it, he formed the plan of the attack, which was of a very
extraordinary nature. The situation of the enemy was such as to be inaccessible
on their left, but by making a detour of two leagues through woody uneven
grounds, and the right was secured by mountains. The Hereditary Prince
undertook in person the attack of the left. He left that of the right to his
infantry, who were obliged to climb up mountains, to come at their enemy. Both
charges were so vigorous and so unexpected, that both succeeded. The enemy in a
manner was routed before Glaubitz had time to form them; but they were routed
with very little loss, and the advantage of their situation was such that their
main body retired from one wood to another, while the Prince was unable to
bring up his fatigued and harrassed infantry to the pursuit. It was on this
occasion, that Elliot's horse performed services that would have done honor to
a regiment of the best veterans in Europe. The Prince in person led them on,
and they alone entered the wood, where their address and discipline was equal
to their intrepidity. The enemy unable to resist them were charged and
penetrated five times; by which a party of 500, being separated from the rest,
threw down their arms and surrendered themselves prisoners. A great deal,
however, remained still to be done before the victory could be complete. A
regiment of the enemy's hussars was entirely cut in pieces; and the main body,
which had taken post in the wood, being in like manner surrounded, found
themselves likewise obliged to give up their arms, but not till after a great
slaughter. The prisoners made on this occasion, besides Glaubitz himself and a
Prince of Anhalt, were 177 officers, and 2482 private men, nine pair of colors
and six pieces of cannon were taken; so that upon the whole it was with regard
to the captures, one of the most extraordinary actions ever known. The
Hereditary Prince lost no more than 79 men, but, of those, 71 were Elliot's
light horse.

Prince Ferdinand remained all this time in his camp at Saxenhausen, but after
this action he moved to Kalle near Cassel. Upon this, the French, who were very
numerous, divided themselves into three armies. One of them, which had formed
their reserve, consisting of 35000 men, passed the Dymel at Stalbergen under
the Chevalier de Muy, who had succeeded St. Germain in his command; another
body, which was their main army, advanced under Broglio himself to Kalle; and
the third, under Prince Xavier of Saxony, took the route of Cassel. From those
motions it was plain the French Generals meditated some important blow, and
Prince Ferdinand at all events thought it his best course to pass the Dymel and
fight de Muy. On the 31st of July, the allies, having passed the river, and
formed upon the heights of Corbach, came in sight of the French, who were
posted to great advantage at Warbourg. It would be presumptuous in us to
censure the operations of great Generals, but we cannot help being of opinion,
that something was wanting to support the attack made on this occasion. The
Hereditary Prince turned the left of the enemy in two columns, so as to attack
them in flank and rear with his usual briskness; but the French were so well
reinforced that he could do nothing effectual. In the mean while, Prince
Ferdinand ordered some detachments to attack the French bridges over the Dymel
to the right, and he himself advanced to charge the enemy in front. It must be
acknowledged, that those dispositions, had they been properly supported, must
have been decisive in favor of the allies; but the flower of their army, which
consisted of the English, were five miles behind, so that though the French, by
the efforts of the Hereditary Prince, began to give way on that side, yet their
main body was at liberty to retire, without putting it into the power of the
infantry of the allies to engage them, nor indeed did their commander in chief
seem to have been very forward to risk his German troops. By his own account
sent to his late Majesty, it is certain, that his attack upon the enemy's front
was very feeble, and as he himself acknowledges, was unsupported by the
infantry, so that the heat of the day fell upon the English, whose cavalry came
all the five miles upon a full trot under the Marquis of Granby and Generals
Mostyn, and while General Waldegrave did all he could to hasten the march of
the infantry, Captain Philips brought up the British arrillery on a gallop. But
though our national troops were thus beyond all precedent expeditions, yet they
could not prevent the enemy from making their retreat good over the Dymel. The
charge, that was made upon them by the British cavalry, was so gallant, as to
evince their ardour for retrieving that glory which they had been deprived of
at Minden, though their foot, many of whom dropped down in the morasses, through
which their long fatiguing march lay, could not second them. The French, in
their account, pretend, that the brigade of Bourbon checked the British
cavalry, that the allies were greatly superior in number, that the Hereditary
Prince in turning their left was favored by a fog, and that the battle
continued without advantage to either side four hours. But it is evident, even
from their own narrative, that they employed most of that time in making
preparations for a retreat, which with great difficulty they effected over the
Dymel, and that, upon the whole, they thought themselves victorious, because
they were not completely defeated. In this battle, the great loss fell upon the
English, of whom about 600 were killed, wounded, and missing. But the total
loss of the allied army was not published, probably because it would have
discovered the great disproportion between the sufferings of the English and
those of the Germans. The French in their account pretended, that the loss of
the allies were superior to theirs. But that could not be the fact. Besides
great numbers of French that were drowned in passing the Dymel, 1500 were left
dead on the field of battle, and as many were taken, together with ten pieces
of cannon.

The battle of Warbourg, the reader will perceive, was more glorious than it
was advantageous to the English and their allies. The Chevalier de Muy
commanded but one of the three French armies; but the other two, without
resistance, became masters of Munden, Cassel, Gottingen, Eimbach, and
Ziegenhagen, where they made a great number of prisoners, and got considerable
magazines. Thus, though the allies gained a battle, they lost a province, the
whole Landgraviate of Hesse being now in the French possession; nor was it
clear, that, before the end of the campaign, they might not become masters of
Hanover itself; while all that Prince Ferdinand gained was to secure his posts
upon the Dymel, and preserve his communication with Westphalia, the loss of
which must have been of the worst consequence to him, considering the situation
of the two armies. The abilities of the German General on this occasion were
highly extolled; but, perhaps, the preservation of Hanover was owing chiefly to
its miserable exhausted state, which rendered it incapable of maintaining an
army.

His Prussian Majesty, all this while, had the terrible junction of the
Russians with the Austrians and Imperialists hanging over his head. One body of
the former had already entered the frontiers of Silesia, another had penetrated
into Pomerania, where they prepared to lay siege to Colberg, and the whole of
them had laid under contribution vast tracts of his Majesty's best provinces.
Laudohn still continued the blockade of Neiss and Schweidnitz, his army was
powerful, and 22,000 Swedes had begun their operations, while his Majesty's
main enemy Daun was lying in wait for an opportunity to finish all his hopes.
His Prussian Majesty in this distracted and discouraging situation had recourse
to expedients, which necessity alone can suggest, and success justify. Marshal
Daun was then at Bautzen, without dreaming that his Prussian Majesty would
undertake impossibilities, for so they must be thought by all the known rules
of war-making. The King, finding he could effect nothing in Saxony, on the 30th
of July decamped and took the rout of Meissen, and without our tracing his
various motions, in five days time he marched near 200 miles, at the head of an
army encumbered with a numerous artillery and 2000 wagons, and he passed the
Elbe, the Spree, the Neiss, the Queiss, and the Boher, with one Austrian army
on one side of him under General Reid, near Bautzen, another behind him under
General Lascy, and a third in front, under General Beck; and all this without
opposition. After this astonishing rapidity, it may, perhaps be unnecessary to
add, that during his progress he obtained many, not inconsiderable, advantages
over the Austrian Generals.

In an undertaking like this, it is proper not only to recount the facts, but
to observe what we may call the military rationale of great events. Count Daun,
as we have mentioned, was still at Bautzen, with an intention to penetrate into
Silesia, and to join Laudohn, in which case, the often attempted junction of
the Austrians with the Russians, must have been effected. Laudohn, whose army
was every day receiving strong reinforcements, had been, for some time, with
difficulty, kept in play by Prince Henry; but the delay of a few days must have
rendered the match unequal, as the Russians were every hour advancing. Daun was
astonished at the escape, for so we may call it, of the King of Prussia, but
prepared to follow him. His Majesty encamped at Lignitz, but found himself in
danger, after all, of missing his great aim, which was that of engaging Laudohn
before the armies under Daun and Lascy could arrive to his assistance, which
they did before his Majesty could find that opportunity. But still Daun and
Laudohn occupied different camps, the one on his front, and the other on his
rear. They had taken possession of an extent of a very strong country, no less
than 30 miles, along the Katsbach, from Parchwitz to Cossendan, and had filled
it with lines and redoubts, so that the whole appeared as one continued
fortification, nor could his Prussian Majesty, with all his skill, fall upon a
way of attacking one army without being exposed to be ruined by the other. He
was again in one of those situations that had so often distressed him. It is
unknown to the public, whether he owed his deliverance on this occasion to his
own wonderful sagacity, which suggested what he himself would do, had he the
same advantages, or whether he was not favored by private intelligence. Both
might be true. Daun was tempted by the occasion which presented itself, and
resolved to become the aggressor. He concerted a plan with Laudohn and Lascy
for attacking his Prussian Majesty, while the Russians, to the number of 24,000
men, having thrown bridges over the Oder, were to pass it that very day under
Count Czernichew. His Prussian Majesty saw that his enemies could not surround
him, without their making one of those movements he had so long wished for. On
the very night, when the Austrians had proposed their great stroke, he
privately decamped from Lignitz, and removed to a strong pass by which he knew
Laudohn's division must march.

Every thing succeeded to his wish. Daun executed his part of the plan with
profound silence in the night time, but found the enemy decamped, and soon had
certain indications that they were engaged with Laudohn. It was thought, at his
own court especially, that if he had made a vigorous attack on the rear of the
Prussian army it might have been totally defeated. But this opinion probably
did him injustice, for his Prussian Majesty foreseeing such an attack, had
guarded his rear with very strong entrenchments. In the mean while, Laudohn had
passed the Katsbach, and proceeded as far as Psaffendorf in his march to
Lignitz, where he was in hopes of assisting at the mortal blow his Prussian
Majesty was to receive. The break of daylight, and the dissipation of a very
thick fog, presented to his eves a most dreadful prospect, which was that of
the whole Prussian army drawn up in array of battle, with a strong artillery on
its front, and posted to great advantage. This was the morning of the 15th of
August, but the astonishment of Laudohn neither daunted his courage, nor
disordered his judgment. Finding he could not retreat, he formed his army with
admirable presence of mind, and a most terrible battle ensued, in which his
Prussian Majesty in person was exposed equally with the meanest soldier; his
clothes being shot through in several places, and a horse killed under him; so
that it might be said he then fought not for dominion but safety. Nothing,
perhaps, but his own personal intrepidity could have gained him the victory.
His veteran Generals were all dead or killed, and his troops were but newly
raised; but they were brave and faithful. His example inspirited their efforts,
and Laudohn, without losing any of his military reputation, retreated to the
Katsbach with the loss (as to the Austrians themselves gave out) of 6000 men
killed, wounded and taken prisoners, though the Prussians gave out he lost
10,000. Two Generals and 84 officers were amongst the prisoners, and the
trophies which fell to the victors were 82 pieces of cannon, and 123 pair of
colors. The loss of the Prussians was said to have been 5000 killed and 1200
wounded.

Though the loss of the battle, as has been before hinted, must have been fatal
to his Prussian Majesty, it did not prove so to the Austrians, whose Generals
received daily reinforcements, and encouragements from their Sovereign. Daun,
though he could not succeed in Silesia, turned his arms toward other objects.
He detached Prince Lavenstein and General Beck, with part of his army, to
encourage the Russians to advance. But the terror of the battle of Psaffendorf,
had made such an impression upon them, that they had repassed the Oder, and
were then marching Northwards. This did not hinder Daun from blockading
Schweidnitz, and his Prussian Majesty having, by this time, joined his brother
at Newmarche, detached General Goltze to observe the motions of the Russians,
while he himself defeated the corpse of Austrians under General Beck, and
obliged Daun to raise the blockade of Schweidnitz, and to retreat precipitately
toward the heights of Landshut. In Saxony, General Hulsen, on the 20th of
August, had an action with part of the Imperial army, which attacked him with
great fury, in order to cut off his communication with Torgau. The engagement
was hot, and Hulsen discovered great military abilities, for, besides the
killed, he made 41 officers and 1200 men prisoners, with very little loss to
himself. But he could not avail himself of this victory; for he was obliged to
retreat, least the grand army of the Imperialists should cut off his
communication with the Elbe. By this retreat he lost his communication with the
King, whose mind and army was distracted amidst a variety of objects. The
Russians were now marching through the Lower Silesia. The Austrians found no
resistance in Lusatia, and Saxony, notwithstanding all Hulsen could do to
defend it, was upon the point of being lost to the King. Such was the state of
his Prussian Majesty's affairs toward the close of the campaign. He had
defeated his enemies, without finding he had lessened their numbers. He had
gained victories, but had reaped no advantages, and all the prodigies of valor
he had performed, did no more than just save him from perdition. But the
situation of his Prussian Majesty's mind is best described in the following
letter, which he wrote to the Marquis D'Argens, the author of the Jewish Spy,
and one of his literary favorites, which letter bears in its style and
composition undoubted marks of its authenticity, which was verified by other
incontestible evidence.

Formerly, my dear Marquis, the affair of the 15th of August would have decided
a campaign. At present that action is no more than a scratch; a great battle
must determine our fate. We shall have one, according to all appearances, very
soon, and then, if the event is favorable to us, we may rejoice. It required
many stratagems, and much address, to bring things to this pass. Don't talk to
me of danger, the last action cost me only a suit of clothes and a horse. This
is buying victory very cheap.

I have not had the letter you mention: we are in a manner blocked up, in
regard to correspondence, by the Russians on one side of the Oder, and by the
Austrians on the other; a small skirmish was necessary to clear the way for
Coccei; I hope that he will deliver you my (...). I never was in the course of
my life in a more embarrassing situation than in this campaign. Believe me,
nothing less than a miracle is still necessary to extricate me from the
difficulties, that I foresee. I shall certainly do my duty when occasion
offers; but, my dear Marquis, always remember that I pretend not to command
fortune, and that I am obliged in my projects to leave too much to chance, for
want of being able to form any more solid. I have the labors of a Hercules to
undergo, at a time of life when my strength fails me, my infirmities increase,
and, to speak the truth, when hope, the only consolation of the unhappy, begins
to desert me. You are not sufficiently acquainted with the circumstances of
affairs, to have a clear idea of all the dangers which threaten the state; I
know, but conceal them; I keep all my fears to myself, and only communicate to
the public my hopes, or the little good news that I can acquaint them with. If
the blow that I meditate succeeds, then, my dear Marquis, it will be time
enough to express our joy: but till then, let us not flatter ourselves, for
fear some expected bad news should deject us too much.

I lead here the life of a military monk. I have much to think of about my
affairs, and the rest of my time I devote to literature, which is my
consolation, as it was of the consul, the father of his country and of
eloquence. I know not if I shall survive the war, but I am determined, in case
it should happen, to pass the rest of my days in retirement, in the bosom of
philosophy and friendship.

When our correspondence shall be more open, you will oblige me by writing more
frequently. I know not where we shall have our winter quarters. My houses at
Bresiau were destroyed by the bombardment. Our enemies envy us every thing,
even day light and the air that we breathe. They must however leave us some
place, and if it is safe, it will be a treat to receive you there.

Well, my dear Marquis, what is become of the peace with France? Your nation,
you see, is more blind than you imagine it: those fools loss Canada and
Pondicherry, to please the Queen and the Czarina. Heaven grant that Prince
Ferdinand may well reward them for their zeal. The officers, innocent of their
evils, and the soldiers, will be made the victims, and the illustrious
Offenders will suffer nothing.

These are the subjects which offer themselves to me: I was in a writing vein,
but I see that I must conclude, lest I should tire you, and neglect my own
business. -- Adieu, my dearest Marquis. -- I embrace you, etc.

Some of the belligerant powers at last began to reflect, with horror, upon the
dreadful butchery their armies were committing in Germany, where they had no
original, or immediate, concern. The French had attacked, as we have already
observed, his Britannic Majesty's electoral dominions, only in consequence of
their American quarrel. Great Britain was only consequentially and out of
gratitude engaged to protect them, and yet their two armies had acted with the
same sanguinary dispositions, as if they had been principals in fighting pro
aris et focis. The Russians could at best be considered as auxiliaries to the
Empress Queen, yet their devastations in Germany exceeded those of all the
other powers; and the Swedes, though impotent, were still numerous enough to
make head against the pitiful number which his Prussian Majesty had to oppose
them, and to eat up the unhappy country. None of those pacific sentiments,
however, were publicly avowed by any party, but they seem to have been
manifested by their consequences.

The public of England were every day in expectation, that after the French had
made themselves masters of Munden and Gottingen, the^ would have penetrated
into Hanover, which they might easily have done. But they had many reasons for
declining such a step. In the first place, as we have already hinted, the
country was so exhausted, that it could not have maintained them. In the next,
such an attempt, if successful, was inconsistent with their real plan. The
British parliament began already to be uneasy about the waste of their blood
and treasure in Germany; and had Hanover been completely conquered, no pretext
could have been invented for detaining their army there, which was the great
point France had in view. A remarkable languishment, however, followed it,
between the two armies who were encamped on each side of the Dymel, after the
battle of Warbourg, for a whole month. This inaction was disagreeable to the
genius of the Hereditary Prince, who appears to have made war in earnest,
without any lucrative views of continuing his appointments, or the mean ones of
sparing his Germans. It is true, the great opinion he experimentally
entertained of the British valor cost our countrymen dear, and was favorable
to the Germans, but he always ventured his own person equally with that of the
meanest English soldier, and they followed him with pride and alacrity. While
the armies lay in this state of inaction, he understood that 2000 French
occupied the town of Zierenberg, and he resolved to surprise them. He
accordingly posted a body of troops between that place and Dierenberg, to cut
off all communication between the two camps of the enemy. He next made the
proper dispositions for secureing his retreat, in case of a repulse; and at the
head of his remaining foot, most of which were English, on the 5th of
September, they set out in three divisions for Warbourg, and by two next
morning they were before Zierenberg. But notwithstanding all the precautions
that had been taken for the silence of their march, they were discovered by a
party of dragoons, who fired upon them and spread an alarm. On this occasion,
the intrepidity and good discipline of the English foot did them great honor.
Contrary to the usual character of their nation, of being too ready to fire,
they made use of their bayonets only. With them they drove the enemy's
picquets, who were on their guard, before them; some entered the town at the
same time with the fugitives, others were employed in putting the guard to the
sword, and others in forcing open the gates, till at last, all entered the
place, and, without firing, they proceeded in firm order to the churchyard,
which the main body of the enemy possessed. The noise they made was so little,
and the night so dark, that the French took them to be their own picquets, and
suffered them to draw up near them, but they were attacked and totally
dispersed by the English with their bayonets on their muskets. In vain the
French attempted to fly from the gate. They were every where opposed, pursued,
slain, or taken prisoners. Every quarter of the town was filled with blood,
confusion, and tumult, but the English were victorious through all. They neither
killed nor took prisoners any of the inhabitants who had not weapons in their
hands, and far from being intent on plunder, they even refused to accept of the
gratuities which the townsmen offered them to spare their persons and
properties. The whole action of this noble and well conducted expedition lasted
but about an hour, at the end of which, the Prince found himself in complete
possession of the place, having taken two pieces of cannon, and made 36
officers and near 500 private men prisoners. He then considered the danger of
remaining with so small a force, so near the enemy's main body, and regained
his former camp without loss or molestation.

Here we find it again necessary to interrupt the course of this narrative, by
observing, that the intrepidity which the English uniformly displayed, and the
success which attended all their operations during the course of this war,
compared with the little effect produced by such amazing exertions of courage,
sufficiently prove, that there was somewhat amiss, and too dilatory in the
original plan of every campaign, which no valor or partial success could
remedy. The advantage gained at Zierenberg was glorious and cheap, for it cost
them no more than 10 men, and yet, if we except the reputation the English
gained by it, it was dear when we consider its consequences. The gallant Prince
found, as he might easily have foreseen, that he could not keep the place, and
by quitting it, he lost all he had obtained, excepting a few prisoners, who
were burdensome to maintain. The public, however, had the satisfaction to see
Prince Ferdinand put his Germans in motion, in order to attempt to interrupt
the communication between the French and the Rhine, and the Main especially
with Franckfort. As to Hanover, it lay quite neglected by both parties. The
French had their reasons, as we have already seen, for not penetrating further
into it than Gottingen, and the allies pretended that they could not, without
hazarding the entire loss of their army, attempt to dispossess them either of
that city or of Cassel. Bulow, a Hanoverian General, was dispatched with a
strong detachment to make inroads into Wetteravia, and the southern parts of
Hesse, which he did with so good success, that he pushed on toward Marbourg,
which town he surprised, and destroyed in it the French ovens with considerable
magazines of provisions, besides carrying off their clothing and military
stores. He at last proceeded toward Frankenau. The French all this while
beheld his progress with an air of security, as thinking it was always in their
power to check him. The matter became now to be serious, as they began to feel
some inconveniences in their communication with Franckfort. Stainville, one of
their best Generals, on the 13th of September, attacked the rear of Bulow's
detachment as it was passing the river Orck, and not only defeated it, but in
all probability would have cut off the whole body, had not the active
Hereditary Prince, hearing of his danger, made a forced march of five German
miles, and arrived to his relief. This obliged Stainville to retire to a strong
camp, where he could not be attacked with any probability of success. In the
mean while, a feeble effort was made under General Wangenheim, another of the
allied Generals, to force the enemy to abandon Gottingen, but on the 19th of
September, after he had passed the Weser, he was obliged to repass it with very
considerable loss, and not quite to the advantage of his military character. It
must be acknowledged, that in all those skirmishes and expeditions, the French
showed a vigilance and an attention to their plan of operations, far superior
to those of the allies; who either had concerted none that was regular, or were
entirely directed by the motions of their enemy. The latter, on the 20th of
September, in consequence of their defensive scheme, retired toward Cassel,
where they fortified themselves, while Prince Ferdinand ventured to do nothing,
but to advance so near them as to observe their operations.

More active, and indeed unexpected scenes of war presented themselves upon the
Rhine, and almost on the frontiers of the dominions of the States Generals,
where the Hereditary Prince appeared to the surprise of all Europe, who thought
he had been in the further part of Hesse. It would exceed our proposed bounds,
should we describe the particulars, by which this emergency, as we may call it,
was effected. It is sufficient to say, that he had under him 20 battalions and
10 squadrons, which he divided into two bodies. One of those passed the Rhine
at Roeroot, on the other side Dusseldorp. The other division, which marched by
the way of Munster, passed a great way below at Rees, which lies almost half
way between Cleves and Wesel. Those two detachments, notwithstanding the
distance of the places, passed the Rhine about the same time, and their
maneuvers were conducted so, as, in a manner to close upon the French. Every
thing succeeded as had been projected. As they advanced to their intended
junction, all the French posts along the Rhine, with all other boats, fell into
the Prince's hands, by which he was enabled to carry over his artillery and the
whole of his troops; so that meeting with no opposition, his detachment again
separated, and on the 3d of October, one division took possession of Cleves,
and three days after, of its castle with 500 men; while another laid siege to
Wesel and attacked it with great fury.

The rapid success of this expedition did not prevent its giving rise to many
conjectures, and some censures, with regard to its utility to Great Britain.
Most people thought that it had been formed to favor, in conjunction with a
strong armament which was fitted out at Portsmouth, a powerful diversion on the
side of the Austrian Netherlands, which might have obliged the French to desist
from forming an army on the Lower Rhine, by which Broglio must have become
master of Hanover. But this supposition was chimerical. Hanover had, at this
time, in fact, nothing to fear, for, as we have often hinted, Broglio might
have become master of it when he pleased. We are therefore to look elsewhere
for the motives of this famous expedition.

It is certain, that is was not difficult to foresee there would be great
clashings in the court of Great Britain, concerning the vast expense of blood
and treasure in which she was involved by the German war. Of all the losses his
Prussian Majesty had met with, that of his countries on the Lower Rhine gave
him the greatest concern, on several accounts. He had many reasons to suspect
that a strong party in the English Ministry were for a separate peace with
France, and that the last convention concluded between him and his Britannic
Majesty on the 9th of November 1759, began to be greatly condemned, chiefly on
account of its fourth article, by which his Britannic Majesty tied himself up
from concluding any kind of peace, without the full consent of his Prussian
ally. He was sensible, as afterward proved to be the case, that if a separate
peace between Great Britain and France was set on foot, it would not be in the
power of the former, to put him by any treaty, in possession of those countries
which were held by the French, only in trust for the Empress Queen. At the same
time, we are to observe that the subjects of the States General had not behaved
toward Great Britain, with such gratitude and attention as entitled them to
extraordinary consideration from our crown. Upon the whole, therefore, it is
most rational to think, that the irruption of the Hereditary Prince (as was
before mentioned) into the territories of Cleves and Gueldres, was secretly
concerted between his Prussian Majesty, and the British court, and happy had it
been for this nation, if it had been as successful, as it was bold, spirited
and well conducted. As to the preparations made at Portsmouth they were
disavowed to be intended against the Austrian Netherlands, and their real
destination has never been publicly owned. But it is certain, that had they
proceeded to the recovery of Neuport and Ostend, and even to overawe some of
our allies, a more popular service, at that time, could not have been
undertaken by a British Ministry.

Unforeseen accidents disappointed the full effect of the Prince's irruption.
One part of his troops was employed in the siege of Wesel, on the right of the
Rhine; while another covered it on the left. The siege was carried on with
great resolution, and sanguine expectations were formed of its success, by the
strong reinforcements that were expected. The vast rains that fell swelled the
rivers, and not only put a stop to their progress, but rendered the Prince's
communication with the besiegers over the Rhine, extremely difficult. Those
prodigious inundations and falls of rain, gave time for the Marquis de Castries
to draw together from Hesse and the Low Countries an army of 30 battalions and
38 squadrons, with which he advanced to Rhinberg, which lay in the very heart
of the Prince's late acquisitions, and drove the allies, with some loss on both
sides, from their posts there. He then turned to the left toward the convent
of Campen, where he formed himself very advantageously. The Prince had now
apparently only two objects to pursue, he must either fight this superior army
in a pitched battle, or abandon the siege of Wesel. His genius suggested to him
a medium. For relying on the known valor of the British troops, which as
usual, formed the flower of his army, he resolved upon a surprise, and for that
purpose, on the 16th of October at ten at night, he began his march. Fischers
famous body of irregulars lay between him and the French camp. Some shots were
exchanged, the French were alarmed, and instantly drew up in a wood. By this
time it was five in the morning, but the sight of the advantageous position of
the French, far from daunting the English troops, seemed to inspire them with
fresh valor. The action with incessant firings, and repeated attacks on the
wood, continued from five in the morning to nine at night. This perseverance
may be called obstinacy by some, and madness by others. The Prince animated the
troops by his own example, but he was disabled by his horse being shot under
him, and he himself receiving a wound; so that he was obliged to order a
retreat, which perhaps he might have done long before, without any imputation
either upon his courage or conduct. The British troops were the chief, if not
the sole, sufferers in this desperate action, but the death of none of them was
more lamented both in Germany and England than that of the Lord Down. He
seemed to be born for social and gay life, but the war no sooner broke out,
than he applied himself, with a most surprising progress, to the most laborious
duties of a military life. He formed in the country, where he had interest, a
handful of his friends and dependents, by his own pains and example, to the
exercises of war, in which they were as complete as the best regulars in
Europe, and he had the glory to die as a voluntier at their head. The loss of
the English in killed and wounded were 1190, and about 500 were made prisoners.
After the slaughter of so many brave men, in a battle which ought to have been
fought by others, it is but a poor comfort for an English reader to be told
that the loss of the French was much greater, though it is some to reflect,
that the British valor had impressed the enemy with such ideas, that they
durst not follow their victory, for such, indeed, it was they had obtained.

The siege of Wesel became now impracticable to be carried on, and the hourly
increase of the waters, had the Prince delayed repassing the Rhine, must have
rendered his retreat so likewise. He seized the first opportunity, and his
maneuvers were so well concerted, that the French did not attempt even to
disturb his rear, notwithstanding the vast superiority they had over him in all
respects, but that of courage. We shall perform the disagreeable task, before
we leave the operations of the allied army this year, of following them into
their winter quarters, which proved more fatal to them than the campaign
itself, severe as their hardships had been during it, and unequal as the share
of service was, which they had undergone. Upon the return of the Hereditary
Prince to the allied army, the blockade of Gottingen was attempted, and
continued from the 22d of November to the 12th of December following. The
operations that preceded this siege was as languid as they were indecisive. A
Hanoverian General attempted to take Heydemunden, but failed of success in a
most unaccountable, if not shameful, manner; and the Freneh defended Gottingen
so bravely, that the blockade was raised. Soon after, both armies rather
slipped, than marched, into winter quarters. Prince Ferdinand made his as
comfortable as he could, by having behind him a country not quite exhausted,
and by giving large premiums to the country people for supplying his camp with
provisions. The winter quarters of the British troops were in the city and
bishopric of Paderborn, the most exhausted place, of the most exhausted country
in Europe, for such Germany then was. Their miserable condition was increased
by the extortions and villainies of their Jewish and other contractors, and the
whole was crowned by the difficulties of the roads through the late rains. The
consequences were, that distresses and diseases of all kinds broke in upon
them, and carried off a prodigious number both men and horses, while their
miseries were embittered by seeing the French in a most advantageous position,
where they received, by the Rhine and the Maine, all the comforts of life.

While our army abroad remained in this uncomfortable situation, the great and
unexpected event of the death of George the 2d happened, on the 25th of October
1760, between the hours of seven and eight in the morning, in the 77th year of
his age, and the 34th of his reign. His death was occasioned by a rupture of
the substance of the right ventricle of his heart, which was uncommonly
dilated* and which, by stopping the circulation, put an immediate end to his
life, without the smallest apparent pain. For some years before, he had few or
no illnesses, but such as were incident to his advanced age, and his death
depended so entirely upon natural causes, which appeared at the time of his
body being opened, that it is in vain to seek for any other. The last question
he ever asked was, in the morning of his death, when he enquired what quarter
the wind was in, and expressed some anxiety about the sailing of his fleet.

The uncommon term of life which he enjoyed, which was longer than that of any
of his predecessors, was owing to his temperance, sobriety, and regularity. If
he had fits of passion, they were so soon over, that they may be said rather to
have circulated his blood, than to have disordered his constitution, and he was
blessed with a peculiar magnanimity, that quickly got the better of any feelings
from the blows of fortune; though he had showed a sincere concern at the death
of his Queen, and was susceptible of the tender, as well as the violent,
passions. To his domestics he was a constant and an easy master, and in private
he gave them less trouble than any gentleman of five hundred pounds a year
would have given his. He was a Prince of indefatigable application to business,
and had numerous private correspondents whom he directed and answered with his
own hand, for he was generally stirring at seven in the morning, and was
employed till near nine in writing letters. By this means, he came to the
knowledge of many important particulars in the courts he was concerned with,
and it was thought, he had the best intelligence of any man in England.
Sometimes, however, he was imposed on, though, upon the whole, it cost him vast
sums. He was equally just to his private as public, engagements. He hated
lying, and detested cowardice. In his private economy he was most exact, and
in his personal expenses more frugal, than became a great King. He may be said
to have been rather magnanimous than generous. He looked upon the many
exorbiant abuses and impositions that prevailed in his court, as the lawful
perquisites of his state officers and their dependents, and never encouraged
any severe reformation of his public expenses. From this principle, he suffered
himself in some particulars to be ill treated, and in others to be served with
scarcely the decency, far less the magnificence, that ought to appear in a
royal palace.

As the head justiciary of his people, he was scrupulous of blood, and has been
often known to inform himself minutely of the circumstances of the trial,
before he signed the sentence, but this tenderness never led him to break into
the great lines of either public or private justice. He was so conscious of the
difficulty he had to resist applications in capital matters, that he formally
declared, upon the suppression of the rebellion of 1745, that he should be
directed by his council as to the punishment of the offenders, and it is said,
he strictly adhered to this resolution. His person, though scarcely of midling
stature, was erect and well made. His air bespoke him to be a King, and there
was a dignity even in the negligences of his dress. That he had great natural
courage, would be ridiculous to doubt, and he was himself a most excellent
General. But we must now attend the most public parts of his character, in
which he will appear, every thing considered, superior to the most glorious of
his predecessors.

He came to England with strong prepossessions and some prejudices, as to
parties and public affairs. It was not without reason, he thought he had been
ill treated by the tories, and that Queen Anne had encouraged a faction in
favor of the Pretender. He had been bred up with the highest opinion of the
measures formed by King William against the power of France, and he had served
under the most illustrious Generals of that confederacy. He thought, that the
support of the house of Austria against that of Bourbon ought to be the ruling
principle of every German patriot, and it was so much his own, that even after
he came to the crown, he voluntarily ventured his person at the head of an army
in that cause; and this, together with the vast subsidies he and his Parliament
granted to the heiress of the Austrian succession, enabled her to maintain it,
otherwise she must have lost it. Notwithstanding many provocations he received
from her obstinacy and inveteracy against the King of Prussia, during the
course of that war, he never would have abandoned her, had she not abandoned
every principle of justice, honor, and policy, in joining with France, the
hereditary enemy of his own and her dominions. His attachments to his
electorate, strong and natural as they are acknowledged to have been, gave way
on the same occasion; a signal proof of the rectitude of his heart, as well as
the soundness of his judgment. Though the chief imputation upon his reign is the
abovementioned attachment, yet if we should heartily examine it, it would be
found to spring from the concern he took, in preserving the independency of the
Germanic constitution, with which he was perfectly well acquainted, and upon
which he thought the liberties of all Europe depended. If he erred in this, he
erred in common with the greatest patriots and politicians, that this, and the
four preceding ages have produced, even in England itself.

His conduct as a King of Great Britain was irreproachable, for he suffered on
many occasions his public duties, to get the better of his private affections.
By the mere force of good sense he guided parties, by suffering them to think
that they were guiding him; for, during the long course of his reign, he never
once failed attaining the favorite objects he kept in view. He had the
happiness to live till he saw national parties abolished in his regal
dominions. This, toward the latter end of his reign, rendered his natural
disposition practicable, mild, and indeed amiable, and those qualities every
day grew, by the increase of his subjects affection to his person and family,
which they procured him. This was the true source of that unexampled unanimity,
which during the latter years of his reign, rendered him one of the greatest
monarchs that ever sat on any throne.

Having said thus much, we may almost venture to pronounce, that he died in the
height of his happiness, as well as of his glory. Had he survived a few months,
his satisfaction must have been embittered, by the growing discontents of his
subjects, at the sufferings of their brave countrymen in Germany, as well as
the prodigious expenses and subsidies paid to maintain that war. The enemies of
his government, during the first twelve or thirteen years of his reign, accused
it of scandalous corruption at home, and inglorious inactivity abroad. We shall
not vindicate his then Minister, further than by repeating what he said
himself, that when he came to power, such was his degeneracy of the English,
that he was obliged to bribe them even to their duty. That our foreign
inactivity was inglorious, is far from being clear; but it is certain, that
during that inactivity, the commerce of Great Britain was silently rooting
itself through all quarters of the Globe, and produced those glorious fruits
which we reaped when activity became necessary. Before we close this part of
his character, it is but doing it common justice to observe, that his electoral
dominions, against the general opinion, were irreparably injured by the
accession of his family to the crown of Great Britain, and this may serve as an
apology for any little partialities he showed his subjects there, by sometimes
keeping his court at Hanover.

The polite arts flourished in England during his reign, though they were but
little indebted to his encouragement. Besides German, French and Italian, he
had no mean knowledge of the Latin, and could converse in the English tongue,
but he read his speeches to parliament with a bad grace, and in a disagreeable
tone. He encouraged a strict, but not a severe, far less a cruel, observance of
military discipline, and he loved those Generals, as well as Ministers, whose
years approached nearest to his own. But he often employed those who were much
younger, and till he did so, it cannot be said, that his armies were in any
excellent condition. He was as placable in his public, as he was in his
private, resentments. Though he hated France, yet he never manifested that
hatred indecently, and when he came into a good understanding with his nephew
the King of Prussia, he talked of him, as if there never had been the least
difference between them. When the party, that had given him the greatest
uneasiness in his royal dominions, came into power, (which some of its leaders
certainly did against his inclination) he seemed to have lost all remembrance
of what had passed; and at the same time he never altered his countenance or
manner toward those Ministers and officers of state who had been removed.
Notwithstanding all this, he was much subject to personal prepossessions, which
he never was at pains to conceal, for he seemed to catch them by impulse. But
they seldom were known to be attended with consequences to the prejudice of
their objects. His temperance and frugality induced many to think he died rich,
especially as he had a large privy purse; but that was far from being the case.
The money and effects of every kind, that he left behind him, were of very
little value, which must be owing to his private bounties. But I am now to
return to the main subject of this review, by resuming the history of the
Prussian and Austrian war.

It is more than probable, that the present King and his Ministers, upon his
Majesty's accession to the throne, had secretly resolved to bind up the wounds
of England and Europe, and to close the scene of blood; but to do it in a way
that was consistent with their own, and the national honor. An immediate
publication of such a resolution must have been attended with the worst effects
both at home and abroad, as it must have damped the interests of his Prussian
Majesty, and of our protestant allies in Germany. Therefore, on the 18th of
November, when the Parliament met, his Majesty declared he would continue the
war, till he should obtain a safe and honorable peace. This declaration gave
great spirits to his Prussian Majesty, who was at this time in the southern
parts of Silesia, while a great body of Russians under Count Czernichew, had
entered the new March of Brandenburgh, and 15,000 Austrians proposed to meet
them under the Generals Lacy and Brentano at the gates of Berlin, the whole
amounting to 40,000 men. The Prussian Generals Hulsen and Werner, after a
variety of rapid marches and artful movements, endeavored to cover that
capital; but their whole force did not amount to 16,000 men; so that all they
could do was to make a faint opposition to the advanced body of the Russians
under Count Tottleben, and to retreat, after throwing into the city three
incomplete battalions. Thus his Prussian Majesty's capital, the proud the
envied seat of arms and arts, adorned with all the improvements and beauties,
that a long series of wise princes could give it, the populous residence of the
popish, as well as the reformed religion, was in a manner abandoned to the
power of inveterate enemies, and barbarous conquerors, who were pleased with
the near prospect they had of plundering one of the finest cities in the world.
The inhabitants were manufacturers, shopkeepers, merchants and artists, but
they knew nothing of arms, and gave themselves up to total despondency. The
garrison was weak and became prisoners of war; so that the former had now
nothing to depend upon to save them from the worst of fates, but the mediation
of the foreign Ministers residing at Berlin. This proved far more effectual
than was expected. A free exercise of religion was granted to the inhabitants;
they were to be protected in in their persons and effects, and it was agreed
that the Russian irregulars should not enter the city. Notwithstanding those
favorable terms, great excesses were committed. The regulars, who marched in,
destroyed the magazines, the foundaries, and all the warehouses of military
stores, of which they seized immense quantities, besides artillery and arms.
The contributions that were demanded amounted to a regular kind of plundering
the city. Eight hundred thousand guilders were ordered to be immediately paid
down, and a further contribution of 1,900,000 German crowns was imposed, and it
was with the utmost difficulty that the officers were able to preserve a
tolerable degree of discipline amongst the barbarians.

The public, considering the exasperated state of the Austrians, was surprised
that the inhabitants of Berlin had suffered so little as they did. We may
partly account for this by the great indulgences, and freedom they enjoyed in
that city, which made it the residence of strangers of all religions, and from
all parts of Germany; so that it is easy to be supposed, the Austrians,
(officers as well as soldiers) who entered it, had many friends and relations
there. This account is the more probable, as both Austrians and Russians were
guilty of the most ungenerous and unmanly depredations upon the royal palace.
Like true descendents of the Goths and Vandals, they plundered the royal palace
of Charlottenburg, destroyed the furniture they could not carry off, defaced,
the paintings, and broke in pieces the noble collection of antique and other
statues that had belonged to the Brandenburg family, and particularly that made
by the famous Cardinal Polignac. The Queen's castle of Schonhausen, and that of
the Margrave Charles of Fredericksfield experienced the like treatment. Amidst
the numerous host of barbarians, one General was found who deserves a better
epithet. This was Prince Esterhasi, who took possession of the palace of
Potsdam, his Prussian Majesty's sans souci. All the ravage there committed was,
that the Prince in viewing the apartments, took into his custody the picture
which he was told bore the greatest resemblance to his Prussian Majesty, and
two German flutes which he usually played on, and even that, not without asking
the leave of the keepers of the palace.

On the 13th of October, Berlin was evacuated after groaning for four days
under the scourge of the Austrians and Russians, who left Brandenburg little
better than a desert, having destroyed the country and carried off all the
horses and cattle they could find. The consequence of this blow upon his
Prussian Majesty was, that having no army in Saxony, his enemies after leaving
Berlin, recovered all that electorate, while Stainville at the head of a
detachment of Broglio's army, laid Hulberstadt under contribution, and the
Russians laid siege to the important seaport of Colberg. The Swedes, all this
while, were advancing in the western Pomerania, and in Silesia. Laudohn
invested the fortress of Cosel. In short, upon the whole, his Prussian
Majesty's affairs seemed to be now more desperate than ever. When his enemies
took the cities of Wittemberg, Meissen, Leipsic, and Torgau, he lost all his
immense magazines of stores, and he himself was closely watched by a far
superior army, under the most vigilent general of his age, Count Daun, without
his knowing where to take his winter quarters; so completely had his enemies
ravaged his dominions. He had made some movements toward the relief of his
capital, and upon its being evacuated, he passed the Elbe the 25th of October,
as Daun did the same day. Soon after his Majesty was joined by his Generals,
Hulsen and Prince Eugene of Wirtemberg, but found himself under circumstances
in which he could get relief only from despair. His was not of the blind,
furious kind; his dispositions were as wise as his conduct was intrepid. Daun,
that he might cover Leipsic and Torgau, had fallen back upon the latter, and
his Prussian Majesty saw him encamped at the head of 80,000 men, secured on the
one side by the Elbe of the other by Morasses, hills and woods, with 200 pieces
of cannon in his front, where alone he could be attacked. His Prussian Majesty,
undaunted by that dreadful object, acquainted his troops in person, on the 3d
of November, that he would that day set them an example to conquer or die. He
gave General Hulsen the command of his right wing, with orders to take post in
a wood to the left of the Austrians, and there to wait till the battle should
begin. General Ziethen with the left wing, was to attack the right of the
enemy, while the King was to make the grand charge in the front. These
dispositions directed Daun in his, and he made them in a masterly manner.
Ziethen began the attack, upon which his Majesty hastened his march. The
situation of both armies was such, according to the accounts published at
Magdeburg, that either the Prussian right or left must take the enemy in their
rear, and so prevent their affording any assistance to that part of their army,
where the main attack was to be made. It would be mispending the readers time
to think of describing a battle so extensive and complicated, as this was, in
which, even they who were present, disagree as to their several relations. It
is allowed on all hands that his Prussian Majesty, rapid and intrepid as his
charge was, was three times repulsed with great slaughter; but General Ziethen
having beat the right wing of the Austrians, made himself master of some
advantageous eminences, and galloping up with a strong body of horse to sustain
the infantry, the latter, notwithstanding their prodigious losses and fatigues,
returned once more to the charge, and proved victorious. The enemy was every
where routed with vast slaughter after a continued engagement, from two in the
afternoon to nine at night, when the Austrians were obliged to repass the Elbe,
which they did in excellent order.

This battle was the most important of any his Prussian Majesty had yet gained,
and cost him the dearest, but it was attended with the most wonderful, though
favorable, circumstances for him. He had lost in killed and wounded about
10,000 of his best men, besides 3000 who were made prisoners. The loss of the
Austrians in men was not greater. The Prussians, however, made about 8,000
prisoners, amongst whom were four Generals, and 216 other officers, and were in
possession of the greatest number of warlike trophies taken from the enemy.
Both sides seem to agree that the Prussians victory was owing, next to their
own valor, and that of their King, to a wound which Count Daun received in the
thigh, and which obliged him to retire from the field of battle, and to leave
the command to General O'Donnel, who ordered the retreat. The pitchy darkness
of the night was equally favorable to both armies, fatigued and exhausted as
they were.

The court of Vienna was surprised, astonished, and ashamed at this sudden
reverse of fortune. In vain did the Ministers of the Queen in publications of
every kind, endeavor to extenuate their loss, and to magnify that of their
enemy; all they could do was to keep up the desponding spirits of their allies.
They could not dissemble that, besides all the other disadvantages the
Prussians lay under in the attack, the Austrians were 30,000 superior to them
in the field, so that the palm of generalship and discipline was by the public
voice adjudged to his Prussian Majesty, who received a contusion in the breast,
and during the hottest of the action, exposed his person, as if he had known
himself to be immortal. But the consequences decided beyond all dispute the
victory to be in his favor, for he recovered all Saxony but its capital, and
he was in no condition to besiege that, because Count Daun had posted all his
army, which was still more numerous than that of the Prussians in that city, or
in cantonments round it. In the mean time the Prussian General Werner had,
after the evacuation of Berlin, been sent with a body of troops into Pomerania,
where he obliged the Russians to abandon the long continued siege of Colberg,
and after defeating the Swedes in the western parts of that province, he forced
them to fall back upon Stralsund, and to abandon the whole of the Prussian
Pomerania. On the side of Silesia, Laudohn was obliged to raise the siege of
Cosel to abandon Landshut, and to retire into the Austrian Silesia, while the
Russians had entirely evacuated the other parts of his Prussian Majesty's
dominions, and the army of the Empire, about the same time, retired into
Franconia.

His Prussian Majesty lost no advantage that could possibly be drawn from his
victory at Torgau, as was before mentioned. Pretending to have received great
provocation, he taxed the circle of Leipsic alone, not only in its ordinary
revenue, and in vast magazines of provisions, but in two millions of crowns for
the ensuing year, a contribution, which London itself, the richest city in the
world, would have found difficult to raise. All the other parts of Misnia were
taxed in the same proportion, and, estimating the Saxons as beasts of burden,
he made the raising 20,000 of them, for recruiting his army, a part of their
contributions. But no country suffered more from his Prussian Majesty's
successes, than the dominions of the Dukes of Mecklenburgh, which were so
unfortunately situated, with regard to those of Prussia, that they were
deprived of relief from their allies. The treatment which those Princes met
with, and the hardships inflicted on their subjects, were, perhaps, more than
severe, and are said to have drawn from the pen of a young Princess, who now
fills the most august throne in the world, a pathetic representation of her
family and country's sufferings, which touched even his Prussian Majesty, but
made much deeper impressions in the breast of another, and a greater royal
personage, to whom the letter was communicated. Such was the situation of
affairs on the continent of Europe, at the close of the year 1760, that of the
Prussians was indeed become better, but that of the British troops was very
undesireable, while the Austrians and the French, by preserving their
communications, the former with the Elbe, and the latter with the Rhine,
enjoyed comfortable winter quarters.

We are now to attend the motions of a marine Don Quixote. Thurot had all the
enterprising, genius, the valor, the generosity, and even the magnanimity of
that celebrated knight errand. His birth was obscure, if not fabulous, and his
outset into the world romatic. He, however, raised himself by a series of bold,
but fortunate adventures, to the notice of the French ministry, who appointed
him to the command of five frigates, with 1270 land soldiers on board. During
the equipment of those frigates of Dunkirk, various were the conjectures of the
public, which probably never was determined any further, than that Thurot
should make a landing on some part of Ireland, which should be most convenient
for favoring the grand expedition under Conflans. On the 5th of October, 1759,
the five frigates escaped the English fleet, in a hazy night, out of Dunkirk;
in ten days they reached Gottenburg in Sweden, and after that, Bergen in
Norway, but not without suffering so much by sickness and stress of weather,
that Thurot was obliged to send his best frigate back to France. Sailing from
Bergen, he was, for almost three months, buffetted about the seas, and lost one
of his remaining frigates, which has never since been heard of. In vain he
attempted to land near Derry in Ireland, and, on the 16th of February, he was
obliged to put into the isle of Ilay, one of the Hebrides of the coast of
Scotland, where he refitted his ships, and paid, even to profusion, for some
provisions and cattle they took in. The accounts he received of the defeat of
Conflans appeared to him suspicious, and did not deter him from pursuing his
course toward Ireland, where, on the 28th of February, he landed his troops,
which were now reduced to 600 men, at Carrickfergus; but, by draughts from the
seamen, he made a shift to muster up about 1000 on the breach, and with them he
proceeded to attack the town, which was defended by Colonel Jennings, with
about four companies of new raised men, destitute of cannon and with very
little ammunition. The Colonel, however, made the best defense he could at the
gate of the town, till his ammunition being spent, he drew off his men toward
the Castle, which, like the town wall, was old, ruinous and untenable, so that
his men were obliged to surrender themselves prisoners of war. After this,
Carrickfergus, because its magistrates refused to comply with Thurot's demands
of wine and provisions, was plundered, and Thurot re-imbarked his men for
France.

The Duke of Bedford was then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and receiving early
intelligence of Thurot's descent, he dispatched an express to Kinsale for three
English frigates, who lay there to sail in quest of Thurot. One of those
frigates, commanded by Captain Elliot, carried 36 guns, the other two, 32 each,
and so great was their dispatch, that they came up with Thurot in sight of the
Isle of Man. Here the ascendency of the British, over the French maritime
genius, was fully proved. Thurot's ships were of greater force, and he fought
with a great superiority of numbers on his side. He had every motive that could
animate a brave man to exert his utmost, which indeed he did, for he was killed
in the discharge of his duty, and all the three ships, being taken by the
English, were carried into Ramsay bay in the Isle of Man. Thurot was lamented,
less, perhaps, by his countrymen, than his enemies, who had often experienced
his humanity, as well as his courage; and thus the only insult, that his
Britannic Majesty's European coasts had suffered during the war, was amply
revenged. -- We are now to attend America.

After the French had been forced to raise the siege of Quebec, Vaudreuil the
Governor of Canada took post at Montreal, where he assembled all his force,
with the appearance of preparing for a decisive effort. Finding the Canadians
were discouraged, he had resource to circulating, by his letters to them, the
meanest lies, on the prodigious successes of the French arms through all the
quarters of the globe, to keep up their spirits, while the difficulty of
entering Canada, he thought, would put the British troops under such
difficulties as would render all attempts against Montreal fruitless, at least
for that campaign.

On the 21st of June, Mr. Amherst, who commanded in chief the British forces in
America, left Shenectady, and on the 9th of July, he arrived at Oswego, where,
on a review of his army, he found it to amount to 10,000 men, of whom 1000, a
sight never known before, were Iroquois, brought by Sir William Johnson to
fight in a British quarrel. Before Sir William Johnson left Shenectady, he had
ordered General Murray to advance with all the force he could spare from the
garrison of Quebec, toward Montreal, while Colonel Haviland was to sail from
Crown Point, and after taking possession of the Isle au Noix, to proceed to
Montreal likewise. On the 10th of August, Amherst's army embarked with its
baggage, ammunition, and artillery, on the lake of Ontario, the most numerous
body, perhaps, that ever traversed in boats so prodigious an expance of water.
Good fortune, and good conduct, equally befriended him. He took Swegatchie and
invested L'Isle Royal, in the river of St. Laurence, the forts of which
surrendered to him on the 25th of August. Having made all the proper
arrangements in that island, which is of the utmost importance for commanding
the Lake, as well as securing the British frontier, he proceeded to the most
difficult part of his expedition, that of encountering the rapid falls of the
river St. Laurence, between L'Isle Royal and Montreal. Amherst surmounted even
that difficulty, with the loss of many of his vessels, but no more than ninety
lives; and on the 6th of September, his army came in sight of Montreal, the
second city of importance for strength, situation and riches in the French
America. The very day that Amherst landed here, General Murray landed from
Quebec, and next day Haviland from the Isle au Noix; so great was the precision
with which this expedition was planned and executed.

After surmounting such incredible difficulties, and arriving before Montreal,
the British Generals scarcely thought the reduction of that place ^o be an
object of their concern. Vaudreuil surrendered it, and the garrison were sent
prisoners to France on condition of their not serving again that war. Nothing,
in the success of this expedition, covered the British Generals with so much
glory, as did the humanity which attended their conquests. Except at the Isle
Royal no blood was spilt, and it was with the utmost reluctance that General
Murray in his march from Quebec, found himself under a necessity of giving
orders for setting on fire some villages whose inhabitants were in arms against
him. At Montreal no person was injured. The British Generals relieved the
misery of the Canadians, by giving them food, and notwithstanding all the
provocations they had received during the course of the war, from the treachery
of the French, they employed their soldiers in defending them, from the
scalping knives of their own, the neutral, and the British savages, who know no
ties of obedience or gratitude but conquest.

During the reduction of Montreal, which completed our conquest of all Canada,
a British squadron under Lord Colville, commanded the mouth of the river St.
Laurence, which three French frigates, with about 20 sail of ships, loaded with
troops and military stores for relieving Montreal, observing they put into the
bay of Chaleurs, but being discovered, their whole armament was taken by the
Lord Byron, a Captain of one of the British ships.

The French were equally unsuccessful in their other schemes upon the vast
continent. Having, by means of their missionaries, a much greater power, than
the English have over the minds of the savages, they had debauched the Cherokee
Indians into their interest, and there was reason for believing, that the
Creeks, another very powerful nation, would follow their example. Whatever
flattering pictures philosophers or philosophical historians may exhibit of
human nature in its most savage state, there is reason to believe from repeated
experience, that the American Indians in general, have no sentiments but those
of cruelty, revenge and rapine, which they never sail to gratify; and that they
are to be awed only by force. Mr. Lyttleton, who was the Governor of Carolina,
knew this, and in October, 1759, he marched with about 1100 regulars and
provincials, 300 miles into their country, lying between Keeowee and Charles
Town. The barbarians, thus seeing their persons and possessions exposed to
immediate destruc^ion, humbled themselves before the Governo^, and agreed to
all the terms he imposed. They even put into his hands such of their countrymen
as had been guilty of the greatest barbarities and murders upon the English,
and gave him 22 hostages for their performance.

Mr. Littleton having, as he had reason to think, been successful in his
expedition, returned to his government: but no sooner was his back turned, than
the very same Savages blocked up Fort Loudon, and attempted to take Fort
Edward. General Amherst, hearing of this, sent Colonel Montgomery to relieve
those two British forts, and to chastise the barbarians, with a regiment of
Highlanders, a battalion of Royal Americans, some grenadiers, and the
provincial troops. Upon his entering the country of the Savages, he burnt one
of their capital towns consisting of about 200 houses, and making war after
their own manner, he spread terror and desolation wherever he came. He marched
on to the middle Cherokees, and in his progress fell into an ambush, where he
had 20 men killed and 80 wounded. Though the enemy in this skirmish lost 80
men, besides a considerable town, yet the Colonel perceiving that he must every
day meet with such encounters as he advanced, found it necessary to retreat to
Fort St. George, from whence he went to New York, to rejoin the grand army; but
left behind him 400 men for the protection of the province. But by this time
the garrison of Fort Loudon having consumed all their provisions was obliged to
come to a capitulation, August the 7th, with the barbarians, who most
infamously broke it by butchering all the officers but one, and by carrying
such of the soldiers as they did not kill into the most miserable of all
captivities. We are now to take a long stride from America to Asia.

On the 16th of April, 1759, after the siege of Fort St. George had been
raised, Major Brereton took the town and fort of Conjioeram; as Major Ford did
by storm the city of Masulipatam; while Colonel Clive drove the French out of
the rich province of Bengal. Thus the English company was possessed of the
commerce of a vast trading and manufacturing country on the coast of
Coromandel, while that of their enemies was confined almost to Pondicherry
alone. In September, Major Brereton at the head of about 12,000 men, was
defeated with the loss of 3 or 4000 killed and wounded, by an army of French
and Indians; and the French General Lally threatened the siege of Trichenopoly.
In the mean while, Colonel Coote, with all the troops he could assemble, took
Wandewash in three days, making the garrison prisoners of war; and in four he
became master of Carongoly, and obliged the garrison to march out of the place.
Those two places were taken, the first on the 30th of November, and the last on
the 10th of December. Upon this Lally laid siege to Wandewash, a place of the
utmost importance to either party, and probably would have retaken it, had not
Colonel Coote, with inconceivable diligence marched to its relief. This brought
on a battle. Lally's army was composed of about 2200 Europeans and between nine
and 10,000 blacks, that of Coote amounted to about 1700 Europeans and 3000
blacks. The victory fell to the English after a bloody dispute; for the French
were totally routed and their camp and artillery were taken. Of the French army
about 1000 were killed and wounded, and amongst the prisoners was Brigadier
General Bussy, who was reckoned the richest subject in the world; the Chevalier
Godeville, quartermaster General, and Lieutenant Colonel Murphy. Of the
English, 200 were killed and wounded, amongst the former was the brave Major
Brereton, and 70 of their black soldiers were slain or wounded.

This important victory did great honor to Colonel Coote as a commander. It
opened his way to Chittiput and Arcot the capital of the province; both which
places were reduced by the English, and in the latter 300 Europeans were made
prisoners of war. On the 4th of September, Admiral Pocock defeated the fleet of
M. D'Ache the French Admiral, and obliged him to take shelter under the walls
of Pondicherry. This naval victory was the more glorious to the conqueror as
D'Ache was not only a most excellent officer, but commanded a fleet far
superior to that of the English in the number and largeness of men and ships,
as well as the weight of metal. In this fight, which continued very hot for
above two hours, eight English ships stood the fire of 16 French, and lost 560
men, while the loss of the French was 1000, and the vessels on both sides were
disabled; D'Ache retired under the cannon of Pondicherry, where Pocock, after
he had refitted his ships, braved and blocked him up. Soon after, upon the
junction of Admiral Cornish with Pocock on the coast of Coromandel, the French
ships found means to escape, and some of them saved themselves, it was thought,
by sailing to the island St. Mauritius, for they disappeared from those seas.
The consequence of this was, that Admiral Cornish and Major Monkton took
possession, on the 5th of April, of the important fortress of Carcal; and thus
the French power on that coast was confined to Pondicherry, and a few other
inconsiderable places.

Pondicherry is a noble strong town, four leagues in circumference, and about
40 miles distant from the English settlement of Madrass. The French at this
place had been accumulating wealth for many years; and it was now the center of
all the riches in those parts, being well provided with artillery and military
stores. The officer, who commanded the garrison, was Lally an Irishman, or of
an Irish family, a man, whimsical, haughty and ill fitted for either
superiority over, or society with, the wealthy, dissolute, proud, selfish
French Asiatics. At the same time he was sober, faithful, brave to excess, and
an excellent disciplinarian. When the siege of Pondicherry was resolved on, the
garrison consisted of about 1500 European regulars; and Lally, who had the
utmost abhorrence for the profligacy and impiety of the merchants and
inhabitants, obliged many of them to do duty likewise, when Colonel Coote and
Admiral Stevens, the first by land, the other by sea, invested the place. It
was surrounded by adjacent fortresses, which in former sieges had given us
great trouble, but were now easily reduced, as the neighboring country was in
the hands of the English. The approaching rainy seasons, and Lally's known
character for resolution, rendered a regular siege unadvisable, and a blockade
by sea and land, for obvious reasons, was resolved on. This blockade was
supported and assisted by proper batteries, which continually harrassed the
garrison and were daily, though insensibly, drawing near to the place, but were
incommoded by the rainy weather.

Those kind of operations continued for seven months, the batteries being
sometimes ruined and sometimes repaired by the indefatigable perseverance of
the English, in both which they were equalled by the French. The English,
however, had the comfort to reflect, that, amidst all their hardships and
labors the purposes of the blockade were still going on; and that the French
within the place were reduced to live on dogs, cats, elephants and camels, and
that even those loathsome kinds of food must, if the blockade continued, fail
them in a few days. The French seldom lose their hopes. They comforted
themselves with the thoughts of being relieved by their fleet; but a storm
which happened on the first of January 1761, gave them a much better grounded
assurance of deliverance. This storm destroyed four English ships of the line
and drove the rest from the blockade. Upon this Lally, the day after, wrote a
letter to Raymond the French resident at Pullicat, in which letter he in a
manner annihilates the English fleet. His beginning and concluding sentences
may give the reader some idea of this General's sanguine impetuosity. He
begins, The English squadron is no more, Sir. He concludes, in short, risque
all, force all, attempt all, and send us some rice, should it be but half a
garse at a time. His hopes were short lived. In four days after the storm, and
before the garrison could receive the smallest supply, Admiral Stevens again
appeared before the place and renewed the blockade with 11 ships of the line
and a frigate; and a large battery was advanced within 450 yards of the rampart.

The garrison had now only three days miserable provision to subsist on; but
this wretchedness made no impression upon the disposition of Lally. He
continued at best passively sullen, pretending, that the English breaches of
faith disabled him from treating with them. At last, however, a signal for
cessation was made, and the principal of the Jesuits with two civilians, but
without any apparent authority from the Governor, were sent out to treat with
the English. As this deputation had no legal commission to treat, the English
knew not well how to behave; but being given to understand that they would meet
with no opposition from the Governor, they took possession of the place and all
its immense riches; and thus, excepting the unimportant settlement of Makie on
the coast of Malabar, which was soon after reduced, the whole trade of the vast
peninsula of India, the richest of any in the known world, fell into the hands
of the English, through the unparallelled intrepidity and perseverance of their
officers and soldiers. But we are now to give an account, before we close the
history of this war, of an internal revolution in India which threatened to
deprive us of all our amazing successes.

The famous Timur Beg or Tamerlane, at the head of his savage Moguls, a hideous
race, conquered India and its vast peninsula, which he left to a branch of his
family. That branch failing, another which was driven out of Buckharia, and
from thence to Persia passed the Ind; and such was the veneration of the
inhabitants for a descendant of Timur Beg, that he mounted the throne of his
ancestors under the appellation of the Great Mogul, which is there synonimous
with that of Great Conqueror; and for some years he and his prosperity made use
of none but Mogul guards, by which they established a most unbounded despotism
over their Indian subjects. Though neither they nor the Moguls are very nice in
matters of succession, yet it has been always found necessary for the
succeeding Emperors there, ever since the days of Aureng Zebe, to claim some
kindred with the Timur Beg blood. At the time we now treat of, the Marattas
were the military force of India, and having deposed the late Great Mogul, his
son Sha Zaddah assumed that title, but his authority was disputed by some
provinces. Being supported by Mr. Law a French officer, nephew to the
celebrated Mississippi Law, at the head of about 200 French fugitives, he made
great progress in asserting his title, and at last Law persuaded him, at the
head of 80,000 of his country troops, and, what he had a much greater
dependence on, the 200 French, to march against the English in Bengal. They
were met by 20,000 of the same country troops and 500 English under the command
of Major Carnac, who in a pitched battle entirely defeated them, and made the
young Mogul, and his General Law, prisoners, the very day on which Pondicherry
was surrendered.

The fortune of the English prevailed equally in other parts of India. Jaffier
Ali Cawn who had, in the manner already related, been raised to the Nabobship
of Bengal, grew intoxicated with his power, even to a kind of phrenzy, which
lost him the protection of the English, who obliged him to resign his
government in favor of his son in law, which he did without resistance. This
new Nabob confirmed and increased the English privileges in Bengal to such an
extent as drew upon them the jealousy of the Dutch, which occasioned some very
disagreeable consequences from an actual invasion of that country by the Dutch,
with a design, as is said, utterly to extirpate the English in Bengal. They
were, however, repelled by the valor of the English, and the matter is now
under a civil deliberation, which makes it improper for a Martial Review.
During those transactions in India the Count D'Estaign, a French officer, with
no more than two frigates of ordinary force, by his valor, conduct and
activity, reflected reproach upon his countrymen in all other parts of the
globe. In October 1759, he destroyed the English settlement of Bender Abassi in
the gulf of Persia. After that, he reduced Bencoolen in the isle of Sumatra,
where we carry on great trade, especially in pepper, and ruined all our forts
and settlements there. This enterprising adventurer afterward fell into the
hands of the English, and has been accused of committing all those hostilities
while he was there, prisoner on his parole. Though we can say nothing
positively as to that fact, yet we apprehend it must be either false or
mis-stated, because the British government suffered him to return to France
without ransom, and he has, since the signature of the late preliminaries, been
nominated to their chief command in India. And here we close our Review of the
war in that country and return to Europe.

During the winter of 1760, and the beginning of 1761, the French winter
quarters on the Lower Rhine, in Hesse, and upon the frontiers of Hanover were
not only secure but plentiful; while those of the allies were the reverse.
Discontents in England concerning the management of the German war had now
risen to a greater height than ever, and Prince Ferdinand, notwithstanding the
rigor of the season, drew his troops together on the 9th of November, and
began his march in three divisions. The hereditary Prince and the Marquis of
Granby, left the country of Hesse to the Eastward, at the head of the right
division, General Sporken penetrated into Thuringia with the left, and our
German General with the center marched directly toward Cassel. It is
inconceivable what Prince Ferdinand could mean by such a plan of bold
operations. The French could have no rational expectation of them, and as they
were executed with amazing rapidity and spirit, their army was thrown into a
consternation, which bore some symptoms of a total rout, The hereditary Prince
and the Marquis of Granby, who were most advanced, struck the first blow; but
the former was repulsed before Fritzlar, and Breidenbach a Hanoverian General
lost his life in attempting to surprise Marbourg; both checks being attended
with a considerable loss on the part of the allies. Fritzlar, being again
attempted by cannon, surrendered on the 15th of February; and the Marquis of
Granby, after reducing the adjacent forts, pushed forward at the head of the
English cavalry with so much spirit, that vast magazines of the French fell
into the hands of the allies, which kept the horses, perhaps the men, alive in
that exhausted country. The French would gladly have fired those magazines, but
were so closely pursued that they had no time, and they fell back almost to the
Main.

Thus far this unintelligible attempt (as was before mentioned) succeeded
beyond any reasonable expectation; but the wisest heads amongst the French
officers gave themselves but little concern with regard to the sequel. The
siege and recovery of Cassel was Prince Ferdinand's great object, but an object
in all probability unattainable at that season of the year, as the garrison was
extremely strong, and Marshal Broglio, though he had retreated toward
Frankfort, hung over him with a superior army, and had now recalled to his
assistance the detachments he had sent to the Lower Rhine. Those rapid
successes of the allies, for Sporken was victorious on his side, led them into
many mistakes, for while they were driving the French from their cantonments
and weak passes, they left behind them large tracts of unguarded country, and
places provided with garrisons in number and strength almost equal to armies.
All the allies had hitherto acquired was by coups du main, but the siege of
Cassel was now regularly formed, and Marpurg and Ziegenhagen blockaded by them,
and Prince Ferdinand made such a disposition as was best suited for carrying on
the siege of Cassel under the direction of the Count of Lip Schoumbourg, and
watched the motions of the Marshal Broglio. But all those dispositions, however
plausible, were found to be fundamentally wrong. Sporken, though he had been
successful, and had driven the French back to Bamberg, had his retreat cut off
with considerable loss by the Count de Vaux the French governor of Gottingen,
who likewise took the town of Duderstadt, so that Sporken was obliged to rejoin
the main army under Prince Ferdinand, where his presence now became necessary.
The strong posts of Marpurg and Ziegenhagen lay to the rear of the allied army,
and in their front they had the collected strength of Marshal Broglio, and all
this while the important siege of Cassel was going forward.

Broglio, having laid his plan of operations, attacked the advanced parts of
the allies under the Hereditary Prince near Grunberg, which, consisting of
Hessians, Hanoverians, and Brunswickers, whom he entirely routed making 2000
prisoners. Upon receiving this severe blow, the allies abandoned the siege of
Cassel, after 27 days open trenches. The blockade of Ziegenhagen was broken up,
their other posts abandoned, and having once more evacuated Hesse, they fell
back upon the Dymel near to their former quarters. Upon the whole, the allies
by this unaccountable expedition acquired only somewhat to eat, and could be
said to fight, not so much for territory or glory, as for victuals; and all the
good resulting from it, was, that it cost the French some time to repair their
magazines.

An expedition was at this time equipping in England, that if possible, was
more unaccountable than Prince Ferdinand's irruption into Hesse. This was
against the wretched barren island of Belleisle lying on the coast of France,
and upon which, 5000 inhabitants may be said, rather to breathe, than to live,
in miserable huts. It has, however, a small fortified city, called Palais,
which was defended by a garrison under the Chevalier de Croix. This expedition,
against a place that never could be of use to England, astonished all Europe,
as the very expense of the equipment amounted to a greater sum than fifty times
the value of the fee simple of the whole island, if sold, could have produced.
The command of the sea armament was given to Commodore Keppel, that of the land
to General Hodgson. Our troops, in attempting first to land, met with a bloody
repulse. On the 25th of April, they made their landing good. The siege of
Palais was formed, and after some disagreeable incidents, which happened to our
troops, the place, on the 7th of June, capitulated. The city of London in
compliment to their favorite minister, addressed the King on this occasion,
while, thinking men saw with regret so much British courage, blood, and
treasure, employed on so worthless an object.

By this time* the negotiations for peace had been set on foot between the
courts of London and Versailles; and the irruption of Prince Ferdinand into
Hesse was no longer a mystery. A negotiation at Augsburgh, for which the
plenipotentiaries of the belligerent powers had been named, was still
depending, but it was foreseen, that the variety of their claims and interests
would either prolong the conferences to an unmeasureable, and indeed an
indefinite, length, or render them entirely fruitless, and therefore a separate
negotiation between France and England was thought more practicable. Of those
two powers, the French ministry was unanimous, but insidious; that of England
was divided. The French earnesty desired peace, and would have made almost any
concessions to have obtained it, but the character of the British minister, who
maintained his credit by the success and continuance of the war, gave them but
small prospect of success; they therefore turned their eyes to Spain. They
represented to his Catholic Majesty, who was himself extremely well disposed to
adopt the doctrine, the danger which the house of Bourbon was exposed to, by
the prevalence of the British arms, and the unavoidable ruin of the Spanish
empire in America, if the war would continue, unless his Catholic Majesty would
interpose and take part with France. Charles of Spain, naturally inclined to
peace, and to the enjoyment of the vast treasures he was every day amassing by
his late succession to the crown of Spain; but fearing that the English would
proceed to the conquest of St. Domingo, and afterward to that of Mexico and
Peru, by which his empire must be in a manner annihilated, he with great
reluctance and secrecy entered into a treaty with France, which is now well
known by the name of the family compact. By this treaty, the contracting
parties guaranty each others dominions; and each takes a common concern with
the other in all matters relating either to peace or war.

The English minister showed more art in discovering, than he did sagacity in
preventing, this treaty, by which France was sure of being supplied with money,
the only ingredient she wanted for making war, her country being full of men,
and the seasons that year remarkably favorable and fruitful. A small share,
however, of pliancy, on the part of the British minister, would have prevented
his Catholic Majesty from complying with a measure, to which he was so averse,
as that of entering into the war. But from what appears to the public, no step
was taken to make him easy or to remove his apprehensions. On the contrary,
after the British minister had a moral certainty of the family compact being
concluded, though not published, he pushed for an immediate war with Spain
without farther ceremony, and for intercepting their treasures on the return of
their ships to Europe.

We have already mentioned the divisions of the English administration, the
state of which it is now proper to explain. His Majesty, with equal wisdom and
tenderness for his people, indulged them in the favorable opinion they had of
his minister, whom he continued in his post, but he soon found a total division
between him and the rest of his council, the Minister's brother in law
excepted. It will, appear a problem to future times, whether the minister had
within him a serious conviction of the expediency, if not necessity, of
declaring war against Spain, or whether, foreseeing that such a measure could
not be complied with, he made use of the noncompliance, as a handle for being
rid of an administration, which he was conscious he could no longer carry on
with credit. Be that as it will, it is certain his Majesty's other ministers of
all denominations were unanimously for opening a negotiation. The minister was
obliged to seem to comply, but it is pretty plain from the manner of carrying
it on, that he was far from being in earnest to complete it. Bussy, who had by
office-business, wriggled himself into some consideration at the French court,
was sent to London, because he had been there before, and had a few paltry
connections with the English. The negotiations between him and the British
minister were opened, and at first promised fair to succeed, but ministerial
craft on the one side, and more than ministerial haughtiness on the other,
blasted them.

Bussy, a low-bred clerk, without abilities to conduct a negotiation that
required all the powers of policy, thought it sufficient if he plied the
British minister with the common places of compliments and soothing
expressions. The genius of the other disdained those mechanical arts, which the
court of Versailles, and some, perhaps, at that of St. James's, thought to be
essentials. Bussy from the manner and answers of Mr. P -- might have foreseen
this; but as his capacity reached no farther than forms, and the servile
observances of instructions, he was puzzled, and never was there more weakness
discovered in any negotiation, than was manifested in this, on the part of
France, though, perhaps, that court was not alone to blame. It is certain that
the French from the commencement of the negotiation treated under the wings of
Spain, whose affairs were managed by a minister of a still more narrow
capacity, and, if possible, of a meaner original than even Bussy himself. Being
by Birth an Italian, he had been serviceable to his Catholic Majesty, who
employed him in the affairs of Spain, where he found himself bewildered, but
his vanity, impelled, perhaps, by a superior influence, became at last his
ruling direction. For the court of Madrid must make a capital figure; and
against every principle of policy, decency, and indeed common sense, Mr. Bussy
was obliged (for in charity we must think him so) to present to the English
minister, what he called, a private memorial, intimating that his Catholic
Majesty should be invited to accede to the guaranty of the treaty, and that his
concerns likewise should be included in ths negotiation. Those were comprised
under three heads. First, satisfaction for Spanish captures made by the English
flag, for which there was little or no color of complaint. Secondly, the claim
of the Spaniards to fish upon the banks of Newfoundland, a claim of which the
foundation of it is a secret; and we are glad that we can oblige the public
with some account of it.

Newfoundland is not the most inviting country in the world, and has
occasionally passed through several hands. Nothing is more indisputable, than
that the original right of it, by discovery, belonged to the crown of England,
so far back as the reign of Henry the 7th. But the climate was so uninviting,
that the English, though they never made any formal cession of it, about the
year 1570, neglected it so greatly that the Biscayners, or, as they are called,
the Guipuscoans, for the benefit of the Spanish lent-observers, fished on the
banks of Newfoundland, and otherwise carried on a considerable trade there in
furs and skins, till in the year 1579, the English re-asserted their right to
the place, and in the year 1583, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, a Devonshire gentleman,
took an exclusive possession of it by a commission under Queen Elizabeth.

Notwithstanding those facts are incontestable, the Spaniards never lost sight
of the right of pasturage they pretended to on this sea-common, the most
fertile and profitable of any in the world. They mentioned it at the treaty of
Utrecht, where it was not thought worthy of a serious discussion, and it
remained dormant till, to the amazement of the world, it was revived in the
negotiation at London in the year 1761, between Mr. Pit and Mr. Bussy.

The third claim that Spain entered on this occasion was reasonable and well
founded, and it regarded the logwood trade on the bay of Campeachy. This trade
had been long an object of contest, and a report of the English board of trade,
in 1718, had given the English as good a right to it as the Spaniards. The
latter, however, never was satisfied with this report, and to say the truth,
the foundation of it was a little more than dubious. As the English, however,
had been long in possession of that trade, the court of Spain was willing to
allow them the benefit, but not the right, of prescription, and insisted upon
the demolition of the English settlements and fortifications, that had been
erected on the bay of Honduras, upon Spanish territory.

Such was the substance of this famous secret memorial, which the British
minister treated with an indignation and contempt, beyond, perhaps, what a
Burleigh or a Walsingham would have expressed. The event was, that though the
negotiation still went on with a variety of altercations and concessions, the
particulars of which are foreign to this work, yet it was easy to foresee that
the treaty must, in the end, prove abortive, if Mr. P -- continued to have the
sole direction of it. This produced many strong debates in the cabinet, where
Bussy's conduct was totally condemned, especially as a person of quality and
consideration then resided at London, as an Ambassador from his Catholic
Majesty, who, however, ordered that minister to justify all that Bussy had
done; but in a manner that might give as little offense as possible to the
British ministry. There is even some reason for believing, that if the court of
Versailles did not disapprove of Bussy's proceedings, they, at least, were
sorry for it.

On the other hand, his Britannic Majesty's privy council, and all his other
ministers did not think that this faux pas was of consequence enough to blow up
the whole negotiation. The spirit with which Mr. P -- acted was now known to
the public, and so much applauded, that he was then become more popular than
ever. He therefore, backed by his brother in law, renewed his efforts for a war
with Spain. The point was debated solemnly and seriously, and threw the rest of
the King's servants into great perplexities. His Majesty discovered a visible
backwardness to the proposition, which was likewise opposed by the other
ministers, while the minister's influence with the public was so great, that,
could they have avoided it, they would not have broken with him; but at last
such a breach became necessary.

We do not hazard too bold a conjecture, when we say, that such a necessity was
mutual. The minister grew every day more and more convinced that he could not
carry on the war, and that his manners were disgusting to his fellow
counselors, and, therefore, he wanted but a pretext for breaking with them.
The wiser and the more sedate part of the latter, were secretly resolved upon
peace, and, let the consequences be what they would, to take out of his hands a
negotiation, which, it was plain, he never intended, should be successful, for
he was even heard to complain of his being forced into the few preliminary
concessions he had already made to France, and which the public seemed to
dislike; so very tender he was of his popularity. It was not long before they
met each other half way; for the negotiation between England and France took a
new turn. The latter refused to abandon their allies in Germany, and insisted
upon the restitution of the captures made at sea before the declaration of war.
The British ministry were highly sensible that their obstinacy was in a great
measure owing to the encouragement they had received from Spain, and resolved
to break off the negotiation, as they could find no other means of taking it
out of Mr. P -- 's hands. Mr. Stanley, who had negotiated the British affairs
at Paris, was recalled from thence, as Bussy was from London; but still Mr. P
-- kept in his hands the direction of the war, and now matters came to a
crisis. He continued to urge the necessity of an immediate declaration of war
with Spain, and his arguments were plausible and popular. They were grounded
upon the danger of the familycompact, the provocations which Spain had already
given to Great Britain, upon the practicability of intercepting their
West India treasures; and he endeavored to show that we could, with very
little more expense, carry on the war against both powers, than what it cost us
singly against France.

His Majesty's other ministers differed from him for many prudential
considerations, but agreed with him in acting with firmness and spirit, if
Spain, after proper representations being made, should persist in joining
France. They insisted upon the general connections which England ought always
to have with the Spanish Monarchy; that an attempt to intercept their treasures
was not only precarious, but would render all the rest of Europe either our
open or secret enemies, and though successful, would hurt ourselves more than
any other nation. Upon the whole, the sense of the council was to apply,
previous to a breach with Spain, every wise but vigorous expedient to prevent
it. The minister, upon those and other arguments arising from the inability of
the nation to maintain a general war, declared, that as he was called to his
post by the voice of the people, he considered himself as their minister; and
that he was resolved to retire from all public business, if his measures were
not followed by an immediate declaration of war against Spain. His speech was
resented by the other Counselors, and by none more than the Earl of Granville,
President of the council, who had always been noted when out, as well as when
in power, for the vigor, if not the violence, of his measures; and the words
of his answer, the authenticity of which seems to be established, are said to
have been as follows. I find the gentleman is determined to leave us, nor can I
say I am sorry for it, since he would otherwise have certainly compelled us to
leave him; but, if he resolved to assume the right of advising his Majesty, and
directing the operations of the war, to what purpose are we called to this
council? when he talks of being responsible to the people, he talks the
language of the house of commons, and forgets, that at this board, he is only
reponsible to the King. However, though he may possibly have convinced himself
of his infallibility, still it remains that we should be equally convinced,
before we can reign our understandings to his direction, or join with him in
the measure he proposes. This speech was, from the acquiescence and approbation
it met with from all the rest of the council considered as their sense; and
their opinion was honored with the countenance of the greatest character in
the nation, who declared, that had his council been as unanimous in following,
as they were in rejecting, his ministers sentiments, he would have found
himself under great difficulties. Soon after Mr. P -- and his brother in law
resigned their places, and within a day or two the London Gazette announced Mr.
P -- 's resignation and that his Majesty had, in consideration of his great
services settled upon him a pension of 3000l. a year for three lives; and that
the title of an English barony was conferred upon his lady and her issue.

Had the government of England been threatened with immediate dissolution, it
could not have created a more general consternation, than this resignation did
in the minds of the public; but a little reflection soon recovered them. It was
remembered, that the Minister's late continental measures were direct
violations of those professions, for which the voice of the people had called
him to power. That, by accepting the pension and the title, he laid himself
under the tacit obligations of honor and gratitude, not to distress, and even
not to oppose, his Majesty's measures; and many went so far as to say, that he
had exchanged his power for the pension and the title; and had in fact bartered
away the interests of the people. Though the last accusation against him was
certainly unjust and groundless; yet it had its weight with many zealots, who
think they never can be wrong if they oppose a court. Other considerations had
their weight with more sensible people. The British minister, at the court of
Spain, gave great hopes, that his Catholic Majesty's ministry inclined to avoid
the war, and to settle matters by an amicable accommodation. Men of sense and
reflection could not conceive that it became any minister to assume to himself
a dictatorial power at his Majesty's council board, that was equally
unconstitutional as insolent; and they were confirmed in this opinion by the
following letter, which was published as authentic in the Public Ledger, and
which never was disowned to be such, either by the minister or his friends.

A letter from a Right Hon. person, to -- in the City.
DEAR SIR,
Finding to my great surprise, that the cause and manner of my resigning the
seals, is grossly misrepresented in the city, as well as that the most gracious
and spontaneous marks of his Majesty's approbation of my services, which marks
followed my resignation, have been infamously traduced as a bargain for my
forsaking the public. I am under a necessity of declaring the truth of both
these facts, in a manner which I am sure no gentleman will contradict. A
difference of opinion, with regard to measures to be taken against Spain, of
the highest importance to the honor of the crown, and to the most essential
national interests, (and this, founded on what Spain had already done, not on
what court may further intend to do) was the cause of my resigning the seals.
Lord Temple and I submitted in writing, and signed by us, our most humble
sentiments to his Majesty; which being overruled by the united opinion of all
the rest of the King's servants, I resigned the seals on Monday the 5th of this
month, in order not to remain responsible for measures, which I was no longer
allowed to guide. Most gracious public marks of his Majesty's approbation of my
services followed my resignation, they are unmerited and unsollicited, and I
shall ever be proud to have received them from the best of sovereigns.

I will now only add, my dear Sir, that I have explained these matters only for
the honor of truth, not in any view to court return of confidence from any
man, who, with a credulity as weak as it is injurious, has thought fit hastily
to withdraw his good opinion from one, who has served his country with fidelity
and success; and who justly reveres the upright and candid judgment of it;
little sollicitous about the censures of the capricious and the ungenerous,
accept of my sincerest acknowledgements for all your kind friendship, and
believe me ever, with truth and esteem,

My Dear Sir, Your Faithful Friend, etc.


The minister's conduct was generally condemned, not so much for the matter
contained in the letter (as was before mentioned) as for the manner in which he
expressed himself; and some construed it as a disrespectful appeal to the
public from the crown, after the almost unparallelled obligations he lay under
to his Majesty. The wording of the letter, to say the best of it, was certainly
incautious, and his assailants from the press had so greatly the advantage of
him, that a mighty breach was made in his popularity. He was now blamed by some
of his best friends for the concessions he had made to France in his
negotiation with Bussy; and all that could be urged in the abatement of the
charge, was, that he had been forced into those concessions. The reply was
ready. If he suffered himself to be ravished in the one case, why not in the
other? Why was he so uncomplying with Spain and so very tame with France?

The Earl of E -- was appointed secretary of state in his room, and the new
ministry gave out, that they were resolved to proceed with the same, if not
greater, firmness, both with regard to France and Spain, as Mr. P -- had done.
It soon appeared that the latter had sent very proper instructions to the Earl
of Bristol, his Britannic Majesty's Ambassador at the Spanish court, and that
his Lordship had executed them with great abilities and punctuality. He gave
Mr. Wall the Spanish minister, to understand, that the British court entirely
rejected the claim of the Spaniards upon part of the Newfoundland fishery. That
the Spanish captures, complained of, must be adjudged by the courts of
Admiralty and appeal in England, and that the right of cutting logwood in the
bay of Honduras never would be given up on the part of Great Britain Wall
disclaimed all intention that the court of Madrid had to offend that of London
by the memorial presented by Bussy, but intimated, that the engagements entered
into by both courts, and the advantages offered by France to Spain, had
cemented their interests. He refused explicitly to give up any of the claims of
Spain, but insinuatd that, in the main point of dispute between them, the
logwood trade, the interest of England, might be gratified, provided the honor
of his Catholic Majesty was consulted by a demolition of the settlements, which
the British had forcibly made in that bay, and complained of the trifling the
English had made use of in that important point, during a six years negotiation
upon it. The new British ministry gave some ear to his answers. But the
interests of the French court, assisted by a general opinion, that Great
Britain was unable longer to carry on the war, prevailed. In the mean while,
the war in Germany took an unfavourable turn for England; the Spanish Flota
arrived safe in their ports; and his Catholic Majesty highly resented the
indignant manner in which the offer of his medation had been treated by the
late British minister; and then the connections between France and Spain, by
the family-compact were openly avowed. The Earl of Bristol's instructions from
the new British ministry, was to demand, in a dispassionate but earnest,
manner, an immediate and categorical answer, whether such a treaty, as public
fame reported, existed between Spain and France, and whether Spain would assist
France in a war with Great Britain.

The Earl of Bristol was sufficiently apprized of the truth, but punctually
performed his instructions, and then Mr. Wall, who seems, on this occasion, to
have been under some control, entirely altered his language and behavior, and
acknowledged, that his Catholic Majesty considered the successes of England in
America as so many preludes to his own ruin, and that he was resolved to be no
longer passive. All the reasonings which the British Ambassador urged for a
further explanation, was in vain, and he received new instructions to declare
that if the Spaniards did not disavow their intentions to assist France, the
court of England would consider such a refusal as a declaration of war. Mr.
Wall's language, was, if possible, more haughty than before. He said, that war
had been declared by the spirit of pride and discord reigning in the English
government, and the attack they had made on his Catholic Majesty's dignity; and
that the Earl of Bristol might depart when and in what manner he thought
proper. His Lordship accordingly immediately retired from Madrid, December 17,
1761, and the Spanish Ambassador in like manner took leave of London.

Soon after, declarations of war were published by the courts of London and
Madrid, and its operations seemed to threaten a general conflagration in the
consequences. During the negotiation, both parties thought they would get the
better terms of peace, the more vigorously they carried on war; but the French
in this respect had a vast superiority; for though the allies had greatly
incommoded and retarded them by burning their magazines, yet the defeat of the
Hereditary Prince at Stangerode, their raising the siege of Cassel, the
evacuation of the country of Hesse, the losses and fatigues they had suffered,
and various other untowardly accidents, having obliged them to repass the
Dymel, the French, in the mean while, recruited both their magazines and
armies. The month of June, however, was far advanced, before Broglio could draw
his forces to the field from Cassel and its neighborhood, when he moved
toward the Dymel to join Soubise. General Sporken was posted so with a strong
detachment in the front of the allied army, as to be able to dispute the
passage of the Dymel; but, on the advance of Broglio, he attempted to retire,
though with considerable loss, for besides the killed, 800 were made prisoners,
19 pieces of cannon, 400 horses, and above 170 wagons were taken by the enemy.
The allies endeavored to extenuate this loss, but it appeared too plain, by
the French passing the Dymel and seizing Warburg, Dringleburg, and Paderborn,
and by Prince Ferdinand falling back upon the Lip and taking post between Ham
and Lipstadt, by which he was in hopes of cutting off Soubise's communication
with the Rhine. The allies being thus advantageously posted, Broglio durst not
march toward Hanover, but resolved, after he had joined the Prince de Soubise,
which he did at Soest, to attack the allied army. Their dispositions soon
convinced Prince Ferdinand of their intention, and he called in all his
parties. His first care was to secure the communication between Lipstadt and
Ham, and his left wing took post between the Lip and the Aast. The body of
the army occupied the height of Wambeln, and the Prince of Anhalt the ground
between Illingen and Hohenover. Lord Granby kept this position upon the heights
of Kirch-Denkern, and Lieutenant General Wulgenau, who was encamped upon the
heath of Untrup, marched by his right to approach the village of Kirch-Denkern.
The avenues and posts on the little rivers Aast, and Sultzbach, were guarded by
the piquets of the army. While those dispositions were planning, on the 15th of
July, at six in the evening, the enemy dislodged Lord Granby's advanced posts,
and attacked his camp in a strong body. It had been before concerted, that
Wulgenau should support him, and Prince Ferdinand ordered the Marquis to
maintain his ground to the last extremity, till he was joined by Wulgenau,
which his Lordship did so gallantly, that, notwithstanding the fury of the
French attack and their superiority of numbers, the enemy was repulsed, the
battle having continued till it was quite dark.

Next morning at three o'clock, the battle began a fresh, and Wulgenau's corpse
appeared to be the chief object of the French, whose right was commanded by
Broglio, as their center and left were by Soubise. The firing continued very
hot for five hours, without the enemy obtaining any advantage. About nine the
French seemed inclined to erect a battery on an exposed eminence, which
commanded the Marquis of Granby's camp; upon which, Prince Ferdinand, after
ordering a body of reserve under Sporken to advance, which they did, commanded
an immediate attack, before the enemy could resolve on what to do. They
resolved on a flight, and their right wing retired with precipitation, their
center and left, which never, properly speaking, had been engaged, otherwise
than by a cannonade from the other side of the Sulzbach, followed the example
of their right, and thus the allies remained masters of the field of battle,
but the nature of the ground not suffering their cavalry to act, they were
obliged soon to discontinue the pursuit. The enemy left their dead and wounded
with some pieces of cannon; and Maxwell's single battalion of grenadiers took
the regiment of Rouse, consisting of four battalions, with its cannon and
colors. Upon the whole, the loss of the French in killed wounded and
prisoners, was said to be 5000, while that of the allies amounted only to 300
killed, 1000 wounded, and 200 taken prisoners.

It happened during the course of this war, by a seeming fatality, that the
defeats the French received, served, upon the whole, to advance their affairs.
It is true, Broglio and Soubise endeavored to throw upon one another the blame
of the late disgrace they had received at Kirch-Denkern. The former accused the
latter of being too late, and the latter the former of being too precipitate,
in the attack, but their service did not suffer. Their loss of men was soon
repaired, that of the allies was irreparable. Their army again divided; Soubise
at the head of one part of it crossed the Lip, intending to besiege Munster,
as Broglio's division did the Weser, with a seeming intention to penetrate into
Hanover. The allied General was obliged to follow their example; he himself
observed the motions of Broglio, while the Hereditary Prince was sent to co^er
Munster. Broglio avoided a battle, but many skirmishes happened, in one of
which, the brave young Prince Henry of Brunswick brother to the Hereditary
Prince, was mortally wounded. Those actions were generally in favor of the
allies, whose successes were owing to the bravery of the British troops under
the Marquis of Granby. The French received a considerable check near Warburg,
and might then have fought on equal terms, but they still declined it, as if
their intention had been to waste the allied troops by skirmishes and fatigues,
in which they succeeded but too well. Mean while, the Hereditary Prince, seeing
Soubise more in earnest to besiege Munster, than Broglio was to march into
Hanover, attacked Dorsten on the 30th of August, and obliged the garrison to
surrender prisoners of war. Upon this, Soubise gave over thoughts of besieging
Munster and retired from the Lip. Prince Ferdinand, on the other hand, seemed
to threaten, by advancing into Hesse, to stop all supplies from that country to
Broglio's army; upon which the latter returned to Hesse, as the Prince did to
Paderborn. After this, the Hereditary Prince, who had rejoined his uncle, made
an irruption into Hesse, and destroyed the enemy's magazines as far as
Fritzlar; while Broglio, on the 25th of October, entered the forest of Hartz,
where he took and destroyed the strong castle of Schartzels and levied severe
contributions on a large tract of country; but the allies received a still more
considerable check by Prince Xavier of Saxony taking Wolfenbuttel after five
days bombardment. The French then drove the reigning Prince of Brunswick from
his capital to Hamburgh, where he met the reigning Landgrave of Hesse, who was
under the like unfortunate circumstances. Prince Ferdinand, perceiving the
uninterrupted progress of the French to the eastward of the Weser, dispatched
his nephew the Hereditary Prince to relieve Brunswick, which was now invested
by Prince Xavier. The Hereditary Prince, being joined by General Luckner, who
was detached with the cavalry toward Pein, attacked the enemy, drove them out
of their entrenchments, and forced them, not only to raise their siege, but
precipitately to abandon Wolfenbuttel with a very considerable loss of men and
cannon.

The French were not so unsuccessful in Westphalia, which the Prince Soubise
ravaged, and where, after taking Osnabourg, he gave that city and its miserable
inhabitants up to the pillage of his soldiers. About the same time, a body of
French light troops appeared before Embden, which was garrisoned by no more
than 200 British invalids, whom the inhabitants refused to assist in defending
the place, and which was given up, after capitulating for favorable treatment.
This capitulation was infamously broken, and the French, not only put that
city, but the greatest part of East Friesland under the most unconscionable
contributions. Those oppressions proved in the end as impolitic as they were
unjust, for they exasperated the boors of the country so much that they took up
arms, and drove the French out of Embden. In the mean while, the Prince of
Conde with another detachment of Soubise's army, took Mappen, a place of some
consequence, on the Ems, where the allies had some magazines. They had,
however, far more considerable ones in Bremen, a city of the utmost importance
by its situation on the Weser, because from it the English were supplied with
all their subsistence. The French attempted to enter it, but were repulsed, and
the garrison, which was before but small, was reinforced. As to the rest of the
operations in Westphalia and Hesse this year, they were various, brisk, and
greatly to the honor of the allied officers, particularly the Marquis of
Granby and the other English Generals. But the French being so numerous, though
they were beaten in almost every encounter, nothing decisive followed upon
them; and therefore the nature of our design does not suffer us to
particularize them. It is sufficient to say, that the Hereditary Prince posted
himself so as to secure the coast of the Weser, and incessantly alarmed the
French by detachments, till the enemy went into winter quarters, as he himself
did soon after. His head quarters were fixed at Hildersheim; those of the
Hereditary Prince at Munster. The British cavalry wintered in East Friesland
and their infantry in the bishopric of Osnabourg, while the French quartered
20,000 troops in the country of Hesse.

Though the British ministry, during their negotiation with France, had refused
to abandon his Prussian Majesty, yet the very treating on such a point gave him
apprehensions, and his intelligence was too good for him not to foresee, that
England would soon alter her system with regard to him. He therefore resolved
to act on the defensive. He had an army under Prince Henry strongly entrenched
at Leipsic in Saxony. Daun was encamped near Dresden, as his Prussian Majesty
was near Schweidnitz. General Tottleben led one division of the Russian army
toward Pomerania, as Butterlin did another into the Upper Silesia, where,
being joined by Laudohn, all that country was laid under severe contributions.
About the 1st of August, a body of Russians appeared before Breslau, which they
cannonaded, but all the various arts, marches and countermarches of Laudohn,
could not draw his Prussian Majesty from his advantageous situation. In
Pomerania, Tottleben lost his command for secretly corresponding with his
Prussian Majesty; and was succeeded by General Romanzow, who formed the siege
of the important town of Colberg by land, while a fleet of 40 ships attacked it
by sea. The place however had been lately fortified, and the Prince of
Wirtemberg, a Prussian General, was entrenched under its cannon with 6 or 7000
men. To save Colberg, the key of his Prussian Majesty's dominions on the north,
he detached General Platen to destroy the Russian magazines in Poland, and then
to continue his march toward Pomerania. Platen performed the service with
great success, and the Russians, to preserve their remaining magazines, without
which they knew they could not subsist, left Silesia and returned to Poland.
From thence, after securing his magazines, Butterlin carried fire and sword
into the March of Brandenburgh, and directed his course toward Pomerania. All
his Prussian Majesty could do, was, to detach General Knoblock after him, that
he and Platen might distress their convoys.

His Majesty, by this time, began to be in want of provisions in the strong
camp he still preserved near Schweidnitz, and made a motion toward the Oder,
thinking himself so secure of Schweidnitz, that he had withdrawn 4000 of his
garrison. Laudohn siezed the critical moment with the greatest rapidity, yet
caution. His troops advanced to the four quarters of the town; clapped their
scaling ladders to its walls, and a magazine blowing up, became master of the
place. About 3000 Prussians in garrison were made prisoners on this occasion,
with the Governor, Lieutenant General Zastrow, and large stores both of
artillery and meal fell into the hands of the conqueror, who effected this
amazing coup de main with the loss of no more than 600 men, of whom 300, with
as many Prussians, were killed by the blowing up of the magazine. His Prussian
Majesty behaved with his usual firmness under this heavy blow. "It is fatal,
said he, but we must endeavor to remedy it". His letter to General Zastrow was
as follows, We may now say, what Francis the First of France wrote to his
mother, after the battle of Pavia. We have lost all except our honor. As I
cannot comprehend what has happened to you, I shall suspend my judgment, the
thing is very extraordinary.

Colberg still continued to make an obstinate resistance, but General Platen,
who had joined the Prince of Wirtemberg, in endeavoring to open a way for the
Prussian reinforcements under Knoblock, was beaten by Romanzow; upon which,
Knoblock, with 2000 men under his command, surrendered themselves prisoners of
war. A storm had driven the fleets of Russia and Sweden from their station
before Colberg; but that procured the place no relief, and it was now visible
that famine and the Russians, whose numbers amounted to 50,000 men, must force
it to surrender. This was so much the opinion of the Prince of Wirtemberg, that
he broke through the Russian army, and left Colberg to make its own terms; and
its brave Governor Heyde, after a noble defense of six months, with his
garrison, became prisoners of war. The Russians, by taking Colberg, which fell
into their hands December 16, were now masters of the Baltic; and were no
longer under a necessity of depending upon precarious supplies of provision
from Poland, while his Prussian Majesty seemed now undone beyond all
possibility of recovery, when all of a sudden he was relieved from the
bitterest distresses he had ever yet experienced by the death of his most
determined enemy the Empress of Russia, which happened soon after he lost
Colberg.

The critical and indeed providential event was as fortunate for Great Britain
as it was for his Prussian Majesty. The court of Vienna at f^rst affected to
give out, that the new Emperor of Russia would pursue the system of the late
Empress, but a few days undeceived the public. Mutual Embassies passed between
the two courts of Petersburgh and Berlin, and Czernichef, the Russian General
in Silesia, having orders to retreat toward Poland, began his march
accordingly. Soon after, it was publicly known, that his Imperial Majesty of
Russia was determined totally to reverse the maxims of his immediate
predecessor, and an entire cessation of hostilities between the two courts soon
after took place.

The court of Great Britain, who had hitherto been hampered between its own
interests and the ties of honor due to the distressed situation of his Prussian
Majesty, seeing with pleasure that he was easied of the weight, which, ever
since the commencement of the war, had turned its scale against him, began now
seriously to think of delivering itself from the heavy burden of his Prussian
Majesty's subsidy. There was the greater reason for this, as we were now, in
fact, entering upon two fresh wars, one by sea, and another by land, but both
against Spain, who had already marched their troops toward Portugal. The
grounds of this invasion were as infamous as any that history can produce.
Neither France nor Spain so much as alleged any provocation that had been
given them by the King of Portugal, and they attacked him for no other reason,
but because he would not break with Great Britain, by acceding to the
family-compact. The Prussian ministers, both in Germany and England, made a
great noise when it was intimated to them that their master's subsidy would be
no longer paid; but as neither they nor their master had a shadow of complaint
of failure in engagements by the British ministry, the affair, as we say, went
off. In the mean while, the good effects which his Prussian Majesty reaped from
the friendship of his Imperial Majesty of Russia daily appeared, for a
cessation of hostilities was concluded between the troops of Prussia and
Sweden, while the Spaniards were redoubling their preparations by sea and land
to invade Portugal, and even threatened Gibraltar itself.

The defection of Russia from the Imperial and French courts damped neither of
those powers. In Germany, the French made preparations for bringing into the
field, the next campaign, 140,000 troops. Those of her Imperial Majesty were
equal, and his Prussian Majesty augmented his army to 150,000 men; but it is
now time to attend the progress of the British arms in America. Next to the
conquest of Quebec, that of Martinico was thought to be of the greatest
consequence to England, and some thought that it even ought to have the
preference on many accounts. Great difficulties had been foreseen in completing
the undertaking, arising chiefly from the bad success of the former attempts
upon that island, and our ignorance of its strength and situation. When it was
determined the conquest of it should be attempted, General Monkton was
appointed to the command of the land forces, as Rear Admiral Rodney was to that
of the sea. On the 5th of January, 1762, the whole armament moved from
Barbados, and, on the 7th, anchored at St. Anne's bay in Martinico. When our
troops landed, they found the island full of gullies that were difficult of
access, guarded by batteries and redoubts, and themselves precluded from all
intelligence, so that the conquest of the island appeared to be a matter of
great difficulty. The enemy was possessed of two strong posts, together with
Mont Tartenson leading to Fort Royale; but being beaten from both, by the
valor of the British troops, they retired to Mont Garnier, a post so strong,
that they thought it impregnable. They were, however, driven from it by the
British grenadiers, and after that, they were beaten from post to post till the
citadel of Fort Royale was surrendered, and La Touch, the French Governor,
after leaving a garrison in Fort Royale, retired to St. Pierre, and then the
whole island of Martinico surrendered by capitulation to the British arms, on
the 7th of February. This conquest was followed by the reduction of the isle of
Grenada, by Commodore Swanton, and Brigadier General Walsh, which was effected
without the loss of a man. Those amazing successes did great service to the
reputation of the new British ministry; and justified the promises they had
made, that the resignation of the late minister should rather forward than
retard the prosecution of the war, but they had a still greater object in view,
which was no less than the conquest of the Havannah itself; an undertaking so
arduous, that Britons alone could have thought of it. The honor of this bold
project was disputed by some of the partisans of the late ministry; but the
merit of carrying it into execution, undoubtedly, was due to the new one. They
thought a peace desirable, and that nothing could bring it about so
effectually as a blow that might disable both France and Spain from carrying on
the war.

As no measure ever was entered into with a more general approbation of the
public, so the minister very honestly and very wisely united the cabinet in the
same sentiments. The nomination of the chief land officers, and the operations
of the expedition, were left to a royal personage, who was an excellent judge
of both, and the Earl of Albermarle was pitched upon to be commander in chief
of the army, as Sir George Pocock was of the fleet. Under his lordship acted
his brother Major General Keppel; another brother, Commodore Keppel, commanded
under Sir George. The ministry seemed to take a pride in omitting nothing that
could make this expedition successful, and on the 17th of February, Sir George
Pocock took leave of his Majesty, and set out for Portsmouth to imbark the
troops. On the 7th of March, the fleet passed by Plymouth, and on the 16th of
June, an account came to England of the Admiral having sailed, with the men of
war and transports, the 16th of May, from Martinico to the Havannah. A long
silence with regard to this expedition succeeded, which greatly embarrassed the
public of England, but in September, an account came by a gentleman who left
the Havannah the 18th of July. By it, we were informed, that two days before
our fleet arrived there, two Dutch ships got in with powder and warlike stores;
and that our troops took two wagons laden with money, going from the town to
the mountains, where all the nuns, priests, and other people had retired. That
the Spanish fleet at that place consisted of seven ships of 70 guns, and three
of 60, having on board 5340 seamen, 1460 soldiers; two of 60, just launched,
one rigged but not manned, and that Don Lewis de Velasco, Captain of the El
Bayna of 70 guns, commanded in the Moro castle. All this intelligence happened
to be pretty near the truth, only the Spanish naval force was in reality
greater than we knew of. After this, the public apprehensions increased from
the profound silence that was observed with regard to the siege, the reason of
which soon appeared. For the castle El Moro, being the capital defense of the
place, it had been agreed upon, between the General and the Admiral, to
dispatch no accounts till that was reduced, as they were morally sure the town
and the other forts must soon follow. At last, on the 30th of September,
letters from the Earl of Albermarle and Sir George Pocock arrived at the
Secretary of State's, and the Admiralty Office, dated August 21, with an
account, that the Moro Fort was taken by storm, on the 30th of July, by his
Majesty's troops under Major General Keppel, who commanded the attack. Our
mines, said the Earl of Albermarle in his letter to the Earl of Egremont, were
sprung about one o'clock and a breach made just practicable for a file of men
in front. The enemy was drawn up on the top of it in force, with a seeming
determination to defend it. The attack was so vigorous and impetuous, that the
enemy was instantaneously drove from the breach, and his Majesty's standard
planted upon the bastion. I did not send a particular express with this good
news to your Lordship, because I flattered myself, that what has happened would
soon be the consequence of our success at Fort Moro. On the 11th in the
morning, by a signal from the fort, we opened our batteries against the town
and Punta fort. The guns and mortars were so well served by the artillery and
sailors, and their effect so great, that in less than six hours, all the guns
in the fort and north bastion were silenced. The governor hung out the white
flag, and beat a parley, and, at the same time, sent out an officer to propose
a cessation of arms for twenty four hours, in order to prepare the articles of
capitulation.

This good news dissipated the gloom, and the melancholy apprehensions of the
public, and the ministry seemed now to triumph over all opposition. All this
while, his Catholic Majesty was making the most vigorous preparations for the
entire conquest of Portugal, and the command of that expedition was given to
the Marquis of Serria; while the French army was advancing to second his
motions. Upon this, his most Faithful Majesty recalled his ministers from the
courts of Madrid and Versailles, the Marquis of Serria entered the Portuguese
territories on the 7th of May, and rather seemed to make a tour than a
campaign, so cowardly was the behavior of the Portuguese. Unfortunately for
England, his most Faithful Majesty's severities, however necessary they might
have been, against his greatest subjects, had raised up a great spirit of
disaffection against him, and many, even of those who were entrusted with
military commands, were in the interests of Spain. The first place in Portugal
which the Spanish General attacked was Miranda, and, while they were preparing
a battery to act against it, a fire broke out in a magazine in the town and
blew it up. Though hostilities had not been then begun, this event had
determined Don Bento Joseph Fagueredo, governor of the place, to desire the
Spaniards would not proceed in their operations, and to surrender himself
prisoner of war with his garrison. Four battalions of the Irish brigade,
assisted by the regiment of Galicia, entered through two breaches made in the
walls by the explosion; while the regiment of Numantia and Merida dragoons
entered by the gates, under the orders of Don Risaguero Lieutenant General.
They found in Miranda, exclusive of the staff officers of the place, twenty
other officers, fifteen sergeants, one drummer, and 324 soldiers of the
regiment of Braganza, together with two troopers, one officer of artillery,
fifteen mattross^s, and three engineers; the other officers and soldiers on
guard were almost all buried in the ruins of the magazine, and it is computed
that 500 persons perished there, including the inhabitants. This acquisition
was succeeded by the surrender of Braganza, which the garrison, consisting of
five companies of foot abandoned, as the garrison of Chaves, though composed of
2000 men, did that place; and the conquerors found Moncorso evacuated not only
by the military, but the civil power. The Spaniards then proceeded against
Almeyda, where they met with a small check from the Portuguese militia. But by
this time the British auxiliaries had landed, and Crauford's regiment having
joined the Portuguese army, they took a position for cutting off the return of
the Spaniards to their own country, flattering themselves that the invaders,
being pressed for want of provisions, must soon retreat.

But, at this juncture, the French auxiliaries were marching to support the
Spaniards, and the English under the Count la Lip, had taken the field for
the Portuguese, while the Spaniards were making themselves masters of
Salvaterra, and the castle of Segura; and the French on their part met with as
little opposition. Thus, the whole kingdom of Portugal was on the point of
falling a prey to her enemies in the most shameful dastardly manner that we
meet with in history, when she was saved by British arms and British councils.
Count de la Lip resolved to open his operations, by exhibiting a specimen of
British courage, that should astonish the Spaniards, and encourage the
Portuguese. He detached Brigadier General Burgoyne with his regiment and 17
companies of grenadiers, to make an attack on Valencia d'Alcantara, from whence
they dislodged the enemy sword in hand. The Spanish regiment of Seville was
entirely destroyed, a Major General, a Colonel, a Captain, five Lieutenants,
three stands of colors, and all the private men were taken who escaped the
sword. The loss of the British troops on this occasion were no more than
Lieutenant Burk of Colonel Frederick's, one sergeant and three private killed;
two sergeants, one drummer, and 18 private wounded. After this, the English and
Portuguese entrenched themselves about eight miles from Abrantes, the pass for
Lisbon; being determined there to wait for the Spaniards.

But all the exertion of the British courage and discipline could not inspire
the Portuguese with courage, or even reconcile them to the British, whom they
treated, not as their deliverers, but their enemies. Count de la Lip
complained of this to his Portuguese Majesty, but all he could do was, to
threaten his Generals and Officers for their disobedience. This seems to have
had some kind of influence, for, on the 6th of October, at Villa Velha the
Portuguese troops showed some degree of spirit, when the Generals Townshend and
Burgoyne surrounded a large body of Spaniards there, and forced them to
surrender prisoners. Some very hot encounters afterward happened, in which the
British courage, as usual, distinguished itself, and effectually defeated the
scheme the Spaniards had formed, of passing over the Tagus into the province of
Alentejo. After that, they were obliged to retire from Castello Branco, and
repass the mountains which separate the provinces of Estremadura and Beira. But
we are to observe, that by this time, the peace was looked upon to be in
forwardness between Great Britain and France.

The more discerning part of the public, perceiving that nothing obstructed its
final conclusion, so much as the incertainty both courts were under with regard
to the affairs of America. The news of the reduction of Martinico had not yet
arrived in Europe, and the British expedition against the Havannah was no
secret to the public. The French, who treated separately from Spain, affected
to give out, that they were ready to grant the same terms which they had
offered before, whether the expedition against Martinico was successful or no.
But the British ministry resolved to wait the event, and to act accordingly.
They carried their views farther than their predecessors had done for the
security of the British colonies in North America, which they thought must be
precarious, without a much larger extent of territory, than what the French had
yet offered; and unless they obtained the free navigation of the Mississippi.
They thought, when they had obtained that, their back settlements were
impregnable to the power of their enemies, and that every thing was provided
for, that their colonies in those parts had so long required, and lamented that
they were not able to obtain. These advantages, they reasonably imagined, must
be greatly improved, in case the expedition against the Havannah should prove
successful; but it must be obtained, if it should not.

The conquest of Martinico did not forward the conclusion of peace so much as
was expected. The French grew sullen at their loss and disgrace, and the easy
purchase the English had made of the finest possession in America; while the
court of London, on the other hand, thought that the conquest of Martinico
entitled them to insist upon higher terms than before. Thus the secret
negociations between the two courts grew more perplexed, and possibly would
have been ineffectual, had not his most Christian Majesty been inflexibly
determined to have peace at any rate, and given his ministers orders
accordingly. The majority of his council opposed this pacific disposition, and
the court of Madrid insisted upon his most Christian Majesty's waiting for the
result of the English expedition against the Havannah, which they considered to
be more romantic and impracticable than any of the many adventures of their own
knight errant.

But all remonstrances were in vain, and the preliminaries being agreed upon,
the Duke de Nivernois was appointed Ambassador from his most Christian, to his
Britannic Majesty; and the Duke of Bedford was, by his Britannic Majesty, on
the 4th of September, appointed his minister plenipotentiary to the court of
France. While those pacific measures were carrying into execution, the British
troops were undergoing the most fatiguing service, any body of men ever
experienced, in the siege of the Havannah, but with such persevering
intrepidity, that, on the 29th of September, the Captains Harvey and Nugent
brought to St. James's, an account of its surrender, and presented to his
Majesty the colors taken in the place. As the particulars of this memorable
siege are heavy and unentertaining, it may be sufficient to acquaint our
readers, that many of our bravest soldiers and sailors died before the place,
through the inclemency of the climate, and that it was at last taken, after
storming the breach our troops had made in the Moro Castle, where the brave
Velasco its Governor was killed; and that the other forts and the town
surrendered by capitulation. But though the negotiations and treaty of peace,
between France and England, had relaxed, and at last extinguished the war
between those two powers, they as yet had no effect on the war between his
Prussian Majesty and the Empress Queen. The British troops, in the beginning of
the year, still remained in Germany, and Prince Henry of Prussia opened the
campaign in Saxony, with some advantages over the army of the Empire. The
allied army under Prince Ferdinand assembled in its cantonments, and sent for
12 battalions from their army on the Lower Rhine, while the war continued in
Silesia between his Prussian Majesty and the Empress Queen, who threatened to
lay siege either to Neiss or Glogau. The Russian General Brandemer met with a
severe defeat near Chemnitz, but in return Prince Henry took Freyberg, every
where defeated the Austrians, and made upwards of 7000 of them prisoners, with
all their artillery, wagons, and ammunition. In the mean while, his Prussian
Majesty obliged Count Daun to retire to the mountains on the frontiers of
Bohemia, and his affairs were in the full career of success, when he received
the astonishing news that his friend and ally the new Emperor of Russia was
deposed and murdered. From this time his Prussian Majesty resolved to act on
the defensive, but had the good fortune to retake Schweidnitz, in which was a
garrison of 8000 men, commanded by Count Guasco. Here we may fairly close the
history of his Prussian Majesty's military operations, during the last campaign
of this war. All that succeeded were merely precautionary, but were conducted
with such judgment, as terminated in his concluding with the court of Vienna, a
most glorious peace, and entering with the Empress Queen into connexions, so
strict and intimate, that we can scarcely persuade ourselves they had ever been
at war.

However dazzling this good fortune of his Prussian Majesty, it is most
certain, that it was entirely owing to the friendship of the court of England.
While the negociations for peace were in suspense, the British Generals in
Germany received orders to act with redoubled vigor. In consequence of this,
Prince Ferdinand, on the 4th of June, attacked the French in their camp of
Graebenstein, under the Marshals D'Etrees and Soubise. Four different attacks
were made. The first under General Luckner, one under General Sporken, one
under Prince Ferdinand himself who attacked the center, and the last by the
Marquess of Granby. The three last Generals passed the Dymel, though from
different quarters, almost at the same minute; and had it not been for the
intrepidity of Mons. de Stanville, a French officer, who put himself at the
head of the flower of the French infantry, their whole army must have been
destroyed; an undisputed victory, however, fell to his Britannic Majesty's
troops, who did not lose above 300 men. The loss of the French was immense. The
fine body of infantry under Stanville, by favoring the retreat of their
cavalry, was entirely destroyed or taken prisoners, excepting two battalions
that fled, and it was upon all hands agreed, that the victory, in which 2570
French prisoners were made, was in a great measure owing to the gallant
behavior of the Marquess of Granby, at the head of the British troops. We are
only to add on this occasion, that the French infantry consisted of 100
battalions, and the English had no more than 60.

After this victory, part of the French army retired precipitately over the
Fulda, and there encamped themselves under the cannon of Hesse. On the 23d of
July, the Hanoverians and Hessians passed the Fulda, and beat the right of the
French army under the command of Prince Xavier. On which occasion, the French
again owed their preservation to the courage and conduct of their General
Stanville. Various operations then succeeded; but the Prince of Conde, having,
without the knowledge of the Hereditary Prince, been reinforced by the two
French Marshals, beat his serene highness, who, besides the Germans, had with
him Elliot's dragoons and the piquets under Lord Frederic Cavendish. In this
action, the Hereditary Prince was wounded, and the loss of the allies in
killed, wounded, and prisoners, amounted to at least 1500 men; but by the good
dispositions of Prince Ferdinand, their enemies were prevented from pursuing
their advantage.

Mean while, Prince Ferdinand laid siege to Cassel, which was obstinately
defended by Mons. Diesbach, the French commandant, but was at last obliged to
surrender, in consequence, as we apprehend, of orders from his court, who had
now fully settled the preliminaries with Great Britain. While this siege was
carrying on, one of the most desperate actions, that had happened during the
whole war, passed at Amoeneburg (which was in possession of the allies) between
the French and the Marquis of Granby, in the night between the 20th and 21st of
October. The intention of the French was to dislodge the allies from that town,
against which they raised some batteries in the night near a mill. The firing
alarmed Lord Granby. He marched with all his troops to the relief of the place
as the French did with all theirs to support the attack, and the latter at last
brought out 20 pieces of artillery. The most dreadful cannonading, considering
the smallness of the posts, that ever was known in the military art, ensued.
The allies maintained the redoubt, and the French the works they had raised at
the mill. The enemy fired from their great artillery upon the redoubt, at the
distance of no more than 300, and with their small arms, at that of 30 paces.
Fifty pieces of cannon were employed, the execution of which was confined to a
space not exceeding 400 paces, and for 15 hours, the firing both from the great
and small arms had not the smallest intermission. No fewer than 17 complete
battalions were successively employed in relieving the troops that defended the
redoubt, and those who came latest, were obliged to raise a parapet of dead
bodies for their defense. The French at the same time attacked Amoeneburg, and
after being three times repulsed, the garrison surrendered prisoners, which put
an end to this bloody action. As to the loss, it very probably was diminished
on both sides; for the allies gave out that they had not above 800 killed; but
the French themselves, two of whose Generals were dangerously wounded in the
action, did not deny that their loss was much greater. This, as it was the most
bloody, was the last action of the war; for, on the 15th of December, a
convention was signed at Brucker's Muhl upon the Oh'me, between the Generals
Howard and Guerchy, authorized by his serene highness Prince Ferdinand, and the
French Marshals, for an immediate cessation of hostilities between the British
and French armies, who were upon the point of separating, in order to march
into their respective winter quarters. Never was there a more sudden and more
pleasing transition from enmity to esteem, than succeeded the signature. The
French and the allies rushed into mutual embraces, and nothing was heard but
the most rapturous admiration of the valor of the one from the mouths of the
other. Several days were spent in magnificent and social entertainments, given
by the one army to the other, from the commander in chief to the meanest
subaltern. And, to the honor of the British troops, we must observe, that on
their return home, they received the thanks of the States General themselves,
through whose dominions they passed, for their sobriety, regularity, and
punctual payment of whatever they were furnished with, in that republic.

The loss of the Havannah gave a most dreadful blow to the interests of Spain,
and such as that court believed impossible to have happened, yet the new
British ministry to make good their professions upon the resignation of Mr.
Pit, that they would carry on the war with more vigor than ever, if Spain
should force them to declare it, resolved to attack Manilla, one of the
Philippine Islands, an enterprise till then deemed impracticable by any
European power. Every one knows how inaccessible those islands which extend
from North lat. 6, to near 20; and from East lon. 114, to 126, are to all but
the Spaniards, which, ever since their discovery under Philip the Second, from
whom they take their name, they have industriously concealed from the rest of
the world, as being the most recondite store houses of their wealth. Those
islands, are said to be 1200 in number, the chief, which belongs to the
Spaniards is Luconia, and contains the city Manilla, the seat of the Spanish
Viceroy. Without entering into any geographical description, which does not
belong to this work, the city of Manilla is rich, populous, and strong, and,
all the time of the expedition we are now to treat of, was thought to contain
immense quantities of treasure. The command of the land forces, appointed to
reduce it, was given to Colonel William Draper, who had signalized himself on
many occasions in the East Indies. The embarkation was made at Madrass, and the
forces consisted of the 75th regiment with a company of the royal artillery,
while the settlement at Madrass furnished 600 Sea-poys, a company of Cafres,
one of Topazes, two companies of French, who had inlisted in their service, and
some unarmed Lascars for the use of the artillery. This little army was
reinforced by rear Admiral Cornish, who commanded the sea forces, with a fine
battalion of 350 seamen and 270 marines; so that the whole force for the land
operations amounted to 2300 men, which were all that could be spared from the
necessary protection of Madrass. The ships employed upon the expedition, were
the Elizabeth, Grafton, Lenox, Weymouth, and Argo, who were dispatched before
with Commodore Tiddeman; and on the first of August, they were followed by the
Norfolk, Panther, America, Seaford, South Sea castle store ship, Admiral
Stevens's store ship, and the Osterly a company's ship, under the command of
Admiral Cornish; two East India ships serving for transports. Nothing
remarkable happened till, on the 23d of September, they anchored in Manilla
bay, and the Colonel, after landing his men and artillery under a fire of the
frigates, which dispersed the Spaniards who were assembling in great numbers,
on the 25th, possessed themselves of an excellent post, which not only covered
the landing of their stores, but secured their communication with their
squadron. The English troops, however, suffered greatly from the rains, and the
perpetual surf on the shore rendered the landing of the artillery and stores a
matter of great difficulty. The perseverance and intrepidity of the English
troops got the better of all obstacles, and the Spaniards were driven from
their advanced posts into the town, after a resistance that gave the English no
high ideas of their courage.

The pride, ignorance, and cruelty, of the defendants, are scarcely to be
credited. Their Archbishop was their governor and commander in chief; but so
weak a man, that when some foul weather began to rise which incommoded the
English, he publicly declared to his people, that the angel of God was about
to disperse and destroy the English, as he had done the host of Sennacherib.
When summoned to surrender, he in return advised the English to desist from
their undertaking, because his city was impregnable. Ten thousand neighboring
Indians, the most cruel and barbarous people under the sun, were introduced
into the city, which was in a manner open to them, the handful of English being
able to invest but a very small part of it. The fierceness of the Barbarians
was remarkably displayed in the following tragedy. The governor's nephew had
been taken in the bay by the English, and his excellency sent a flag of truce
requesting the favor that he might be set on shore, which was accordingly
granted; and Lieutenant Friar, the General's own secretary, was appointed to
conduct him to the city. In their way thither, they met with a large party of
the garrison, intermingled with Indians, who most inhumanly murdered Lieutenant
Friar and mangled his body in a manner too shocking so be related, and at the
same time mortally wounded the gentleman, while he was endeavoring to save his
conductor. The weather and rains continued still to be so unfavourable to the
English, that the Archbishop trusted to the elements for his deliverance; while
the Indians in their sallies, though slightly armed, fearlessly ran up to the
very muzzles of their enemy's pieces, and expired like wild beasts gnawing the
bayonet that gave them death. At last, after surmounting incredible
difficulties, and the Spaniards continuing still obstinate, though not brave, a
breach was made, which the English resolved to storm. This was done with such
amazing spirit and rapidity, that the Spaniards made no effort of resistance,
so that the English were afraid the enemy had some mines in reserve to spring;
but without reason. The chief resistance they met with was at the royal gate,
where a hundred Spaniards and Indians, who refused to surrender, were put to
the sword, and about 300 were drowned in attempting to pass the river. At last,
the governor and principal officers, who had retired to the citadel, which was
in a good posture of defense, surrendered at discretion; and thus the absolute
reduction of the place, with its numerous artillery and stores, was effected.
If the treasure found here by the English was not so great as expected, it was
owing to the unavoidable misfortune they were under of not being able to invest
the place; by which, their enemies were at liberty to dispose of their treasure
and effects as they pleased. To make them some amends, however, during the
siege, Captain Parker in the Panther made prize of a rich Acapulco ship, valued
at three millions of dollars; and the Admiral and General reduced the enemy to
the necessity of offering our forces an honorable and beneficial capitulation,
which they accepted, very fortunately for them, and for us, as the places would
otherwise have been given up, without redemption, by the following treaty.

The Definitive Treaty.
By the KING.
A PROCLAMATION.
GEORGE R.

WHEREAS a definitive treaty of peace and friendship between us, the most
Christian King, and the King of Spain, to which the King of Portugal has
acceded, has been concluded at Paris on the 10th day of February last, and the
ratifications thereof have been exchanged upon the 10th day of this instant
March; in conformity thereunto, we have thought fit hereby to command, that the
same be published throughout all our dominions: And we do declare to all our
loving subjects our will and pleasure, that the said treaty of peace and
friendship be observed inviolably, as well by sea as land, and in all places
whatsoever; strictly charging and commanding all our loving subjects to take
notice hereof, and to conform themselves thereunto accordingly.

Given at our court at St. James's, the 21st day of March, 1763, in the 3d year
of our reign.
GOD save the KING.
In the Name of the most holy and undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. So be it.
BE it known to all those to whom it shall, or may, in any manner, belong.

It has pleased the most High to diffuse the spirit of union and concord among
the Princes, whose divisions had spread troubles in the four parts of the
world, and to inspire them with the inclination to cause the comforts of peace
to succeed to the misfortunes of a long and bloody war, which, having arisen
between England and France, during the reign of the most serene and most potent
Prince, George the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, of
glorious memory, continued under the reign of the most serene and most potent
Prince, George the Third, his successor, and, in its progress, communicated
itself to Spain and Portugal: Consequently, the most serene and most potent
Prince, George the Third, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenbourg, Arch-Treasurer, and Elector, of
the Holy Roman empire; the most serene and most potent Prince, Lewis the
Fifteenth, by the Grace of God, most Christian King; and the most serene and
most potent Prince, Charles the Third, by the Grace of God, King of Spain and
of the Indies, after having laid the foundations of peace in the preliminaries,
signed at Fontainbleau the 3d of November last; and the most serene and most
potent Prince, Don Joseph the First, by the Grace of God, King of Portugal and
of the Algarves, after having acceded thereto, determined to complete, without
delay, this great and important work. For this purpose, the high contracting
parties have named and appointed their respective Ambassadors Extraordinary,
and Ministers Plenipotentiary, viz. his Sacred Majesty the King of Great
Britain, the most illustrious and most excellent Lord, John, Duke and Earl of
Bedford, Marquess of Tavistock, etc. his Minister of State, Lieutenant General
of his armies, Keeper of his Privy Seal, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, and his Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to his
most Christian Majesty; his Sacred Majesty the most Christian King, the most
illustrious and most excellent Lord Caesar Gabriel de Choiseul, Duke of
Praslin, Peer of France, Knight of his Orders, Lieutenant General of his
armies, and of the province of Britanny, Counselor in all his Councils,
Minister and Secretary of State, and of his commands and Finances; his Sacred
Majesty the Catholic King, the most illustrious and most excellent Lord, Dom
Jerome Grimaldi, Marquis de Grimaldi, Knight of the most Christian King's
orders, Gentleman of his Catholic Majesty's Bedchamber in employment, and his
Ambassador extraordinary to his most Christian Majesty; his Sacred Majesty the
most Faithful King, the most illustrious and most excellent Lord, Martin de
Mello and Castro, Knight professed of the order of Christ, of his most Faithful
Majesty's Council, and his Ambassador and Minister Plenipotentiary to his most
Christian Majesty.

Who, after having duly communicated to each other their full powers, in good
form, copies whereof are transcribed at the end of the present treaty of peace,
have agreed upon the articles, the tenor of which is as follows:

Art. I. There shall be a christian, universal, and perpetual peace, as well by
sea as by land, and a sincere and constant friendship shall be reestablished
between their Britannick, Most Christian, Catholic, and Most Faithful
Majesty's, and between their heirs and successors, kingdoms, dominions,
provinces, countries, subjects, and vassals, of what quality or condition
soever they be, without exception of places, or of persons: So that the high
contracting parties shall give the greatest attention to maintain between
themselves and their said dominions and subjects, this reciprocal friendship
and correspondence, without permitting, on either side, any kind of
hostilities, by sea or by land, to be committed, from henceforth, for any
cause, or under any pretense whatsoever, and every thing shall be carefully
avoided, which might, hereafter, prejudice the union happily re-established,
applying themselves, on the contrary, on every occasion, to procure for each
other whatever may contribute to their mutual glory, interests, and advantages,
without giving any assistance or protection, directly or indirectly, to those
who would cause any Prejudice to either of the high contracting parties: there
shall be a general oblivion of every thing that may have been done or committed
before, or since, the commencement of the war, which is just ended.

Art. II. The treaties of Westphalia of 1648; those of Madrid between the
crowns of Great Britain and Spain of 1667, and 1670; the treaties of peace of
Nimeguen of 1678, and 1679; of Ryswyck of 1697; those of peace and of commerce
of Utrecht of 1713; that of Baden of 1714; the treaty of the triple alliance of
the Hague of 1717; that of the quadruple alliance of London of 1718; the treaty
of peace of Vienna of 1738; the definitive treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle of 1748;
and that of Madrid, between the crowns of Great Britain and Spain, of 1750; as
well as the treaties between the crowns of Spain and Portugal, of the 13th of
February 1668; of the 6th of Feb. 1715; and of the 12th of Feb. 1761; and that
of the 11th of April 1713, between France and Portugal, with the guaranties of
Great Britain; serve as a basis and foundation to the peace, and to the present
treaty: and for this purpose, they are all renewed and confirmed in the best
form, as well as all the treaties in general, which subsisted between the high
contracting parties before the war, as if they were inserted here word for
word, so that they are to be exactly observed, for the future, in their whole
tenor, and religiously executed on all sides, in all their points, which shall
not be derogated from by the present treaty, notwithstanding all that may have
been stipulated to the contrary by any of the high contracting parties: and all
the said parties declare, that they will not suffer any privilege, favor, or
indulgence, to subsist, contrary to the treaties above confirmed, except what
shall have been agreed and stipulated by the present treaty.

Art. III. All the prisoners made, on all sides, as well by land, as by sea,
and the hostages carried away, or given during the war, and to this day, shall
be restored, without ransom, six weeks, at latest, to be computed from the day
of the exchange of the ratification of the present treaty, each crown
respectively paying the advances, which shall have been made for the
subsistence and maintenance of their prisoners, by the Sovereign of the country
where they shall have been detained, according to the attested receipts and
estimates, and other authentic vouchers, which shall be furnished on one side
and the other: and securities shall be reciprocally given for the payment of
the debts which the prisoners shall have contracted in the countries, where
they have been detained, until their entire liberty. And all the ships of war
and merchant vessels, which shall have been taken, since the expiration of the
terms agreed upon for the cessation of hostilities by sea, shall be likewise
restored bona fide, with all their crews and cargoes: And the execution of this
article shall be proceeded upon immediately after the exchange of the
ratifications of this treaty.

Art. IV. His most Christian Majesty renounces all pretensions, which he has
heretofore formed, or might form, to Nova Scotia, or Acadia, in all its parts;
and guaranties the whole of it, with all its dependencies, to the King of Great
Britain: Moreover, his most Christian Majesty cedes, and guaranties, to his
said Britannic Majesty, in full right, Canada, with all its dependencies, as
well as the island of Cape Breton, and all the other islands and coasts, in the
gulf and river of St. Laurence, and in general every thing that depends on the
said countries, lands, islands, and coasts, with the sovereignty, property,
possession, and all rights acquired by treaty or otherwise, which the most
Christian King, and the crown of France, have had, till now, over the said
countries, islands, lands, places, coasts, and their inhabitants, so that the
most Christian King cedes and makes over the whole to the said King, and to the
crown of Great Britain, and that in the most ample manner and form, without
restriction, and without any liberty to depart from the said cession and
guaranty, under any pretense, or to disturb Great Britain in the possessions
abovementioned. His Britannic Majesty, on his side, agrees to grant the
liberty of the Catholic religion to the inhabitants of Canada: He will,
consequently, give the most precise and most effectual orders, that his new
Roman Catholic subjects may profess the worship of their religion, according
to the rites of the Romish church, as far as the laws of Great Britain permit.
His Britannic Majesty further agrees, that the French inhabitants, or others
who had been subjects of the most Christian King in Canada, may retire, with
all safety and freedom, wherever they shall think proper, and may sell their
estates, provided it be to subjects of his Britannic Majesty, and bring away
their effects, as well as their persons, without being restrained in their
emigration, under any pretense whatsoever, except that of debts, or of criminal
prosecutions: The term, limited for this emigration, shall be fixed to the
space of eighteen months, to be computed from the day of the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty.

Art. V. The subjects of France shall have the liberty of fishing and drying on
a part of the coasts of the island of Newfoundland, such as it is specified in
the XIIIth article of the treaty of Utrecht; which article is renewed and
confirmed by the present treaty (except what relates to the island of Cape
B^e^on, as well as to the other islands and coasts, in the mouth and in the
gulf of St. Laurence): And his Britannic Majesty consents to leave to the
subjects of the most Christian King the liberty of fishing in the gulf St.
Laurence, on condition that the subjects of France do not exercise the said
fishery, but at the distance of three leagues from all the coasts belonging to
Great Britain, as well those of the continent, as those of the islands situated
in the said gulf St. Laurence. And as to what relates to the fishery on the
coasts of the island of Cape Breton out of the said gulf, the subjects of the
most Christian King shall not be permitted to exercise the said fishery, but at
the distance of fifteen leagues from the coasts of the island of Cape Breton;
and the fishery on the coasts of Nova Scotia or Acadia, and every where else
out of the said gulf, shall remain on the foot of former treaties.

Art. VI. The King of Great Britain cedes the islands of St. Pierre and
Miquelon, in full right, to his most Christian Majesty, to serve as a shelter
to the French fishermen: And his said most Christian Majesty engages not to
fortify the said islands; to erect no buildings upon them, but merely for the
convenience of the fishery; and to keep upon them a guard of fifty men only for
the police.

Art. VII. In order to re-establish peace on solid and durable foundations, and
to remove for ever all subject of dispute with regard to the limits of the
British and French territories on the Continent of America; It is agreed, that,
for the future, the confines between the dominions of his Britannic Majesty,
and those of his most Christian Majesty, in that part of the world, shall be
fixed irrevocably by a line drawn along the middle of the river Mississippi,
from its source to the river Iberville, and from thence, by a line drawn along
the middle of this river, and the lakes Maurepas and Pontchartrain, to the sea;
and, for this purpose, the most Christian King cedes in full right, and
guaranties to his Britannic Majesty, the river and port of the Mobile, and
every thing which he possesses, or ought to possess, on the left side of the
river Mississippi, except the town of New Orleans, and the island in which it
is situated, which shall remain to France, provided that the navigation of the
river Mississippi shall be equally free, as well to the subjects of Great
Britain, as to those of France, in its whole breadth and length, from its
source to the sea, and expressly that part which is between the said island of
New Orleans, and the right bank of that river, as well as the passage both in
and out of its mouth: It is further stipulated, that the vessels belonging to
the subjects of either nation, shall not be stopped, visited, or subjected to
the payment of any duty whatsoever. The stipulations inserted in the IVth
article, in favor of the inhabitants of Canada, shall also take place, with
regard to the inhabitants of the countries ceded by this article.

Art. VIII. The King of Great Britain shall restore to France the islands of
Guadaloupe, of Marie Galante, of Desirade, of Martinico, and of Belleisle; and
the fortresses of these islands shall be restored in the same condition they
were in, when they were conquered by the British arms; provided that his
Britannic Majesty's subjects, who shall have settled in the said islands, or
those who shall have any commercial affairs to settle there, or in the other
places restored to France by the present treaty, shall have liberty to sell
their lands, and their estates, to settle their affairs; to recover their
debts, and to bring away their effects, as well as their persons, on board
vessels, which they shall be permitted to send to the said islands, and other
places restored as above, and which shall serve for this use only, without
being restrained, on account of their religion, or under any other pretense
whatsoever, except that of debts, or of criminal prosecutions: And for this
purpose, the term of eighteen months is allowed to his Britannic Majesty's
subjects, to be computed from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty: But, as the liberty, granted to his Britannic Majesty's
subjects, to bring away their persons and their effects, in vessels of their
nation, may be liable to abuses, if precautions were not taken to prevent them:
It has been expressly agreed between his Britannic Majesty and his most
Christian Majesty, that the number of English vessels, which shall have leave
to go to the said islands and places restored to France, shall be limited, as
well as the number of tons of each one; That they shall go in ballast; shall
set sail at a fixed time; and shall make one voyage only, all the effects
belonging to the English, being to be embarked at the same time. It has been
further agreed, That his most Christian Majesty shall cause the necessary
passports to be given to the said vessels; That, for the greater security, it
shall be allowed to place two French Clerks, or Guards, in each of the said
vessels, which shall be visited in the landing places, and ports, of the said
islands, and places, restored to France, and that the merchandise, which shall
be found therein, shall be confiscated.

Art. IX. The most Christian King cedes and guaranties, to his Britannic
Majesty, in full right, the islands of Grenada and of the Grenadines, with the
same stipulations in favor of the inhabitants of this colony, inserted in the
IVth article for those of Canada: and the partition of the islands, called
Neutral, is agreed and fixed, so that those of St. Vincent, Dominica, and
Tobago, shall remain, in full right, to Great Britain, and that that of St.
Lucia shall be delivered to France, to enjoy the same likewise in full right;
and the high contracting parties guaranty the partition so stipulated.

Art. X. His Britannic Majesty shall restore to France the island of Goree in
the condition it was in when conquered: And his most Christian Majesty cedes,
in full right, and guaranties to the King of Great Britain the river Senegal,
with the forts and factories of St. Lewis, Podor, and Galam; and with all the
rights and dependencies of the said river Senegal.

Art. XI. In the East Indies, Great Britain shall restore to France, in the
condition they are now in, the different factories, which that crown possessed,
as well on the coast of Coromandel and Orixa, as on that of Malabar, as also in
Bengal, at the beginning of the year 1749. And his most Christian Majesty
renounces all pretension to the acquisitions which he had made on the coast of
Coromandel and Orixa, since the said beginning of the year 1749. His most
Christian Majesty shall restore, on his side, all that he may have conquered
from Great Britain, in the East Indies, during the present war; and will
expressly cause Nattal and Tapanoully, in the island of Sumatra, to be restored;
he engages further, not to erect fortifications, or to keep troops in any part
of the dominions of the Subah of Bengal. And in order to preserve future peace
on the coast of Coromandel and Orixa, the English and French shall acknowledge
Mahomet Ally Khan for lawful Nabob of the Carnatick, and Salabat Jing for
lawful Subah of the Decan; and both parties shall renounce all demands and
pretensions of satisfaction, with which they might charge each other, or their
Indian allies, for the depredations, or pillage, committed, on the one side, or
on the other, during the war.

Art. XII. The island of Minorca shall be restored to his Britannic Majesty, as
well as Fort St. Philip, in the same condition they were in, when conquered by
the arms of the most Christian King; and with the artillery which was there,
when the said island and the said fort were taken.

Art. XIII. The town and port of Dunkirk shall be put into the state fixed by
the last treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, and by former treaties. The Cunette shall
be destroyed immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present
treaty, as well as the forts and batteries which defend the entrance on the
side of the sea; and provisions shall be made, at the same time, for the
wholesomeness of the air, and for the health of the inhabitants, by some other
means, to the satisfaction of the King of Great Britain.

Art. XIV. France shall restore all the countries belonging to the Electorate
of Hanover, to the Landgrave of Hesse, to the Duke of Brunswick, and to the
Count of La Lip Buckebourg, which are, or shall be occupied by his most
Christian Majesty's arms: The fortresses of these different countries shall be
restored in the same condition they were in, when conquered by the French arms;
and the pieces of artillery, which shall have been carried elsewhere, shall be
replaced by the same number, of the same bore, weight, and metal.

Art. XV. In case the stipulations, contained in the 13th article of the
preliminaries, should not be completed at the time of the signature of the
present treaty, as well with regard to the evacuations to be made by the armies
of France of the fortresses of Cleves, Wesel, Guelders, and of all the
countries belonging to the King of Prussia, as with regard to the evacuations
to be made by the British and French armies of the countries which they occupy
in Westphalia, Lower Saxony, on the Lower Rhine, the Upper Rhine, and in all
the Empire, and to the retreat of the troops into the dominions of their
respective sovereigns; their Britannic, and most Christian Majesty's promise to
proceed, bona fide, with all the dispatch the case will permit of, to the said
evacuations, the entire completion whereof they stipulate before the 15th of
March next, or sooner if it can be done; and their Britannic and most Christian
Majesty's further engage, and promise to each other, not to furnish any
succors, of any kind, to their respective allies, who shall continue engaged
in the war in Germany.

Art. XVI. The decision of the prizes made, in time of peace, by the subjects
of Great Britain, on the Spaniards, shall be referred to the courts of justice
of the admiralty of Great Britain, conformably to the rules established among
all nations, so that the validity of the said prizes, between the British and
Spanish nations, shall be decided and judged, according to the law of nations,
and according to treaties, in the courts of justice of the nation, who shall
have made the capture.

Art. XVII. His Britannic Majesty shall cause to be demolished all the
fortifications which his subjects shall have erected in the bay of Honduras and
other places of the territory of Spain, in that part of the world, four months
after the ratification of the present treaty: and his Catholic Majesty shall
not permit his Britannic Majesty's subjects, or their workmen, to be disturbed,
or molested, under any pretense whatsoever, in the said places, in their
occupation of cutting, loading, and carrying away logwood: and for this
purpose, they may build without hindrance, and occupy without interruption, the
houses and magazines which are necessary for them, for their families, and for
their effects: and his Catholic Majesty assures to them, by this article, the
full enjoyment of those advantages, and powers, on the Spanish coasts and
territories, as above stipulated, immediately after the ratifications of the
present treaty.

Art. XVIII. His Catholic Majesty desists, as well for himself, as for his
successors, from all pretension, which he may have formed, in favor of the
Guipuscoans, and other his subjects, to the right of fishing in the
neighborhood of the island of Newfoundland.

Art. XIX. The King of Great Britain shall restore to Spain all the territory
which he has conquered in the island of Cuba, with the fortress of the
Havannah; and this fortress, as well as all the other fortresses of the said
island, shall be restored in the same condition they were in when conquered by
his Britannic Majesty's arms; provided, that his Britannic Majesty's subjects,
who shall have settled in the said island, restored to Spain by the present
treaty, or those who shall have any commercial affairs to settle there, shall
have liberty to fell their lands, and their estates, to settle their affairs,
to recover their debts, and to bring away their effects, as well as their
persons, on board vessels which they shall be permitted to send to the said
island restored as above, and which shall serve for that use only, without
being restrained on account of their religion, or under any other pretense
whatsoever, except that of debts, or of criminal prosecutions: and for this
purpose, the term of eighteen months is allowed to his Britannic Majesty's
subjects, to be computed from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty: but as the liberty, granted to his Britannic Majesty's
subjects, to bring away their persons, and their effects, in vessels of their
nation, may be liable to abuses, if precautions were not taken to prevent them;
it has been expressly agreed, between his Britannic Majesty and his Catholic
Majesty, that the number of English vessels, which shall have leave to go to
the said island restored to Spain, shall be limited, as well as the number of
tons of each one; that they shall go in ballast; shall set sail at a fixed
time; and shall make one voyage only; all the effects belonging to the English
being to be embarked at the same time: It has been further agreed, that his
Catholic Majesty shall cause the necessary passports to be given to the said
vessels; that, for the greater security, it shall be allowed to place two
Spanish clerks, or guards, in each of the said vessels, which shall be visited
in the landing places, and ports of the said island restored to Spain, and that
the merchandise, which shall be found therein, shall be confiscated.

Art. XX. In consequence of the restitution stipulated in the preceding
article, his Catholic Majesty cedes and guaranties, in full right, to his
Britannic Majesty, Florida, with fort St. Augustine, and the bay of Pensacola,
as well as all that Spain possesses on the continent of North America, to the
east, or to the south east, of the river Mississippi. And in general, every
thing that depends on the said countries and lands, with the sovereignty,
property, possession, and all rights, acquired by treaties or otherwise, which
the Catholic King, and the Crown of Spain, have had, till now, over the said
countries, lands, places, and their inhabitants; so that the Catholic King
cedes and makes over the whole to the said King, and to the crown of Great
Britain, and that in the most ample manner and form. His Britannic Majesty
agrees, on his side, to grant to the inhabitants of the countries, above ceded,
the liberty of the Catholic religion: He will consequently give the most
express and the most effectual orders, that his new Roman Catholic subjects may
profess the worship of their religion, according to the rites of the Romish
church, as far as the laws of Great Britain permit: His Britannic Majesty
further agrees, that the Spanish inhabitants, or others who had been subjects
of the Catholic King in the said countries, may retire, with all safety and
freedom, wherever they think proper; and may sell their estates, provided it be
to his Britannic Majesty's subjects, and bring away their effects, as well as
their persons, without being restrained in their emigration, under any pretense
whatsoever, except that of debts, or of criminal prosecutions: The term,
limited for this emigration, being fixed to the space of eighteen months, to be
computed from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of the present
treaty. It is moreover stipulated, that his Catholic Majesty shall have power
to cause all the effects, that may belong to him, to be brought away, whether
it be artillery, or other things.

Art. XXI. The French and Spanish troops shall evacuate all the territories,
lands, towns, places, and castles, of his most faithful Majesty, in Europe,
without any reserve, which shall have been conquered by the armies of France
and Spain, and shall restore them in the same condition they were in when
conquered, with the same artillery, and ammunition, which were found there:
And, with regard to the Portuguese colonies in America, Africa, or in the East
Indies, if any change shall have happened there, all things shall be restored
on the same footing they were in, and conformably to the preceding treaties,
which subsisted between the courts of France, Spain, and Portugal, before the
present war.

Art. XXII. All the papers, letters, documents, and archieves, which were found
in the countries, territories, towns, and places, which are restored, and those
belonging to the countries ceded, shall be, respectively and bona fide,
delivered, or furnished at the same time, if possible, that possession is
taken, or, at latest, four months after the exchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty, in whatever places the said papers or documents may be
found.

Art. XXIII. All the countries and territories, which may have been conquered,
in whatsoever part of the world, by the arms of their Britannic and most
faithful Majesty's, as well as by those of their most Christian and Catholic
Majesty's, which are not included in the present treaty, either under the title
of cessions, or under the title of restitutions, shall be restored without
difficulty, and without requiring any compensation.

Art. XXIV. As it is necessary to assign a fixed epoch for the restitutions,
and the evacuations, to be made by each of the high contracting parties; it is
agreed, that the British and French troops shall complete, before the 15th of
March next, all that shall remain to be executed of the XIIth and XIIIth
articles of the preliminaries, signed the 3d day of November last, with regard
to the evacuation to be made in the empire, or elsewhere. The island of
Belleisle shall be evacuated six weeks after the exchange of the ratifications
of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done. Guadaloup, Desirade, Marie
Galante, Martinico, and St. Lucia, three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done. Great Britain
shall likewise, at the end of three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done, enter into
possession of the river and port of the Mobile, and of all that is to form the
limits of the territory of Great Britain, on the side of the river Mississippi,
as they are specified in the VIIth article. The island of Goree shall be
evacuated by Great Britain, three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty; and the island of Minorca, by France at
the same epoch, or sooner if it can be done: and according to the conditions of
the VIIth article, France shall likewise enter into possession of the islands
of St. Peter, and of Miquelon, at the end of three months after the exchange of
the ratifications of the present treaty. The factories in the East Indies shall
be restored six months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present
treaty, or sooner if it can be done. The fortress of the Havannah, with all
that has been conquered in the island of Cuba, shall be restored three months
after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it
can be done: and at the same time, Great Britain shall enter into possession of
the country ceded by Spain, according to the XXth article. All the places and
countries of his most Faithful Majesty, in Europe, shall be restored
immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty; and
the Portuguese colonies, which may have been conquered, shall be restored in
the space of three months in the West Indies, and of six months in the East
Indies, after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, or
sooner if it can be done. All the fortresses, the restitution whereof is
stipulated above, shall be restored with the artillery and ammunition, which
were found there at the time of the conquest. In consequence whereof, the
necessary orders shall be sent by each of the high contracting parties, with
reciprocal passports for the ships that shall carry them, immediately after the
exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty.

Art. XXV. His Britannic Majesty, as Elector of Brunswick Lunenbourg, as well
for himself, as for his heirs and successors, and all the dominions and
possessions of his said Majesty in Germany, are included and guarantied by the
present treaty of peace.

Art. XXVI. Their Sacred Britannic, most Christian, Catholic, and most Faithful
Majesty's, promise to observe sincerely, and bona fide, all the articles
contained and settled in the present treaty; and they will not suffer the same
to be infringed, directly or indirectly, by their respective subjects; and the
said high contracting parties, generally and reciprocally, guaranty to each
other all the stipulations of the present treaty.

Art. XXVII. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good
and due form, shall be exchanged in this city of Paris, between the high
contracting parties, in the space of a month, or sooner if possible, to be
computed from the day of the signature of the present treaty.

In witness whereof, We the underwritten, their Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Ministers Plenipotentiary, have signed with our hands, in their name, and in
virtue of our full powers, the present Definitive Treaty, and have caused the
seal of our arms to be put thereto.

Done at Paris the tenth of February, 1763. (L. S.) BEDFORD, C. P. S. (L. S.)
CHOISEUL, DUC DE PRASLIN. (L. S.) EL MARQ. DE GRIMALDI.


SEPARATE ARTICLES.
I. SOME of the titles made use of by the contracting powers, either in the
full powers, and other acts, during the course of the negotiation, or in the
preamble of the present treaty, not being generally acknowledged; it has been
agreed, that no prejudice shall ever result therefrom to any of the said
contracting parties, and that the titles, taken or omitted, on either side, on
occasion of the said negotiation, and of the present treaty, shall not be
cited, or quoted as a precedent.

II. It has been agreed and determined, that the French language, made use of
in all the copies of the present treaty, shall not become an example, which may
be alleged, or made a precedent of, or prejudice, in any manner, any of the
contracting powers; and that they shall conform themselves, for the future, to
what has been observed, and ought to be observed, with regard to, and on the
part of, Powers who are used, and have a right, to give and to receive copies
of like treaties in another language than French; the present treaty having
still the same force and effect, as if the aforesaid custom had been therein
observed.

III. Though the King of Portugal has not signed the present definitive treaty,
their Britannic, most Christian, and Catholic Majesty's, acknowledge,
nevertheless, that his most Faithful Majesty is formally included therein, as a
contracting party, and as if he had expressly signed the said treaty:
Consequently, their Britannic, most Christian, and Catholic Majesty's,
respectively and conjointly promise to his most Faithful Majesty, in the most
express and most binding manner, the execution of all and every the clauses,
contained in the said treaty, on his act of accession.

The present separate articles shall have the same force as if they were
inserted in the above treaty.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Ministers Plenipotentiary of their Britannic, most Christian, and Catholic
Majesty's, have signed the present separate articles, and have caused the seal
of our arms to be put thereto.

Done at Paris the 10th of February, 1763. (L. S.) BEDFORD, C. P. S. (L. S.)
CHOISEUL, DUC DE PRASLIN. (L. S.) EL MARQ. DE GRIMALDI.


Declaration of his most Christian Majesty's Plenipotentiary, with regard to
the debts due to the Canadians.
THE King of Great Britain, having desired, that the payment of the letters of
exchange and bills, which had been delivered to the Canadians for the
necessaries furnished to the French troops, should be secured, His most
Christian Majesty, entirely disposed to render to every one that justice which
is legally due to them, has declared, and does declare, That the said bills,
and letters of exchange, shall be punctually paid, agreeably to a liquidation
made in a convenient time, according to the distance of the places, and to what
shall be possible; taking care, however, that the bills, and letters of
exchange, which the French subjects may have at the time of this declaration,
be not confounded with the bills and letters of exchange, which are in the
possession of the new subjects of the King of Great Britain.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten Minister of his most Christian
Majesty, duly authorized for this purpose, have signed the present declaration,
and caused the seal of our arms to be put thereto.

Done at Paris the tenth of February, 1763. CHOISEUL, DUC DE PRASLIN. (L. S.)

Declaration of his Britannic Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, with regard to the limits of Bengal in the East Indies.
WE the underwritten Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the King
of Great Britain, in order to prevent all subject of dispute on account of the
limits of the dominions of the Subah of Bengal, as well as of the coast of
Coromandel and Orixa, declare, in the name and by order of his said Britannic
Majesty, that the said dominions of the Subah of Bengal shall be reputed not to
extend farther than Yanaon exclusively, and that Yanaon shall be considered as
included in the North part of the coast of Coromandel or Orixa.

In witness whereof, etc.

Done at Paris the tenth of February, 1763. BEDFORD, C. P. S. (L. S.)

(His Britannic, most Christian, and Catholic Majesty's, full powers to their
respective Ministers Plenipotentiary, with the accession of his most Faithful
Majesty, his full Power, and declaration of his Minister (importing that no
consequence shall be drawn from the alternative observed on the parts of the
King of Great Britain, and the most Christian King, with the most Faithful
King, in the act of accession of the Court of Portugal) are all the other
papers that relate to this important transaction; but are here omitted, as
containing only matters of mere form.]

Some Reflections on the above Treaty of Peace.
THIS Review would be incomplete, did we not indulge our readers and ourselves
in a few reflections upon the probable consequences, which the glorious
successes it contains, may produce.

France, the old and natural enemy of Great Britain, is now sensible of one
truth, which, however seemingly inconsistent, is founded on reason and
experience; we mean, that Great Britain is stronger, fighting by herself and
for herself, than if half Europe were her allies. In the wars of King William
and Queen Anne, she fought in the quarrels of nations, who were a dead weight
upon her arms; her motions were directed by theirs; and, though under the Duke
of Marlborough, she always was victorious, yet the fruits of her successes were
lost, through the jarring, but private, interests of her allies, who left the
greatest burden of the war upon her shoulders, though least concerned in its
event. In the next war with France, that in support of the Austrian succession
in the person of her present Imperial Majesty, it was evident she must have
been victorious, had it not been for the Dutch and German confederates; the
treacherous cowardice of the former lost her the battle of Fontenoy, as the
selfish haughtiness of the other did that of Lafeldt. Even in the war, of which
we have just closed the review, though Great Britain paid all, she may be said
to have fought all, and scarcely a glorious action happened through the whole,
that was not performed by her natives; but when we say this, we except the
great exploits of his Prussian Majesty. The observation we have made holds
still more strongly in her naval operations. How many disgraceful blows did she
receive by sea from France, when her fleets were united with those of the
Dutch; while in the late war, though she stood single, every action at sea,
except that doubtful one under Admiral Byng, proved decisive in her favor. The
consequence is, that France, humbled by so many repeated blows, has
relinquished the ambitious, but artful schemes, which she had been forming for
above half a century against the British settlements in North America. Had
these proved successful, all intercourse between the British planters and the
natives must have been entirely cut off; the French would have had the savages
of their own training, as well as in their interest, and would have employed
the natural ferocity of those barbarians, first in exterminating our back
settlers, and next in attacking the vitals of our most populous colonies, which
must have been attended with the almost immediate ruin of the British commerce
in that part of the world.

The fortunate events of the war in our favor have turned upon the French the
destruction they had meditated against us. They themselves are now dispossessed
of almost all they had in North America, so effectually, that, in all human
probability, we can never have a competitor in those parts of the world, either
in power or commerce.

In the East Indies, the British arms have been beyond all precedent
successful, and that too at a time when our common enemy, flushed with recent
successes, was in hopes of engrossing, upon our ruin, the trade of Asia to
himself. But now, there, as well as in North America, our interest is so
durably established, and the power of France so effectually reduced, that we
have nothing to fear but from the Dutch, as the natives, in all likelihood,
will never break with the English, whom they have seen perform such amazing
prodigies of valor.

Three important conquests, those of Guadaloupe, Martinico and the Havannah,
have indeed been returned by the definitive treaty; but the loss of them were
of infinitely more prejudice to the enemy, than their possession could have
been of service to us.

We have also agreed to permit the French to fish on the banks of Newfoundland,
in the gulf St. Lawrence, and on the coasts of the island of Cape Breton, and
given them the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon, for that purpose, with leave
to keep stores, and to cure and dry their fish in Newfoundland. This is by far
the worst part of the treaty; for besides that Great Britain, by engrossing the
whole of the fishery, might have employed all her poor sailors who are now in
distress, it would have brought large sums into the nation, and, what is of
still greater consequence, her navy would have been so strengthened, and that
of France so impaired, by this means, that in all probability no war would have
ensued for a century, and our ministry and people, with common prudence, might
have discharged the whole of the national debt, enormous as it is. -- Besides
the conquests made by Great Britain, during the course of the war, the French
marine was almost annihilated, and that of Spain so damaged, as not to be
repaired for some years; so that this seemed to be the time for Great Britain
to settle a peace to her own satisfaction.

The war in Germany, in its own nature, was but a secondary consideration to
Great Britain; but the engagements we had entered into there, rendered it in
fact a primary one. To dissolve those engagements, without hurting the honor
of the nation, or endangering the balance of power on the continent of Europe,
was the great object that, soon after the accession of his present Majesty,
employed the attention of his ministers. They succeeded in their intention
beyond the expectation of the public. They more than fulfilled their actual
engagements with his Prussian Majesty; and, after the defection of the Russians
from the cause of Austria, they took off the French from being his enemies. The
sensible and immediate effect of this was, that the Princes of the empire, who
think they have no security against the power of Austria, but the treaty of
Westphalia, of which the French are guarantees, openly embraced a neutrality,
and secretly resolved to oblige the Queen of Hungary to lay down her arms, and
thereby to give some respite to the exhausted, desolated, country of Germany.
Thus his Prussian Majesty, by his own magnanimity, and the wise conduct of
Great Britain, in obliging the French to abandon the German war, gained all he
had fought for. The court of Vienna, finding itself unsupported, agreed to a
peace, which might have been made in the beginning of the war, and which would
have saved the lives of above a million of brave men. Nor was this the only
good effect of their conduct, for her Imperial Majesty begins now to be
sensible of the selfish views with which France joined her, and sees how
dangerous such an unnatural conjunction may prove to the peace and independency
of the Germanic body. There is, therefore, all the reason in the world to hope,
that the house of Austria, finding it can do nothing against that of
Brandenburgh, will unite with it in watching that of Bourbon, while his
Britannic Majesty, divested of all foreign partialities, will resume the
glorious, but almost forgotten, character of being the umpire of Europe.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 19, line 6, for 1761 read 1751. P. 60, l. 8, for humane r. human. P. 78,
l. 26, for Daun r. Schmettau. P. 100, l. 12, for at r. as. P. 119, l. 16, for
convoy r. convey. P. 126, l. 33, for generals r. general. P. 131, l. 32, dele
to. P. 135, l. 6, for loss r. lost. P. 140, l. 25, for other r. their. P. 149,
l. 25, for his r. the. P. 157, l. 1, for Austrians r. Prussians. P. 164, l. 15,
for Conjiveram r. Conjeveram. P. 169, l. 1, for prosperity, r. posterity. P.
182, l. 13, for reign r. rein. P. 184, l. 9, for what court, r. what that court.

The battle in the East Indies, between Col. Coote and Mons. Lally, related in
Page 102 and 103, is again repeated, by mistake, in Page 164 and 165.

Just Published, In SIX Large VOLUMES, Duodecimo, (Price One Guinea bound)
Illustrated with near One Hundred and Fifty COPPER-PLATE CUTS, on each of which
are delineated many Subjects, all drawn from the Life, or taken from Drawings
preserved by the Royal Societies of London, Paris, Berlin, Petersburgh, etc. A
NEW and ACCURATE SYSTEM OF NATURAL HISTORY. CONTAINING, I. The History of
QUADRUPEDES, including amphibious Animals, Frogs and Lizards, with their
Properties and Uses in Medicine. II. The History of BIRDS, with the Method of
bringing up those of the singing Kind. III. The History of FISHES and SERPENTS,
including Sea-Turtles, Crustaceous and Shellfish; with their Medicinal Uses.
IV. The History of INSECTS, with their Properties and Uses in Medicine. V. The
History of WATERS, EARTHS, STONES, FOSSILS, and MINERALS; with their Virtues,
Properties, and Medicinal Uses; to which is added, the Method in which Linnaeus
has treated these Subjects. VI. The History of VEGETABLES, as well Foreign as
Indigenous, including an Account of the Roots, Barks, Woods, Leaves, Flowers,
Fruits, Seeds, Resins, Gums, and concreted Juices; as also their Properties,
Virtues, and Uses in Medicine; together with the Method of cultivating those
planted in Gardens.
By R. BROOKS, M. D. Author of the General Practice of Physic, etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. Newbery, at the Bible and Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard.

To the PUBLIC.
OF all the Studies which have employed the industrious, or amused the idle,
perhaps Natural History deserves the preference; other sciences generally
terminate in doubt, or rest in bare speculation; but here every step is marked
with certainty, and while a description of the objects around us teaches to
supply our Wants, it satisfies our curiosity.

A comprehensive system, however, of this most pleasing science has been
hitherto wanting. Nor is it a little surprising, when every other branch of
literature has been of late cultivated with so much success, how this most
interesting department should have been neglected.

How far the present Performance has supplied the defects, and reformed the
errors of Natural History, is left to the Public to determine. Those who have
read the Author's Practice of Physic, and his other Medical and Geographical
Compositions, will see evident marks, not only of the Philosopher, but of the
accurate and judicious Traveller; and cannot doubt but his Abilities were
adequate to this Undertaking, and that he had abundant Opportunities to
convince himself of the Truth of what he has asserted.

He has had, indeed, one Advantage over all other Naturalists, namely, that of
having visited a Variety of Countries, and examined the Productions of each
upon the Spot. Whatever America or the known Parts of Africa have produced to
excite Curiosity have been carefully observed by him, and compared with the
Accounts of others.

This Work, though comprised within the Compass of Six Volumes, has employed
great Part of the Author's Life: and there is not a Figure represented in any
of the Plates, but what was drawn by himself, or by his Son under his
Inspection. Nor has the Reader's Convenience been less considered than his
Pleasure and Improvement. Each of these Volumes, if printed as Works of this
kind usually are, might have been made a large Quarto, and the Whole have been
sold for Six Guineas, instead of One; but as the Improvement of natural
Knowledge may conduce to the Improvement of Religion and Piety, it was thought
expedient to make this Work as cheap as possible, that it might fall within the
Compass of every studious Person, and that all might be acquainted with the
great and wonderful Works of Nature, see the Dependence of Creature upon
Creature, and of all upon the Creator.


