map of author's voyage to New Holland [Australia] Capt. DAMPIERS New Voyage to
NEW HOLLAND etc. in 1699 etc.


A VOYAGE TO New Holland, etc. In the Year, 1699.

Wherein are described, The Canary-Islands, the Isles of Mayo and St. Jago. The
Bay of All Saints, with the Forts and Town of Bahia in Brasil. Cape Salvadore.
The Winds on the Brasilian Coast. Abrohlo-Shoals. A Table of all the Variations
observed in this Voyage. Occurrences near the Cape of Good Hope. The Course to
New Holland. Shark's Bay. The Isles and Coast, etc. of New Holland. Their
Inhabitants, Manners, Customs, Trade, etc. Their Harbors, Soil, Beasts, Birds,
Fish, etc. Trees, Plants, Fruits, etc.


Illustrated with several Maps and Dranghts; also diverse Birds; Fishes, and
Plants, not found in this part of the World, Curiously Engraven on
Copper Plates.

VOL. III.

By Captain William Dampier.

LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1703.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Pembroke, Lord President of Her
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
THE Honor I had of being employed in the Service of His late Majesty ^f
Illustrious Memory, at the ^me when Your Lordship presi^ed at the Admiralty,
gives me the Boldness to ask Your Protection of the following Papers. They
consist of some Remarks made upon very distant Climates, which I should have
the vanity to think altogether new, could I persuade my self they had escaped
Your Lordship's Knowledge. However I have been so cautious of publishing any
thing in my whole Book that is generally known, that I have denied my self the
pleasure of paying the due Honors to Your Lordships Name in the Dedication. I
am ashamed, my Lord, to offer You so imperfect a Present, having not time to
set down all the Memoirs of my last Voyage: But as the particular Service I
have now undertaken, hinders me from finishing this Volume, so I hope it will
give me an opportunity of paying my Respects to Your Lordship in a new one.

The World is apt to judge of every thing by the Success; and whoever has ill
Fortune will hardly be allowed a good Name. This, my Lord, was my Unhappiness
in my late Expedition in the Roe-Buck, which foundered through perfect Age near
the Island of Ascension. I suffered extremely in my Reputation by that
Misfortune; though I comfort my self with the Thoughts, that my Enemies could not
charge any Neglect upon me. And since I have the Honor to be acquitted by Your
Lordship's Judgment, I should be very humble not to value my self upon so
complete a Vindication. This, and a World of other Favors, which I have been
so happy as to receive from Your Lordship's Goodness, do engage me to be with
an everlasting Respect,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Faithful and Obedient Servant, Will. Dampier.

THE PREFACE.
THE favorable Reception my two former Volumes of Voyages and Descriptions
have already met with in the World, gives me Reason to hope, That
notwithstanding the Objections which have been raised against me by prejudiced
Persons, this Third Volume likewise may in some measure be acceptable to Candid
and Impartial Readers, who are curious to know the Nature of the Inhabitants,
Animals, Plants, Soil, etc. in those distant Countries, which have either
seldom or not at all been visited by any Europeans.

It has almost always been the Fate of those who have made new Discoveries, to
be disesteemed and slightly spoken of, by such as either have had no true
Relish and Value for the Things themselves that are discovered, or have had
some Prejudice against the Persons by whom the Discoveries were made. It would
be vain therefore and unreasonable in me to expect to escape the Censure of
all, or to hope for better Treatment than far Worthier Persons have met with
before me. But this Satisfaction I am sure of having, that the Things
themselves in the Discovery of which I have been employed, are most worthy of
our Diligentest Search and Inquiry; being the various and wonderful Works of
God in different Parts of the World: And however unfit a Person I may be in
other respects to have undertaken this Task, yet at least I have given a
faithful Account, and have found some Things undiscovered by any before, and
which may at least be some Assisttance and Direction to better qualified
Persons who shall come after me.

It has been Objected against me by some, that my Accounts and Descriptions of
Things are dry and jejune, not filled with variety of pleasant Matter, to
divert and gratify the Curious Reader. How far this is true, I must leave to
the World to judge. But if I have been exactly and strictly careful to give
only True Relations and Descriptions of Things (as I am sure I have;) and if my
Descriptions be such as may be of use not only to my self (which I have already
in good measure experienced) but also to others in future Voyages; and likewise
to such Readers at home as are more desirous of a Plain and Just Account of the
true Nature and State of the Things described, than of a Polite and Rhetorical
Narrative: I hope all the Defects in my Style, will meet with an easy and ready
Pardon.

Others have taxed me with borrowing from other Men's Journals; and with
Insufficiency, as if I was not my self the Author of what I write, but
published Things digested and drawn up by others. As to the first Part of this
Objection, I assure the Reader, I have taken nothing from any Man without
mentioning his Name, except some very few Relations and particular Observations
received from credible Persons who desired not to be named; and these I have
always expressly distinguished in my Books, from what I relate as of my own
observing. And as to the latter; I think it so far from being a Diminution to
one of my Education and Employment, to have what I write, Revised and Corrected
by Friends; that on the contrary, the best and most eminent Authors are not
ashamed to own the same Thing, and look upon it as an Advantage.

Lastly, I know there are some who are apt to slight my Accounts and
Descriptions of Things, as if it was an easy Matter and of little or no
Difficulty to do all that I have done, to visit little more than the Coasts of
unknown Countries, and make short and imperfect Observations of Things only
near the Shore. But whoever is experienced in these Matters, or considers
Things impartially, will be of a very different Opinion. And any one who is
sensible, how backward and refractory the Seamen are apt to be in long Voyages
when they know not whither they are going, how ignorant they are of the Nature
of the Winds and the shifting Seasons of the Monsoons, and how little even the
Officers themselves generally are skilled in the Variation of the Needle and
the Use of the Azimuth Compass; besides the Hazard of all outward Accidents in
strange and unknown Seas: Any one, I say, who is sensible of these
Difficulties, will be much more pleased at the Discoveries and Observations I
have been able to make, than displeased with me that I did not make more.

Thus much I thought necessary to premise in my own Vindication, against the
Objections that have been made to my former Performances. But not to trouble
the Reader any further with Matters of this Nature; what I have more to Offer,
shall be only in relation to the following Voyage.

For the better apprehending the Course of this Voyage, and the Situation of
the Places mentioned in it, I have here, as in the former Volumes, caused a Map
to be Engraven, with a pricked Line, representing to the Eye the whole Thread
of the Voyage at one View; besides Draughts and Figures of particular Places,
to make the Descriptions I have given of them more intelligible and useful.

Moreover, which I had not the opportunity of doing in my former Voyages;
having now had in the Ship with me a Person skilled in Drawing, I have by this
means been enabled, for the greater Satisfaction of the Curious Reader, to
present him with exact Cuts and Figures of several of the principal and most
remarkable of those Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Plants, which are described in
the following Narrative; and also of several, which not being able to give any
better or so good an Account of, as by causing them to be exactly Engraven, the
Reader will not find any further Description of them, but only that they were
found in such or such particular Countries. The Plants themselves are in the
Hands of the Ingenious Dr. Woodward. I could have caused many others to be
drawn in like manner, but that I resolved to confine my Self to such only, as
had some very remarkable difference in the shape of their principal Parts from
any that are found in Europe. I have besides several Birds and Fishes ready
drawn, which I could not put into the present Volume, because they were found
in Countries, to the Description whereof the following Narrative does not
reach. For, being obliged to prepare for another Voyage, sooner than I at first
expected; I have not been able to Continue the ensuing Narrative any further
than to my Departure from the Coast of New Holland. But, if it please God that
I return again safe, the Reader may expect a Continuation of this Voyage from
my departure from New Holland, till the foundring of my Ship near the Island of
Ascension.

In the mean time, to make the Narrative in some measure complete, I shall here
add a Summary Abstract of that latter part of the Voyage, whereof I have not
had time to draw out of my Journals a full and particular Account at large.
Departing therefore from the Coast of New Holland in the beginning of
September, 1699. (for the Reasons mentioned Page 154.) we arrived at Tymor,
Sept. 15. and Anchored off that Island. On the 24th we obtained a small Supply
of fresh Water from the Governor of a Dutch Fort and Factory there; we found
also there a Portuguese Settlement, and were kindly treated by them. On the 3d
of December we arrived on the Coast of New Guinea; where we found good fresh
Water, and had Commerce with the Inhabitants of a certain Island called
Pulo-Sabuti. After which, passing to the Northward, we ranged along the Coast
to the Eastermost part of New Guinea: which I found does not join to the main
Land of New-Guinea, but is an Island, as I have described it in my Map, and
called it New Britain.

It is probable this Island may afford many rich Commodities, and the Natives
may be easily brought to Commerce. But the many Difficulties I at this time met
with, the want of convenience to clean my Ship, the fewness of my Men, their
desire to hasten home, and the danger of continuing in these Circumstances in
Seas where the Shoals and Coasts were utterly unknown, and must be searched out
with much Caution and length of time; hindered me from prosecuting any further
at present my intended Search. What I have been able to do in this Matter for
the Public Service, will, I hope, be heartily received; and no Difficulties
shall discourage me from endeavoring to promote the same End, whenever I have
an opportunity put into my Hands.

May 18. in our return, we arrived again at Tymor. June 21, we past by part of
the Island Java. July 4, we anchored in Batavia-Road; and I went ashore,
visited the Dutch General, and desired the Privilege of buying Provisions that
I wanted; which was granted me. In this Road we lay till the 17th of October
following; when, having fitted the Ship, recruited my Self with Provisions,
filled all my Water, and the Season of the year for returning toward Europe
being come; I set Sail from Batavia, and on the 19th of December made the Cape
of Good Hope; whence departing Jan. 11, we made the Island of Santa Hellena on
the 31st; and February the 21st. the Island of Aseension; near to which my
Ship, having sprung a Leak which could not be stopped, foundred at Sea; With
much difficulty we got ashore, where we lived on Goats and Turtle; and on the
26th of February found, to our great Comfort, on the S. E. side of a high
Mountain, about half a mile from its top, a Spring of fresh Water. I returned
to England in the Canterbury East-India-Ship. For which wonderful Deliverance
from so many and great Dangers, I think my self bound to return continual
Thanks to Almighty God; whose Divine Providence if it shall please to bring me
safe again to my Native Country from my present intended Voyage; I hope to
publish a particular Account of all the material Things I observed in the
several Places which I have now but barely mentioned.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The A.'s departure from the Downs. A Caution to those who Sail in the
Channel. His Arrival at the Canary-Islands. Santa Cruz in Teneriffe; the Road
and Town, and Spanish Wreck. Laguna T. Lake and Country; and Oratavia T. and
Road. Of the Wines and other Commodities of Teneriffe, etc. and the Governors
at Laguna and Santa Cruz. Of the Winds in these Seas. The A.'s Arrival at Mayo.
Of the C. Verd Islands; its Salt-pond, compared with that of Salt Tortuga; its
Trade for Salt, and Frape-boats. Its Vegetables, Silk-Cotton, etc. Its Soil,
and Towns; its Guinea-Hen's, and other Fowls, Beasts, and Fish. Of the
Sea-Turtles, etc. laying in the Wet Season. Of the Natives, their Trade and
Livelihood. The A.'s Arrival at J. St. Jago; Proga, and St. Jago Town. Of the
Inhabitants, and their Commodities. Of the Custard-Apple. St. Jago-Road. J.
Fogo.

CHAP. II. The A.'s Deliberation on the Sequel of his Voyage, and Departure
from St. Jago. His Course, and the Winds, etc. in crossing the Line. He stands
away for the Bay of All Saints in Brazil; and why. His Arrival on that Coast
and in the Bay. Of the several Forts, the Road, Situation, Town, and Buildings
of Bahia. Of its Governor, Ships and Merchants; and Commodities to and from
Europe. Claying of Sugar. The Season for the European Ships, and Coire Cables:
Of their Guinea-trade, and of the Coasting-trade, and Whale-killing. Of the
Inhabitants of Bahia; their carrying in Hammocks: their Artificers, Crane for
Goods, and Negro-Slaves. Of the Country about Bahia, its Soil and Product. Its
Timber Trees; the Sapiera, Vermiatico, Comesserie, Guitteba, Serrie, and
Mangroves. The Bastard-Coco, its Nuts and Cables; and the Silk-Cotton-trees.
The Brasilian Fruits, Oranges, etc. Of the Sour-sops, Cashew's, and Jennipah's.
Of their peculiar Fruits, Arisah's, Mericasah's, Petango's, Petumbo's,
Mungaroo's, Muckishaw's, Ingaw's, Otees, and Musteran de Ova's. Of the
Palm-berries, Physick-nuts, Mendibee's, etc. and their Roots and Herbs, etc. Of
their Wild Fowl, Maccaw's, Parrots, etc. The Yemma, Carrion-Crow and
Chattering-crow, Bill-bird, Curreso, Turtle-dove and Wild-pigeons; the Jenetee,
Clocking-hen, Crab-catcher, Galden, and black Heron: The Ducks, Wigeon and
Teal; and Ostriges to the Southward: and of the Dunghil-fowls. Of their
Cattle,. Horses, etc. Leopards and Tiger's. Of their Serpents; the
Rattle-Snake, small Green-Snake, Amphisbaena, small Black and small Grey-Snake;
the great Land, and the great Water-Snake: and of the Water-dog. Of their
Seafish and Turtle; and of St. Paul's Town.

CHAP. III. The A.'s Stay and Business at Bahia: Of the Winds, and Seasons of
the Year there. His departure for N. Holland. C. Salvadore. The Winds on the
Brasilian Coast; and Abrohlo Shoal; Fish, and Birds: The Shear-water Bird, and
Cooking of Sharks. Excessive number of Birds about a dead Whale; of the
Pintado-Bird, and the Petrel, etc. Of a Bird that shows the C. of G. Hope to be
near: Of the Sea-reckonings, and Variations: And a Table of all the Variations
observed in this Voyage. Occurrences near the Cape; and the A.'s passing by it.
Of the Westerly Winds beyond it: A Storm, and its Presages. The A.'s Course to
N. Holland; and Signs of approaching it. Another Abrohlo Shole and Storm, and
the A.'s Arrival on part of N. Holland. That part described; and Shark's Bay,
wbere he first Anchors. Of the Land there, Vegetables, Birds, etc. A particular
sort of Guano: Fish, and beautiful Shells; Turtle, large Shark, and
Water-Serpents. The A.'s removing to another part of N. Holland: Dolphins,
Whales, and more Sea-Serpents: and of a Passage or Straight suspected here: Of
the Vegetables, Birds, and Fish. He anchors on a third Part of N. Holland, and
digs Wells, but brackish. Of the Inhabitants there, the great Tides, the
Vegetables and Animals, etc.


Dampier's Voyages.
VOL. III. A Voyage to Terra Australis.
CHAP. I.
The A.'s departure from the Downs. A Caution to those who Sail in the Channel.
His Arrival at the Canary-Islands. Santa Cruz in Teneriffe; the Road and Town,
and Spanish Wreck. Laguna T. Lake and Country; and Oratavia T. and Road. Of the
Wines and other Commodities of Teneriffe, etc. and the Governors at Laguna and
Santa Cruz. Of the Winds in these Seas. The A.'s Arrival at Mayo, one of the C.
Verd Islands; its Salt-pond, compared with that of Salt-Tortuga; its Trade for
Salt, and Frape-boats. Its Vegetables, Silk-Cotton, etc. Its Soil, and Towns;
its Guinea-Hen's, and other Fowls, Beasts, and Fish. Of the Sea-Turtle's (
etc.) laying in the Wet Season. Of the Natives, their Trade and Livelihood. The
A.'s Arrival at J. St. Jago; and St. Jago Town. Of the Inhabitants, and their
Commodities. Of the Custard-Apple, and the Papah. St. Jago Road. J. Fogo.

I Sailed from the Downs early on Saturday, Jan. 14. School/9. with a fair Wind,
in his Majesty's Ship the Roe-buck; carrying but 12 Guns in this Voyage, and 50
Men and Boys, with 20 Month's Provision. We had several of the King's Ships in
Company, bound for Spit-head and Plymouth; and by Noon we were off Dungeness.
We parted from them that Night, and stood down the Channel, but found our
Selves next Morning nearer the French Coast than we expected; C. de Hague
bearing S. E. and by E. 6 L. There were many other Ships, some nearer, some
further off the French Coast, who all seemed to have gone nearer to it than
they thought they should. My Master, who was somewhat troubled at it at first,
was not displeased however to find that he had Company in his Mistake: Which,
as I have heard, is a very common one, and fatal to many Ships. The Occasion of
it is the not allowing for the Change of the Variation since the making of the
Charts; which Captain Halley has observed to be very considerable. I shall
refer the Reader to his own Account of it which he caused to be Published in a
single Sheet of Paper, purposely for a Caution to such as pass to and fro the
English Channel: The Title of it is in the Margin. An Advertisement necessary
to be observed in the Navigation up and down the Channel of England. Sold by S.
Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. Price 2 d.
And my own Experience thus confirming to me the Usefulness of such a Caution,
I was willing to take this occasion of helping toward the making it the more
Public.

Not to trouble the Reader with every Days Run, nor with the Winds or Weather
(but only in the remoter Parts, where it may be more particularly useful)
standing away from C. la Hague, we made the Start about 5 that Afternoon; which
being the last Land we saw of England, we reckoned our Departure from thence:
Though we had rather have taken it from the Lizard, if the hazy Weather would
have suffered us to have seen it.

The first Land we saw after we were out of the Channel was C. Finisterre,
which we made on the 19th; and on the 28th made Lancerota, one of the Canary
Islands; of which, and of Allegrance, another of them, I have here given the
Sights, as they both appeared to us at two several Bearings and Distances.
[Table I. No. 1, 2.]

We were now standing away for the Island Teneriffe, where I intended to take
in some Wine and Brandy for my Voyage. On Sunday, half an hour past 3 in the
Afternoon, we made the Island, and crowded in with all our Sails till 5; when
the N. E. Point of the Isle bore W. S. W. did. 7 Leagues: But being then so
far off that I could not expect to get in before Night, I lay by till next
Morning, deliberating whether I should put in at Santa Cruz, or at Oratavia,
the one on the E. the other on the W. side of the Island; which lies mostly
North and South; and these are the principal Ports on each Side. I chose Santa
Cruz as the better Harbor (especially at this time of the Year) and as best
furnished with that sort of Wine which I had occasion to take in for my Voyage:
So there I come to an Anchor Jan. 30th, in 33 Fathom-water, black slimy Ground;
about half a Mile from the Shore; from which distance I took the Sight of the
Town. [Table I. No. 3.]

In this Road Ships must ride in 30, 40, or 50 Fathom-water, not above half a
mile from the Shore at sarthest: And if there are many Ships, they must ride
close one by another. The Shore is generally high Land, and in most Places
steep to. This Road lies so open depictions of the Canary Islands Table I.
Canary Islands No. 1. I. Allegrance, did: about 12 Leagues at these Bearings
I. Lancerota Shows thus at ye same time, did: about 17 L. at these Bear^.
No. 2. I. Allegrance did: about 17 Leagues at the Bearings I. Lancerota Shows
thus at ye same time, did: about 15 L. The Sight of Lancerota continued
No. 3. I. Teneriffe

to the East, that Winds from that side make a great Swell, and very bad going
ashore in Boats: The Ships that ride here are then often forced to put to Sea,
and sometimes to cut or slip their Anchors, not being able to weigh them. The
best and smoothest Landing is in a small sandy Cove, about a mile to the N. E.
of the Road, where there is good Water, with which Ships that lade here are
supplied; and many times Ships that lade at Oratavia, which is the chief Port
for Trade, send their Boats hither for Water. That is a worse Port for Westerly
than this is for Easterly Winds; and then all Ships that are there put to Sea.
Between this Watering-place and Santa Cruz are two little Forts; which with
some Batteries scattered along the Coast command the Road. Santa Cruz its self
is a small unwalled Town fronting the Sea, guarded with two other Forts to
secure the Road. There are about 200 Houses in the Town, all 2 Stories high,
strongly built with Stone, and covered with Pantile. It has two Convents and
one Church, which are the best Buildings in the Town. The Forts here could not
secure the Spanish Galleons from Admiral Blake, though they hall'd in close under
the main Fort. Many of the Inhabitants that are now living remember that
Action; in which the English battered the Town, and did it much Damage; and the
marks of the Shot still remain in the Fort-Walls. The Wrecks of the Galleons
that were burnt here lie in 15 Fathom-water: And it is said that most of the
Plate lies there, though some of it was hastily carried ashore at Blake's coming
in sight.

Soon after I had anchored I went ashore here to the Governor of the Town, who
received me very kindly and invited me to Dine with him the next day. I
returned on board in the Evening, and went ashore again with two of my Officers
the next Morning; hoping to get up the Hill time enough to see Laguna, the
principal Town, and to be back again to Dine with the Governor of Santa Cruz;
for I was told that Laguna was but 3 Mile off. The Road is all the way up a
pretty steep Hill; yet not so steep but that Carts go up and down laden. There
are Public Houses scattering by the way-side, where we got some Wine. The Land
on each side seemed to be but rocky and dry; yet in many Places we saw Spots of
green flourishing Corn. At farther distances there were small Vineyards by the
Sides of the Mountains, intermixed with abundance of waste rocky Land, unfit for
Cultivation, which afforded only Dildo-bushes. It was about 7 or 8 in the
Morning when we set out from Santa Cruz; and it being fair clear Weather, the
Sun shone very bright and warmed us sufficiently before we got to the City
Laguna; which we reached about 10 a Clock, all sweaty and tired, and were glad
to refresh our selves with a little Wine in a sorry Tipling-house: But we soon
found out one of the English Merchants that resided here; who entertained us
handsomely at Dinner, and in the Afternoon showed us the Town.

Laguna is a pretty large well-compacted Town, and makes a very agreeable
Prospect. It stands part of it against a Hill, and part in a Level. The Houses
have mostly strong Walls built with Stone and covered with Pantile. They are
not uniform, yet they appear pleasant enough. There are many fair Buildings;
among which are 2 Parish-Churches, 2 Nunneries, an Hospital, 4 Convents, and
some Chapels; besides many Gentlemen's Houses. The Convents are those of St.
Austin, St. Dominick, St. Francis, and St. Diego. The two Churches have pretty
high square Steeples, which top the rest of the Buildings. The Streets are not
Regular, yet they are mostly spacious and pretty handsome; and near the middle
of the Town is a large Parade, which has good Buildings about it. There is a
strong Prison on one side of it; near which is a large Conduit of good Water,
that supplies all the Town. They have many Gardens which are set round with
Oranges, Limes, and other Fruits: In the middle of which are Pot Herbs,
Sallading, Flowers, etc. And, indeed, if the Inhabitants were curious this way,
they might have very pleasant Gardens: For as the Town stands high from the
Sea, on the Brow of a Plain that is all open to the East, and has consequently
the Benefit of the true Trade-wind, which blows here, and is most commonly
fair; so there are seldom wanting, at this Town, brisk, cooling, and refreshing
Breezes all the Day.

On the back of the Town there is a large Plain of 3 or 4 Leagues in length and
2 Miles wide, producing a thick kindly sort of Grass, which looked green and
very pleasant when I was there, like our Meadows in England in the Spring. On
the East Side of this Plain, very near the back of the Town, there is a natural
Lake or Pond of fresh Water. It is about half a Mile in circumference; but
being stagnant, it is only used for Cattle to drink of. In the Wintertime
several sorts of wild Fowl resort hither, affording plenty of Game to the
Inhabitants of Laguna. This City is called Laguna from hence; for that Word in
Spanish signifies a Lake or Pond. The Plain is bounded on the W. the N. W. and
the S. W. with high steep Hills; as high above this Plain as this is above the
Sea; and it is from the foot of one of these Mountains that the Water of the
Conduit which supplies the Town, is conveyed over the Plain, in Troughs of
Stone raised upon Pillars. And, indeed, considering the Situation of the Town,
its large Prospect to the East (for from hence you see the Grand Canary) its
Gardens, cool Arbors, pleasant Plain, green Fields, the Pond and Aqueduct, and
its refreshing Breezes, it is a very delightful Dwelling; especially for such
as have not Business that calls them far and often from home: For the Island
being generally Mountainous, steep and craggy, full of Risings and Fallings,
it is very troublesome Traveling up and down in it, unless in the Cool of the
Mornings and Evenings: And Mules and Asses are most used by them, both for
Riding and Carriage, as fittest for the stony, uneven Roads.

Beyond the Mountains, on the S. W. side, still further up, you may see from
the Town and Plain a small peeked Hill, overlooking the rest. This is that
which is called the Pike of Teneriffe^, so much noted for its height: But we
saw it here at so great a disadvantage, by reason of the nearness of the
adjacent Mountains to us, that it looked inconsiderable in respect to its Fame.

The true Malmesy Wine grows in this Island; and this here is said to be the
best of its kind in the World. Here is also Canary-Wine, and Verdona, or
Green-wine. The Canary grows chiefly on the West Side of the Island; and
therefore is commonly sent to Oratavia; which being the chief Seaport for
Trade in the Island, the principal English Merchants reside there, with their
Consul; because we have a great Trade for this Wine. I was told, That that Town
is bigger than Laguna; that it has but one Church, but many Convents: That the
Port is but ordinary at best, and is very bad when the N. W. Winds blow. These
Norwesters give notice of their coming, by a great Sea that tumbles in on the
Shore for some time before they come, and by a black Sky in the N. W. Upon
these Signs Ships either get up their Anchors, or slip their Cables and put to
Sea, and ply off and on till the Weather is over. Sometimes they are forced to
do so 2 or 3 times before they can take in their Lading; which it is hard to do
here in the fairest Weather: And for fresh Water, they send, as I have said, to
Santa Cruz. Verdona is green, strong-bodied Wine, harsher and sharper than
Canary. It Is not so much esteemed in Europe, but is exported to the
West Indies, and will keep best in hot Countries; for which Reason I touched
here to take in some of it for my Voyage. This sort of Wine is made chiefly on
the East Side of the Island, and Shipped off at Santa Cruz.

Besides these Wines, which are yearly vended in great plenty from the Canary
Islands (chiefly from Grand Canary, Teneriffe, and Palma) here is store of
Grain, as Wheat, Barley and Maiz, which they often transport to other places.
They have also some Beans and Peace, and Coches, a sort of Grain much like Maiz,
sowed mostly to satin Land. They have Papah's, which I shall speak more of
hereafter; Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cherries, and excellent Peaches, Apricocks,
Guava's, Pomegranates, Citrons, Oranges, Lemons, Limes, Pumpkins, Onions the
best in the World, Cabbages, Turnips, Potato's, etc. They are also well stocked
with Horses, Cows, Asses, Mules, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, Conies, and plenty of
Deer. The Lancerot Horses are said to be the most mettlesome, fleet, and loyal
Horses that are. Lastly, here are many Fowls, as Cocks and Hens, Ducks,
Pigeons, Patridges, etc. with plenty of Fish, as Mackril, etc. All the Canary
Islands have of these Commodities and Provisions more or less: But as Lancerota
is most famed for Horses, and Grand Canary, Teneriffe, and Palma for Wines,
Teneriffe especially for the best Malmesy, (for which reason these 3 Islands
have the chief Trade) so is Forteventura for Dunghil-Fowls, and Gomera for
Deer. Fowls and other Eatables are dear on the Trading Islands; but very
plentiful and cheap on the other; and therefore it is best for such Ships as are
going out on long Voyages, and who design to take in but little Wine, to touch
rather at these last; where also they may be supplied with Wine enough, and
good cheap: And for my own part, if I had known it before I came hither, I
should have gone rather to one of those Islands than to Teneriffe: But enough
of this.

It Is reported they can raise 12000 armed Men on this Island. The Governor or
General (as he is called) of all the Canary Islands lives at Laguna: His Name
is Don Pedro de Ponto. He is a Native of this Island, and was not long since
President of Panama in the South Seas; who bringing some very rich Pearls from
thence, which he presented to the Queen of Spain, was therefore, as it is said,
made General of the Canary Islands. The Grand Canary is an Island much superior
to Teneriffe both in Bulk and Value; but this Gentleman chooses rather to reside
in this his native Island. He has the Character of a very worthy Person; and
governs with Moderation and Justice, being very well beloved.

One of his Deputies was the Governor of Santa Cruz, with whom I was to have
Dined; but staying so long at Laguna, I came but time enough to Sup with him.
He is a civil, discreet Man. He resides in the main Fort close by the Sea.
There is a Sentinel stands at his Door; and he has a few Servants to wait on
him. I was Treated in a large dark Lower Room, which has but one small Window.
There were about 200 Muskets hung up against the Walls, and some Pikes; no
Wainscot, Hangings, nor much Furniture. There was only a small old Table, a few
old Chairs, and 2 or 3 pretty long Forms to sit on. Having Supped with him, I
invited him on Board, and went off in my Boat. The next Morning he came aboard
with another Gentleman in his Company, attended by 2 Servants: But he was
presently Sea-sick, and so much out of order that he could scarce Eat or Drink
any Thing, but went quickly ashore again.

Having refreshed my Men ashore, and taken in what we had occasion for, I
Sailed away from Santa Cruz on Feb. 4. in the Afternoon; hastening out all I
could, because the N. E. Winds growing stormy made so great Sea, that the Ship
was scarce safe in the Road; and I was glad to get out, though we left behind
several Goods we had bought and paid for: For a Boat could not go ashore; and
the stress was so great in weighing Anchor, that the Cable broke. I designed
next for the I. of Mayo, one of the C. Verd Islands; and ran away with a strong
N. E. Wind, right before it, all that Night and the next Day, at the rate of 10
or 11 Miles an hour; when it slackened to a more moderate Gale. The Canary
Islands are, for their Latitude, within the usual Verge of the True or General
Trade-Wind; which I have observed to be, on this side the Equator, N. Easterly:
But then lying not far from the African Shore, they are most subject to a N.
Wind, which is the Coasting and constant Trade, sweeping that Coast down as low
as to C. Verd; which spreading in breadth, takes in mostly the Canary Islands;
though it be there interrupted frequently with the True Trade-Wind, N.
West-Winds, or other Shifts of Wind that Islands are Subject to; especially
where they lie many together. The Pike of Teneriffe, which had generally been
Clouded while we lay at Santa Cruz, appeared now all white with Snow, hovering
over the other Hills; but their height made it seem the less considerable; for
it looks most remarkable to Ships that are to the Westward of it. We had brisk
N. N. E. and N. E. Winds from Teneriffe; and saw Flying-fish, and a great deal
of Sea-thistle Weed floating. By the 9th of Feb. at Noon we were in the Lat. of
15 d. 4 m. so we steered away W. N. W. for the I. of Mayo, being by Judgment,
not far to the E. of it, and at 8 a Clock in the Evening lay by till Day. The
Wind was then at W. by S. and so it continued all Night, fair Weather, and a
small easy Gale. All these were great Signs, that we were near some Land,
after having had such constant brisk Winds before. In the Morning after
Sunrise, we saw the Island at about 4 Leagues distance. But it was so hazy over
it, that we could see but a small part of it; yet even by that part I knew it
to be the Isle of Mayo. See how it appeared to us at several Views, as we were
compassing the E. the S. E. and the S. of it, to get to the Road, on the S. W.
of it, [Table II. No. 1, 2, 3.] and the Road it self [No. 4.]

I got not in till the next Day, Feb. 11. when I come to an Anchor in the Road,
which is the Lee-ward part of the Island; for it is a general Rule never to
Anchor to Wind-ward of an Island between the Tropicks. We Anchored at 11 a
Clock in 14 Fathom clean Sand, and very smooth Water, about three quarters of a
Mile from the depictions of the Cape Verd Islands ^ble II. Cape Verd Islands
No. 1. I. Mayo, at 2 L. did:, ye S. point covered with a Fog. No. 2. I. Mayo,
at these Bearings: Then 15 Fath. red coral about I M. from ye W.S.W. beari^.
No. 3. I. Mayo, standing away to ye S.W. point of it. did: 2 Miles. No. 4. I.
Mayo, No. 5. Isle and Town of St. Iago

Shore, in the same Place where I Anchored in my Voyage round the World; and
found riding here the Newport of London, a Merchant Man, Captain Barefoot
Commander, who welcomed me with 3 Guns, and I returned one for Thanks. He came
from Fayal, one of the Western Islands; and had store of Wine and Brandy
aboard. He was taking in Salt to carry to New Foundland, and was very glad to
see one of the King's Ships, being before our coming afraid of Pirates; which,
of late Years, had much infested this and the rest of the Cape Verd Islands.

I have given some Account of the Island of Mayo, and of other of these
Islands, in my Voyage round the World, [Vol. I. p. 70.] but I shall now add
some further Observations that occurred to me in this Voyage. The I. of Mayo is
about 7 Leagues in Circumference, of a roundish Form, with many small rocky
Points shooting out into the Sea a Mile, or more. Its Lat. is 15 d. N. and as
you Sail about the Isle, when you come pretty nigh the Shore, you will see the
Water breaking off from those Points; which you must give a Birth to, and avoid
them. I Sailed at this time two parts in three round the Island, but saw
nothing dangerous besides these Points; and they all showed themselves by the
Breaking of the Water: Yet it is reported, That on the N. and N. N. W. side
there are dangerous Sholes, that ly farther off at Sea; but I was not on that
Side. There are 2 Hills on this Island of a considerable height; one pretty
bluff, the other peeked at top. The rest of the Island is pretty level, and of
a good height from the Sea. The Shore clear round has sandy Bays, between the
Rocky Points I spoke of; and the whole Island is a very dry sort of Soil.

On the West Side of the Isle where the Road for Ships is there is a large
Sandy Bay, and a Sand-bank, of about 40 Paces wide within it, which runs along
the Shore 2 or 3 Miles; within which there is a large Salina or Salt-pond,
contained between the Sand-bank and the Hills beyond it. The whole Salina is
about 2 Miles in length, and half a Mile wide; but above one half of it is
commonly dry. The North end only of the Pond never wants Water, producing Salt
from November till May, which is here the dry Season of the Year. The Water
which yields this Salt works in from out of the Sea through a hole in the
Sand-bank before mentioned, like a Sluice, and that only in Spring-tides; when
it fills the Pond more or less, according to the height of the Tides. If there
is any Salt in the Ponds when the Flush of Water comes in, it presently
dissolves: But then in two or three Days after it begins to Kern; and so
continues Kerning till either all, or the greatest part of the Salt Water is
congealed or kern'd; or till a fresh Supply of it comes in again from the Sea.
This Water is known to come in only at that one Passage on the N. part of the
Pond; where also it is deepest. It was at a Spring of the New Moon when I was
there; and I was told that it comes in at no other time but at the New Moon
Spring-tides: but why that should be I cannot guess. They who come hither to
lade Salt rake it up as it Kerns, and lay it in heaps on the dry Land, before
the Water breaks in anew: And this is observable of this Salt-Pond, that the
Salt kerns only in the Dry Season, contrary to the Salt-Ponds in the
West Indies, particularly those of the Island Salt-Tortuga, which I have
formerly mentioned [Vol. I. p. 56.] for they never Kern there till the Rains
come in about April; and continue to do so in May, June, July, etc. while the
Wet Season lasts; and not without some good Shower of Rain first: But the
Reason also of this Difference between the Salt-Ponds of Mayo, and those of the
West Indies, why these should Kern in the Wet Season, and the former in the Dry
S^on, I shall leave to Philosophers.

Our Nation drive here a great Trade for Salt, and have commonly a Man of War
here for the Guard of our Ships and Barks that come to take it in; of which I
have been informed that in some Years there have not been less than 100 in a
Year. It costs nothing but Men's Labor to rake it together, and wheel it out
of the Pond, except the Carriage: And that also is very cheap; the Inhabitants
having plenty of Asses, for which they have little to do besides carrying the
Salt from the Ponds to the Sea-tide at the Season when Ships are here. The
Inhabitants lade and drive their Asses themselves, being very glad to be
employed; for they have scarce any other Trade but this to get a Penny by. The
Pond is not above half a Mile from the Landing-place, so that the Asses make a
great many Trips in a day. They have a set number of Turns to and fro both
Forenoon and Afternoon, which their Owners will not exceed. At the
Landing-place there lies a Frape-boat, as our Seamen call it, to take in the
Salt. It Is made purposely for this use, with a Deck reaching from the Stern a
third part of the Boat; where there is a kind of Bulk-head that rises, not from
the Boats bottom, but from the Edge of the Deck, to about 2 foot in height;
all calk'd very tight. The Use of it is to keep the Waves from dashing into the
Boat, when it lies with its Head to the Shore, to take in Salt: For here
commonly runs a great Sea; and when the Boat lies so with its Head to the
Shore, the Sea breaks in over the Stern, and would soon fill it, was it not for
this Bulk-head, which stops the Waves that come flowing upon the Deck, and
makes them run off into the Sea on each side. To keep the Boat thus with the
Head to the Shore, and the Stern to the Sea, there are two strong Stantions set
up in the Boat; the one at the Head, the other in the middle of it, against the
Bulk-head, and a Foot higher than the Bulk-head. There is a large Notch cut in
the top of each of these Stantions big enough for a small Hazer or Rope to lie
in; one end of which is fastened to a Post ashore, and the other to a Grapling
or Anchor lying a pretty way off at Sea: This Rope serves to hale the Boat in
and out, and the Stantions serve to keep her fast, so that she cannot swing to
either side when the Rope is haled tight: For the Sea would else fill her, or
toss her ashore and stave her. The better to prevent her staving and to keep
her the tighter together, there are two sets of Ropes more: The first going
athwart from Gunnal to Gunnal, which, when the Rowers Benches are laid, bind
the Boats sides so hard against the Ends of the Benches that they cannot easily
fall asunder, while the Benches and Ropes mutually help each other; the Ropes
keeping the Boats sides from flying off, and the Benches from being crushed
together inwards. Of these Ropes there are usually but two, dividing the Boats
length, as they go across the Sides, into there equal parts. The other set of
Ropes are more in number, and are so placed as to keep the Ribs and Planks of
the Boat from starting off. For this purpose there are holes made at certain
distances through the Edge of the Keel that runs along on the inside of the
Boat; through which these Ropes passing are laid along the Ribs, so as to line
them, or be themselves as Ribs upon them, being made fast to them by Rattan's
brought thither, or small Cords twisted close about both Ropes and Ribs, up to
the Gunnal: By which means though several of the Nails or Pegs of the Boat should
by any shock fall out, yet the Ropes of these two sets might hold her together:
Especially with the help of a Rope going quite round about the Gunnal on the
outside, as our Long-boats have. And such is the Care taken to strengthen the
Boats; from which girding them with Ropes, which our Seamen call Fraping, they
have the Name of Frape-boats. Two Men suffice to hale her in and out, and take
in the Salt from Shore (which is brought in Bags) and put it out again. As soon
as the Boat is brought nigh enough to the Shore, he who stands by the Bulk-head
takes instantly a turn with the Hazer about the Bulk-head-Stantion; and that
stops her fast before the Sea can turn her aside: And when the two Men have got
in their Lading, they hale off to Sea, till they come a little without the
swell; where they remove the Salt into another Boat that carries it on board
the Ship. Without such a Frape-boat here is but bad Landing at any time: for
though it is commonly very smooth in the Road, yet there falls a great Sea on the
Shore, so that every Ship that comes here should have such a Boat, and bring,
or make, or borrow one of other Ships that happen to be here; for the
Inhabitants have none. I have been thus particular in the Description of these
Frape-boats, because of the Use they may be of in any Places where a great Sea
falls in upon the Shore; as it does especially in many open Roads in the East
and West Indies; where they might therefore be very serviceable; but I never
saw any of them there.

The Island Mayo is generally barren, being dry, as I said; and the best of it
is but a very indifferent Soil. The sandy Bank that pens in the Salt-pond has
a sort of Silk Cotton growing upon it, and a Plant that runs along upon the
Ground, branching out like a Vine, but with thick broad Leaves. The Silk-Cotton
grows on tender Shrubs, 3 or 4 Foot high, in Cods as big as an Apple, but of a
long shape; which when ripe open at one end, parting leisurely into 4 quarters;
and at the first opening the Cotton breaks forth. It may be of use for stuffing
of Pillows, or the like; but else is of no value, any more than that of the
great Cotton-tree. I took of these Cods before they were quite ripe, and laid
them in my Chest; and in two or three days they would open and throw out the
Cotton. Others I have bound fast with Strings, so that the Cod could not open;
and in a few Days after, as soon as I slackned the String never so little, the
Cod would burst, and the Cotton fly out forceably, at a very little hole, just
as the Pulp out of a roasting Apple, till all has been out of the Cod. I met
with this sort of Cotton afterward at Timor (where it was ripe in November)
and no where else in all my Travels; but I found two other sorts of Silk-cotton
at Brazil, which I shall there describe. The right Cotton-Shrub grows here
also, but not on the Sand-bank. I saw some Bushes of it near the Shore; but the
most of it is planted in the middle of the Isle, where the Inhabitants live,
Cotton-cloth being their chief Manufacture; but neither is there any great
store of this Cotton. There also are some Trees within the Island, but none to
be seen near the Seaside; nothing but a few Bushes scattering up and down
against the sides of the adjacent Hills; for, as I said before, the Land is
pretty high from the Sea. The Soil is for the most part either a sort of Sand,
or loose crumbling Stone, without any fresh Water Ponds or Streams, to moisten
it; but only Showers in the Wet-season, which run off as fast as they fall:
except a small Spring in the middle of the Isle, from which proceeds a little
Stream of Water that runs through a Valley between the Hills. There the
Inhabitants live in three small Towns, having a Church and Padre in each Town:
And these Towns, as I was informed, are 6 or 7 miles from the Road. Pinose is
said to be the chief Town, and to have two Churches: St. John's the next; and
the third Lagoa. The Houses are very mean; small, low Things. They build with
Fig Tree; here being, as I was told, no other Trees fit to build with. The
Rafters are a sort of wild Cane. The Fruits of this Isle are chiefly Figs, and
Water-Melons. They have also Callavances (a sort of Pulse like French Beans)
and Pumpkins, for ordinary Food. The Fowls are Flamingo's, Great Curlews, and
Guinea-Hens; which the Natives of those Islands call Gallena Pintada, or the
Painted Hen; but in Jamaica, where I have seen also those Birds in the dry
Savannah's and Woods, (for they love to run about in such Places) they are
called Guinea-Hens. They seem to be much of the Nature of Partridges. They are
bigger than our Hens, have long Legs, and will run apace. They can fly too, but
not far, having large heavy Bodies, and but short Wings, and short Tails: As I
have generally observed that Birds have seldom long Tails unless such as fly
much; in which their Tails are usually serviceable to their turning about, as a
Rudder to a Ship or Boat. These Birds have thick and strong, yet sharp Bills,
pretty long Claws, and short Tails. They feed on the Ground, either on Worms,
which they find by tearing open the Earth; or on Grasshoppers, which are
plentiful here. The Feathers of these Birds are speckled with dark and light
Gray; the spots so regular and uniform, that they look more beautiful than many
Birds that are decked with gayer Feathers. Their Necks are small and long;
their Heads also but little. The Cocks have a small rising on their Crowns,
like a sort of a Comb. It Is of the color of a dry Wall Nut-shell, and very
hard. They have a small red Gill on each side of their Heads, like Ears,
strutting out downwards; but the Hens have none. They are so strong that one
cannot hold them; and very hardy. They are very good Meat, tender, and sweet;
and in some the Flesh is extraordinary white; though some others have black
Flesh: but both sorts are very good. The Natives take them with Dogs, running
them down whenever they please; for here are abundance of them. You shall see 2
or 300 in a company. I had several brought aboard alive, where they throve very
well; some of them 16 or 18 Months; when they began to pine. When they are
taken young they will become tame like our Hens. The Flamingo's I have already
described at large, [Vol. I. p. 79.] They have also many other sort of Fowls,
viz. Pigeons and Turtle-doves; Miniota's, a sort of Land-fowls as big as
Crows, of a gray color, and good Food; Crusia's, another sort of grey-colour'd
Fowl almost as big as a Crow, which are only seen in the Night (probably a sort
of Owls) and are said to be good for consumptive People, but eaten by none
else. Rabek's, a sort of large gray eatable Fowls with long Necks and Legs, not
unlike Herons; and many kinds of small Bitds.

Of Land-Animals, here are Goats, as I said formerly, and Asses good store.
When I was here before they were said to have had a great many Bulls and Cows:
But the Pirates, who have since miserably infested all these Islands, have much
lessened the number of those; not having spared the Inhabitants themselves: for
at my being there this time the Governor of Mayo was but newly returned from
being a Prisoner among them, they having taken him away, and carried him about
with them for a Year or two.

The Sea is plentifully stocked with Fish of diverse sorts, viz. Dolphins,
Boneta's, Mullets, Snappers, Silver-fish, Garfish, etc. and here is a good Bay
to hale a Sain or Net in. I haled mine several times, and to good purpose;
dragging ashore at one time 6 dozen of great Fish, most of them large Mullets
of a foot and a half or two foot long. Here are also Porposes, and a small sort
of Whales, that commonly visit this Road every day. I have already said, [Vol.
I. p. 75.] That the Months of May, June, July and August, (that is, the Wet
Season) are the time, when the Green Turtle come hither, and go ashore to lay
their Eggs. I look upon it as a thing worth taking Notice of, that the Turtle
should always, both in North and South Latitude, lay their Eggs in the Wet
Months. It might be thought, considering what great Rains there are then in
some places where these Creatures lay, that their Eggs should be spoiled by
them. But the Rain, though violent, is soon soaked up by the Sand, wherein the
Eggs are buried; and perhaps sinks not so deep into it as the Eggs are laid:
And keeping down the Heat may make the Sand hotter below than it was before,
like a Hot-bed. Whatever the Reason may be why Providence determines these
Creatures to this Season of laying their Eggs, rather than the Dry, in Fact it
is so, as I have constantly observed; and that not only with the Sea-Turtle,
but with all other sorts of Amphibious Animals that lay Eggs; as Crocodils,
Alligator's, Guano's, etc. The Inhabitants of this Island, even their Governor
and Padre's, are all Negro's, Woolpated like their African-Neighbours; from
whom it is like they are descended; though being Subjects to the Portuguese they
have their Religion and Language. They are stout, lusty, well-limb'd People,
both Men and Women, fat and fleshy; and they and their Children as round and
plump as little Porposes; though the Island appears so barren to a Stranger as
scarce to have Food for its Inhabitants. I inquired how many People there might
be on the Isle; And was told by one of the Padre's, that here were 230 Souls in
all. The Negro-Governor has his Patent from the Portuguese Governor of St.
Jago. He is a very civil and sensible poor Man; and they are generally a good
sort of People. He expects a small Present from every Commander that lades Salt
here; and is glad to be invited aboard their Ships. He spends most of his time
with the English in the Salting Season, which is his Harvest; and indeed, all
the Islanders are then fully employed in getting somewhat; for they have no
Vessels of their own to Trade with, nor do any Portuguese-Vessels come hither:
scarce any but English, on whom they depend for Trade; and though Subjects of
Portugal, have a particular Value for us. We don't pay them for their Salt, but
for the Labor of themselves and their Beasts in lading it: for which we give
them Victuals, some Money, and old Clothes, viz. Hats, Shirts, and other
Clothes: by which means many of them are indifferently well rigged; but some of
them go almost Naked. When the Turtle-season comes in they watch the Sandy-bays
in the Night, to turn them; and having small Huts at particular Places on the
Bays to keep them from the Rain, and to sleep in: And this is another Harvest
they have for Food; for by Report there come a great many Turtle to this and
the rest of the Cape Verd Islands. When the Turtle Season is over they have
little to do but to hunt for Guinea-Hens, and manage their small Plantations.
But by these means they have all the Year some Employment or other; whereby
they get a Subsistence, though but little else. When any of them are desirous to
go over to St. Jago they get a License from the Governor, and desire passage in
any English Ship that is going thither: And indeed all Ships that lade Salt
here will be obliged to touch at St. Jago for Water, for here at the Bay is
none, not so much as for Drinking. It Is true there is a small Well of brackish
Water not half a mile from the Landing-place, which the Asses that carry Salt
drink at; but it is very bad Water. Asses themselves are a Commodity in some of
these Islands, several of our Ships coming hither purposely to freight with
them, and carry them to Barbados and our other Plantations. I stayed at Mayo 6
days, and got 7 or 8 Tun of Salt aboard for my Voyage: In which time there came
also into this Road several Sail of Merchants Ships for Salt; all bound with it
for Newfoundland.

The 19th day of February, at about One a Clock in the Morning I weighed from
Mayo-Road, in order to Water at St. Jago, which was about 5 or 6 Leagues to the
Westward. We coasted along the Island St. Jago, and past by the Port on the
East of it, I mentioned formerly [Vol. I. p. 76.] which they call Praya; where
some English outward-bound East India Men still touch, but not so many of them
as heretofore. We saw the Fort upon the Hill, the Houses and Coco-nut Trees:
But I would not go in to anchor here, because I expected better Water on the S.
W. of the Island, at St. Jago Town. By 8 a Clock in the Morning we saw the
Ships in that Road, being within 3 Leagues of it: But were forced to keep
Turning many hours to get in, the Flaws of Wind coming so uncertain; as they do
especially to the Leeward of Islands that are High Land. At length two
Portuguese boats came off to help tow us in; and about 3 a Clock in the
Afternoon we came to an Anchor; and took the Prospect of the Town, [Table II.
No. 5.] We found here, besides two Portuguese-Ships bound for Brazil, whose
Boats had towed us in; an English Pink that had taken in Asses at one of the
Cape Verd Islands, and was bound to Barbados with them. Next Morning I went
Ashore with my Officers to the Governor, who treated us with Sweetmeats: I
told him, the occasion of my coming was chiefly for Water; and that I desired
also to take in some Refreshments of Fowls, etc. He said I was welcome, and that
he would order the Townsmen to bring their Commodities to a certain House,
where I might purchase what I had occasion for: I told him I had not Money, but
would exchange some of the Salt which I brought from Mayo for their
Commodities. He replied, that Salt was indeed an acceptable Commodity with the
poor People, but that if I designed to buy any Cattle, I must give Money for
them. I contented my self with taking in Dunghill Fowls: The Governor ordering a
Crier to go about the Town and give notice to the People, that they might
repair to such a place with Fowls, and Maiz for feeding them, where they might
get Salt in exchange for them: So I sent on board for Salt, and ordered some of
my Men to truck the same for the Fowls and Maiz, while the rest of them were
busy in filling of Water. This is the effect of their keeping no Boats of
their own on the several Islands, that they are glad to buy even their own Salt
of Foreigners, for want of being able to transport it themselves from Island to
Island.

St. Jago Town lies on the S. W. part of the Island, in Lat. about 15 Degrees. N.
and is the Seat of the General Governor, and of the Bishop of all the Cape
Verd Islands. This Town stands scattering against the sides of two Mountains,
between which there is a deep Valley, which is about 200 Yards wide against the
Sea; but within a quarter of a mile it closes up so as not to be 40 Yards wide.
In the Valley, by the Sea, there is a straggling Street, Houses on each side,
and a Run of Water in the bottom, which empties it self into a fine small Cove
or sandy Bay, where the Sea is commonly very smooth: so that here is good
Wat'ring and good Landing at any time; though the Road be rocky and bad for
Ships. Just by the Landing-place there is a small Fort, almost level with the
Sea, where is always a Court of Guard kept. On the top of the Hill, above the
Town, there is another Fort; which, by the Wall that is to be seen from the
Road, seems to be a large Place. They have Canon mounted there, but how many I
know not: Neither what use that Fort can be of, except it be for Salutes. The
Town may consist of 2 or 300 Houses, all built of rough Stone; having also one
Convent, and one Church.

The People in general are black, or at least of a mixed color, except only
some few of the better sort, viz. the Governor, the Bishop, some Gentlemen, and
some of the Padres; for some of these also are black. The People about Praya
are Thievish; but these of St. Jago-Town, living under their Governor's Eye,
are more orderly; though generally poor, having little Trade: Yet besides chance
Ships of other Nations, there come hither a Portuguese Ship or two every Year,
in their way to Brazil. These vend among them a few European Commodies, and
take of their principal Manufactures, viz. striped Cotton-cloth, which they
carry with them to Brazil. Here is also another Ship comes hither from Portugal
for Sugar, their other Manufacture, and returns with it directly thither: For
it is reported that there are several small Sugar-works on this Island, from
which they send home near 100 Tun every year; and they have plenty of Cotton
growing up in the Country, wherewith they cloth themselves, and send also a
great deal to Brazil. They have Vines, of which they make some Wine: but the
European Ships furnish them with better; though they drink but little of any.
Their chief Fruits are, (besides Plantains in abundance) Oranges, Lemons,
Citrons, Melons, (both Musk and Water-melons) Limes, Guava's, Pomgranates,
Quinces, Custard-Apples, and Papah's, etc.

The Custard-Apple (as we call it) is a Fruit as big as a Pomegranate, and much
of the same color. The outside Husk, Shell or Rind, is for substance and
thickness between the Shell of a Pomegranate, and the Peel of a Sevil-Orange;
softer than this, yet more brittle than that. The Coat or Covering is also
remarkable in that it is beset round with small regular Knobs or Risings; and
the inside of the Fruit is full of a white soft Pulp, sweet and very pleasant,
and most resembling a Custard of any thing, both in Color and Taste: From
whence probably it is called a Custard-Apple by our English. It has in the
middle a few small black Stones or Kernels; but no Core, for it is all Pulp. The
Tree that bears this Fruit is about the bigness of a Quince-tree, with long,
small, and thickset Branches spread much abroad: At the Extremity of here and
there one of which the Fruit grows upon a Stalk of its own about 9 or 10 Inches
long, slender and tough, and hanging down with its own weight. A large Tree of
this sort does not bear usually above 20 or 30 Apples; seldom more. This Fruit
grows in most Countries within the Tropicks. I have seen of them (though I
omitted the Description of them before) all over the West Indies, both
Continent and Islands; as also in Brazil, and in the East Indies.

The Papah too is found in all these Countries, though I have not hitherto
described it. It is a Fruit about the bigness of a Musk-Melon, hollow as that
is, and much resembling it in Shape and Color, both outside and inside: Only
in the middle, instead of flat Kernels, which the Melons have, these have a
handful of small blackish Seeds, about the bigness of Pepper-corns; whose Taste
is also hot on the Tongue somewhat like Pepper. The Fruit it self is sweet,
soft and luscious, when ripe; but while green it is hard and unfavory: though even
then being boiled and eaten with Salt-pork or Beef, it serves instead of
Turnips, and is as much esteemed. The Papah-Tree is about 10 or 12 Foot high.
The Body near the Ground may be a Foot and an half or 2 Foot Diameter; and it
grows up tapering to the top. It has no Branches at all, but only large Leaves
growing immediately upon Stalks from the Body. The Leaves are of a roundish
Form and jag'd about the Edges, having their Stalks or Stumps longer or shorter
as they grow near or further from the top. They begin to spring from out of the
Body of the Tree at about 6 or 7 Foot height from the Ground, the Trunk being
bare below: but above that the Leaves grow thicker and larger still toward its
Top, where they are close and broad. The Fruit grows only among the Leaves; and
thickest among the thickest of them; insomuch that toward the top of the Tree
the Papah's springs forth from its Body as thick as they can stick one by
another. But then lower down, where the Leaves are thinner, the Fruit is
larger, and of the size I have described: And at the Top, where they are thick,
they are but small, and no bigger than ordinary Turnips; yet tasted like the
rest.

Their chief Land-Animals are their Bullocks; which are said to be many; though
they asked us 20 Dollars apiece for them: They have also Horses, Asses, and
Mules, Deer, Goats, Hogs, and blackfac'd long-tail'd Monkeys. Of Fowls they
have Cocks and Hens, Ducks, Guinea-Hens, both tame and wild, Parakites,
Parrots, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, Herons, Hawks, Crab-catchers, Galdens, (a
larger sort of Crab-catchers) Curlew's, etc. Their Fish is the same as at Mayo
and the rest of these Islands, and for the most part these Islands have the
same Beasts and Birds also: But some of the Isles have Pasturage and Employment
for some particular Beasts more than other; and the Birds are encouraged, by
Woods for shelter, and Maiz and Fruits sor Food, to flock rather to some of the
Islands (as to this of St. Jago) than to others.

St. Jago Road is one of the worst that I have been in. There is not clean
Ground enough for above 3 Ships; and those also must lie very near each other.
One even of these must lie close to the Shore, with a Land-fast there: And that
is the best for a small Ship. I should not have come in here if I had not been
told that it was a good secure Place; but I found it so much otherways, that I
was in pain to be gone. Captain Baresool, who came to an Anchor while I was
here, in ^oul Ground, lost quickly 2 Anchors; and I had lost a small one. The
Island Fogo shows its self from this Road very plain, at about 7 or 8 Leagues
distance; and in the Night we saw the Flames of Fire issuing from its Top.

CHAP. II.
The A.'s Deliberation on the Sequel of his Voyage, and Departure from St.
Jago. His Course, and the Winds, etc. in crossing the Line. He stands away for
the Bay of All Saints in Brazil; and why. His Arrival on that Coast and in the
Bay. Of the several Forts, the Road, Situation, Town, and Buildings of Bahia.
Of its Governor, Ships and Merchants; and Commodities to and from Europe.
Claying of Sugar. The Season for the European Ships, and Coire Cables: Of their
Guinea-trade, and of the Coasting-trade, and Whale-killing. Of the Inhabitants
of Bahia; their carrying in Hammocks: their Artificers, Crane for Goods, and
Negro-Slaves. Of the Country about Bahia, its Soil and Product. Its
Timber Trees; the Sapiera, Vermiatico, Comesserie, Guitteba, Serrie, and
Mangroves. The Bastard-Coco, its Nuts and Cables; and the Silk-Cotton-trees.
The Brasilian Fruits, Oranges, etc. Of the Sour-sops, Cashew's, and Jennipah's.
Of their peculiar Fruits, Arisah's, Mericasah's, Petango's, Petumbo's,
Mungaroo's, Muckishaw's, Ingwa's, Otee's, and Musteran de ova's. Of the
Palm-berries, Physick-nuts, Mendibee's, etc. and their Roots and Herbs, etc. Of
their Wild Fowl, Maccaw's, Parrots, etc. The Yemma, Carrion-Crow and
Chattering-crow, Bill-bird, Curreso, Turtle-dove and Wild-pigeons; the Jenetee,
Clocking-hen, Crab-catcher, Galden, and black Heron: The Ducks, Wigeon and
Teal; and Ostriges to the Southward: and of the Dunghil-fowls. Of their Cattle,
Horses, etc. Leopards and Tiger's. Of their Serpents; the the Rattle-Snake,
small Green-Snake, Amphisbaena, small Black and small Grey-Snake; the great
Land, and the great Water-Snake: and of the VVater-dog. Of their Seafish and
Turtle; and of St. Paul's-Town.

HAving dispatched my small Affairs at the C. Verd Islands, I meditated on the
process of my Voyage. I thought it requisite to touch once more at a cultivated
Place in these Seas, where my Men might be refreshed, and might have a Market
wherein to furnish themselves with Necessaries: For designing that my next
Stretch should be quite to N. Holland, and knowing that after so long a Run
nothing was to be expected there but fresh Water, if I could meet even with
that there, I resolved upon putting in first at some Port of Brazil, and to
provide my Self there with whatever I might have further Occasion for. Beside
the refreshing and furnishing my Men, I aimed also at the inuring them
gradually and by intervals to the Fatigues that were to be expected in the
remainder of the Voyage, which was to be in a part of the World they were
altogether Strangers to; none of them, except two young Men, having ever crosst
the Line.

With this Design I sailed from St. Jago on the 22d of February, with the Winds
at E. N. E. and N. E. fair Weather, and a brisk Gale. We steered away S. S. E.
and S. S. E. half East, till in the Lat. of 7 degrees. 50 min. we met with many
Riplings in the Sea like a Tide or strong Current, which setting against the
Wind caused such a Ripling. We continued to meet these Currents from that Lat.
till we came into the Lat. of 3 degrees. 22 N. when they ceased. During this time
we saw some Boneta's, and Sharks; catching one of these. We had the true
General Trade-Wind blowing fresh at N. E. till in the Lat. of 4 degrees. 40 min. N.
when the Wind varied, and we had small Gales, with some Tornadoes. We were then
to the East of St. Jago 4 degrees. 54 min. when we got into Lat. 3 degrees. 2 min. N.
(where I said the Ripling ceased) and Long. to the East of St. Jago 5 degrees. 2
min. we had the Wind whiffling between the S. by E. and E. by N. small Gales,
frequent Calms, very black Clouds, with much Rain. In the Lat. of 3 degrees. 8 min.
N. and Long. E. from St. Jago 5 degrees. 8 min. we had the Wind from the S. S. E.
to the N. N. E. faint, and often interrupted with Calms. While we had Calms we
had the opportunity of trying the Current we had met with hitherto, and found
that it set N. E. by E. half a Knot, which is 12 mile in 24 hours: So that here
it ran at the Rate of half a mile an hour, and had been much stronger before.
The Rains held us by intervals till the Lat. of 1 degrees. 0 min. N. with small
Gales of Wind between S. S. E. and S. E. by E. and sometimes calm: Afterward
we had the Wind between the S. and S. S. E. till we crosst the Line, small
Winds, Calms, and pretty fair Weather. We saw but few Fish beside Porposes; but
of them a great many, and struck one of them.

It was the 10th day of March, about the time of the Equinox, when we crosst
the Equator, having had all along from the Lat. of 4 degrees. 40 min. N. where the
True Trade-Wind left us, a great swell out of the S. E. and but small uncertain
Gales, mostly Southerly, so that we crept to the Southward but slowly. I kept
up against these as well as I could to the Southward, and when we had now and
then a flurry of Wind at E. I still went away due South, purposely to get to
the Southward as fast as I could; for while near the Line I expected to have
but uncertain Winds, frequent Calms, Rains, Tornadoes, etc. which would not
only retard my Course, but endanger Sickness also among my Men: especially
those who were ill provided with Clothes, or were too lazy to shift themselves
when they were drenched with the Rains. The Heat of the Weather made them
careless of doing this; but taking a Dram of Brandy, which I gave them when
wet, with a Charge to shift themselves, they would however lie down in their
Hammocks with their Wet Clothes; so that when they turned out they caused an
ill smell wherever they came, and their Hammocks would stink sufficiently:
that I think the Remedying of this is worth the Care of Commanders that cross
the Line; especially when they are, it may be, a Month or more ever they get
out of the Rains, at some times of the Year, as in June, July, or August.

What I have here said about the Currents, Winds, Calms, etc. in this Passage
is chiefly for the farther Illustration of what I have heretofore observed in
general about these Matters, and especially as to Crossing the Line, in my
Discourse of the Winds, etc. in the Torrid Zone: [See Vol. II. Part 3. p. 5,
6.] Which Observations I have had very much confirmed to me in the Course of
this Voyage; and I shall particularize in several of the chief of them as they
come in my Way. And indeed I think I may say this of the Main of the
Observations in that Treatise, that the clear Satisfaction I had about them,
and how much I might rely upon them, was a great Ease to my Mind during this
Vexatious Voyage; wherein the Ignorance, and Obstinacy withal, of some under
me, occasioned me a great deal of Tronble: though they found all along, and were
often forced to acknowledge it, that I was seldom out in my Conjectures, when I
told them usually beforehand what Winds, etc. we should meet with at such or
such particular Places we should come at.

Pernambuc was the Port that I designed for at my first setting out from St.
Jago; it being a Place most proper for my purpose, by reason of its Situation,
lying near the Extremity of C. St. Augustine, the Easternmost Promontory of
Brazil; by which means it not only enjoys the greater benefit of the
Sea-breezes, and is consequently more healthy than other Places to the
Southward, but is withal less subject to the Southerly Coasting-Trade-winds,
that blow half the Year on this Shore; which were now drawing on, and might be
troublesome to me: So that I might both hope to reach soonest Pernambuc, as
most directly and nearest in my Run; and might thence also more easily get away
to the Southward than from Bahia de Todos los Santos, or Ria Janeira.

But notwithstanding these Advantages I proposed to my self in going to
Pernambuc, I was soon put by that Design through the refractoriness of some
under me, and the Discontents and Backwardness of some of my Men. For the Calms
and Shiftings of Wind which I met with, as I was to expect, in crossing the
Line, made them, who were unacquainted with these Matters, almost heartless as
to the persuit of the Voyage, as thinking we should never be able to weather C.
St. Augustine: And though I told them that by that time we should get to about
three Degrees South of the Line, we should again have a True brisk General
Trade-Wind from the North East, that would carry us to what part of Brazil we
pleased, yet they would not believe it till they found it so. This, with some
other unforeseen Accidents, not necessary to be mentioned in this place,
meeting with the Aversion of my Men to a long unknown Voyage, made me justly
apprehensive of their Revolting, and was a great Trouble and Hindrance to me.
So that I was obliged partly to alter my Measures, and met with many
Difficulties, the Particulars of which I shall not trouble the Reader with: But
I mention thus much of it in general for my own necessary Vindication, in my
taking such Measures sometimes for prosecuting the Voyage as the state of my
Ships Crew, rather than my own Judgment and Experience, determined me to. The
Disorders of my Ship made me think at present that Pernambuc would not be so
fit a Place for me; being told that Ships ride there two or three Leagues from
the Town, under the Command of no Forts; so that whenever I should have been
ashore it might have been easy for my discontented Crew to have cut or slipped
their Cables, and have gone away from me: Many of them discovering already an
Intention to return to England, and some of them declaring openly that they
would go no further onwards than Brazil. I altered my Course therefore, and
stood away for Bahio de todos los Santos, or the Bay of All Saints, where I
hoped to have the Governor's help, if need should require, for securing my Ship
from any such Mutinous Attempt; being forced to keep my self all the way upon
my Guard, and to lie with my Officers, such as I could trust, and with small
Arms, upon the Quarter Deck; it scarce being safe for me to lie in my Cabin,
by Reason of the Discontents among my Men.

On the 23d of March we saw the Land of Brazil; having had thither, from the
time when we came into the True Trade-Wind again after crossing the Line, very
fair Weather and brisk Gales, mostly at E. N. E. The Land we saw was about 20
Leagues to the North of Bahia; so I coasted along Shore to the Southward. This
Coast is rather low than high, with Sandy-Bays all along by the Sea.

A little within Land are many very white Spots of Sand, appearing like Snow;
and the Coast looks very pleasant, being checkered with Woods and Savanahs. The
Trees in general are not tall; but they are green and flourishing. There are
many small Houses by the Seaside, whose Inhabitants are chiefly Fishermen.
They come off to Sea on Barklogs, made of several Logs fastened side to side,
that have one or two Masts with Sails to them. There are two Men in each
Barklog, one at either end, having small low Benches, raised a little above the
Logs, to sit and fish on, and two Baskets hanging up at the Mast or Masts; one
to put their Provisions in, the other for their Fish. Many of these were a
Fishing now, and two of them came aboard, of whom I bought some Fish. In the
Afternoon we sailed by one very remarkable piece of Land, where, on a small
pleasant Hill, there was a Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. See a Sight of
some parts of this Coast [Table III. No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.] and of the Hill the
Church stands on [Table III. No. 1.]

I coasted along till the Evening, and then brought to, and lay by till the
next Morning. About 2 hours after we were brought to, there came a Sail out of
the Offin (from Seaward) and lay by about a Mile to Windward of us, and so lay
all Night. In the Morning, upon speaking with her, she proved to be a
Portuguese Ship bound to Bahia; therefore I sent my Boat aboard and desired to
have one of his Mates to Pilot me in: He answered, That he had not a Mate
capable of it, but that he would sail in before me, and show me the way; and
that if he went in to the Harbor in the Night, he would hang out a Light for
me. He said we had not far in and might reach it before Night with a tolerable
Gale; but that with so small an one as now we had we could not do it: So we
jog'd on till Night, and then he accordingly hung out his Light, which we
steered after, sounding as we went in. I kept all my Men on Deck, and had an
Anchor ready to let go on occasion. We had the Tide of Ebb against us, so that
we went in but slowly; and it was about the middle of the Night when we
anchored. Immediately the Portuguese Master came depictions of Brazil ^able
III. Brazil ^o. 1. Conception of ye V. Mary ^o. 2. The Land to ye Southward of
ye Chapel, going for Bahia ^o. 3. Sight of these Capes W N. from C. Salvador
at 3 L. did. ^o. 4. Sight from about 1 M. from ye Fort ^o. 5. Bahia de todos
los Santos Town and Harbor. ^o. 6. C. of G. Hope at 10 L. did. from ye Table
Land ^o. 7. Thus Shows the Cape Land (A) ^o. 8. (A) to ye Southward of ye Table
Land, at about 9 L. did: from the Table

aboard to see me, to whom I returned Thanks for his Civilities; and indeed I
found much Respect, not only from this Gentleman, but from all of that Nation
both here and in other Places, who were ready to serve me on all Occasions. The
Place that we anchored in was about two Miles from the Harbor where the Ships
generally ride; but the Fear I had lest my People should run away with the Ship
made me hasten to get a License from the Governor, to run up into the Harbor,
and ride among their Ships, close by one of their Forts. So on the 25th of
March about 10 a Clock in the Morning the Tide serving I went thither, being
Piloted by the Super-intendant there, whose Business it is to carry up all the
King of Portugal's Ships that come hither, and to see them well moored. He
brought us to an Anchor right against the Town, at the outer part of the
Harbor, which was then full of Ships, within 150 yards of a small Fort that
stands on a Rock half a mile from the Shore. See a Prospect of the Harbor and
the Town, as it appeared to us while we lay at Anchor, [Table III. No. 5.]

Bahia de todos los Santos lies in Lat. 13 degrees. S. It is the most considerable
Town in Brazil, whether in respect of the Beauty of its Buildings, its Bulk, or
its Trade and Revenue. It has the convenience of a good Harbor that is capable
of receiving Ships of the greatest Burden: The Entrance of which is guarded
with a strong Fort standing without the Harbor, called St. Antonio: A Sight of
which I have given [Table III. No. 4.] as it appeared to us the Afternoon
before we came in; and its Lights (which they hang out purposely for Ships) we
saw the same Night. There are other smaller Forts that command the Harbor, one
of which stands on a Rock in the Sea, about half a mile from the Shore. Close
by this Fort all Ships must pass that anchor here, and must ride also within
half a mile of it at farthest between this and another Fort (that stands on a
Point at the inner part of the Harbor and is called the Dutch Fort) but must
ride nearest to the former, all along against the Town: where there is good
holding Ground, and less exposed to the Southerly Winds that blow very hard
here. They commonly set in about April, but blow hardest in May, June, July and
August: but the Place where the Ships ride is exposed to these Winds not above
3 Points of the Compass.

Beside these there is another Fort fronting the Harbor, and standing on the
Hill upon which the Town stands. The Town it self consists of about 2000
Houses; the major part of which cannot be seen from the Harbor: but so many as
appear in sight, with a great mixture of Trees between them, and all placed on
a rising Hill, make a very pleasant Prospect; as may be judged by the Draught,
[Table III. No. 5.]

There are in the Town 13 Churches, Chapels, Hospitals, Convents, beside one
Nunnery; viz. the Ecclesia Major or Cathedral, the Jesuits College, which are
the chief, and both in sight from the Harbor: St. Antonio, Sta. Barbara, both
Parish-Churches; the Franciscans Church, and the Dominicans; and two Convents
of Carmelites; a Chapel for Seamen close by the Seaside, where Boats commonly
land, and the Seamen go immediately to Prayers; another Chapel for poor People,
at the farther end of the same Street, which runs along by the Shore; and a
third Chapel for Soldiers, at the edge of the Town, remote from the Sea; and an
Hospital in the middle of the Town. The Nunnery stands at the outer-edge of the
Town next the Fields, wherein by Report there are 70 Nuns. Here lives an
Archbishop who has a fine Palace in the Town; and the Governor's Palace is a
fair Stone-building, and looks handsome to the Sea, though but indifferently
furnished within: both Spaniards and Portuguese in their Plantations abroad, as
I have generally observed, affecting to have large Houses; but are little
curious about Furniture, except Pictures some of them. The Houses of the Town
are 2 or 3 Stories high, the Walls thick and strong, being built with Stone,
with a Covering of Pantile; and many of them have Balconies. The principal
Streets are large, and all of them paved or pitched with small Stones. There
are also Parades in the most eminent Places of the Town, and many Gardens, as
well within the Town as in the Out-parts of it, wherein are Fruit Trees, Herbs,
Salladings and Flowers in great variety, but ordered with no great Care nor Art.

The Governor who resides here is called Don John de Lancastario, being
descended, as they say, from our English Lancaster Family; and he has a respect
for our Nation on that account, calling them his Countrymen. I waited on him
several times and always found him very courteous and civil. Here are about 400
Soldiers in Garrison. They commonly draw up and exercise in a large Parade
before the Governor's House; and many of them attend him when he goes abroad.
The Soldiers are decently clad in brown Linen, which in these hot Countries is
sar better than Woollen; but I never saw any clad in Linen but only these.
Beside the Soldiers in Pay, he can soon have some thousands of Men up in Arms
on occasion. The Magazine is on the Skirts of the Town, on a small rising
between the Nunnery and the Soldiers Church. It Is big enough to hold 2 or 3000
Barrels of Powder; but I was told it seldom has more than 100, sometimes but
80. There are always a Band of Soldiers to guard it, and Sentinels looking out
both Day and Night.

A great many Merchants always reside at Bahia; for it is a Place of great
Trade: I found here above 30 great Ships from Europe, with two of the King of
Portugal's Ships of War for their Convoy; beside two Ships that Traded to
Africa only, either to Angola, Gamba, or other Places on the Coast of Guinea;
and abundance of small Craft, that only run to and fro on this Coast, carrying
Commodities from one part of Brazil to another.

The Merchants that live here are said to be Rich, and to have many Negro
Slaves in their Houses, both of Men and Women. Themselves are chiefly
Portuguese, Foreigners having but little Commerce with them; yet here was one
Mr. Cock an English Merchant, a very civil Gentleman and of good Repute. He had
a Patent to be our English Consul, but did not care to take upon him any
Public Character, because English Ships seldom come hither, here having been
none in 11 or 12 years before this time. Here was also a Dane, and a French
Merchant or two; but all have their Effects transported to and from Europe in
Portuguese Ships, none of any other Nation being admitted to Trade hither.
There is a Custom-house by the Seaside, where all Goods imported or exported
are entered. And to prevent Abuses there are 5 or 6 Boats that take their turns
to row about the Harbor, searching any Boats they suspect to be running of
Goods.

The chief Commodities that the European Ships bring hither, are Linnencloaths,
both course and fine; some Woollens also, as Bays, Searges, Perpetuana's, etc.
Hats, Stockings, both of Silk and Thread, Bisket-bread, Wheat Flour, Wine
(chiefly Port) Oil-Olive, Butter, Cheese, etc. and Salt-beef and Pork would
there also be good Commodities. They bring hither also Iron, and all sorts of
Iron-Tools; Pewter-Vessels of all sorts, as Dishes, Plates, Spoons, etc.
Lookingglasses, Beads, and other Toys; and the Ships that touch at St. Jago
bring thence, as I said, Cotton cloth, which is afterward sent to Angola.

The European Ships carry from hence Sugar, Tobacco, either in Roll or Snuff,
never in Leaf, that I know of: These are the Staple Commodities. Besides which,
here are Dye-woods, as Fustick, etc. with Woods for other uses, as speckled
Wood, Brazil, etc. They also carry home raw Hides, Tallow, Train-Oil of Whales,
etc. Here are also kept tame Monkeys, Parrots, Parakites, etc. which the Seamen
carry home.

The Sugar of this Country is much better than that which we bring home from
our Plantations: for all the Sugar that is made here is clay'd, which makes it
whiter and finer than our Muscovada, as we call our unrefin'd Sugar. Our
Planters seldom refine any with Clay, unless sometimes a little to send home as
Presents for their Friends in England. Their way of doing it is by taking some
of the whitest Clay and mixing it with Water, 'till it is like Cream. With this
they fill up the Pans of Sugar, that are sunk 2 or 3 Inches below the Brim by
the draining of the Molosses out of it: First scraping off the thin hard Crust
of the Sugar that lies at the top, and would hinder the Water of the Clay from
soaking through the Sugar of the Pan. The refining is made by this Percolation.
For 10 or 12 days time that the Clayish Liquor lies soaking down the Pan, the
white Water whitens the Sugar as it passes through it; and the gross Body of the
Clay it self grows hard on the top, and may be taken off at pleasure; when
scraping off with a Knife the very upper part of the Sugar, which will be a
little sullied, that which is underneath will be White almost to the bottom:
and such as is called Brazil Sugar is thus Whitened. When I was here this Sugar
was sold for 50 s. per 100 lb. and the Bottoms of the Pots, which is very
course Sugar, for about 20 s. per 100 lb. both sorts being then scarce; for
here was not enough to lade the Ships, and therefore some of them were to lie
here till the next Season.

The European Ships commonly arrive here in February or March, and they have
generally quick Passages; finding at that time of the Year brisk Gales to bring
them to the Line, little Trouble, then, in crossing it, and brisk E. N. E.
Winds afterward to bring them hither. They commonly return from hence about
the latter end of May, or in June. 'Twas said when I was here that the Ships
would sail hence the 20th day of May; and therefore they were all very busy,
some in taking in their Goods, others in Careening and making themselves ready.
The Ships that come hither usually Careen at their first coming; here being a
Hulk belonging to the King for that purpose. This Hulk is under the charge of
the Superintendent I spoke of, who has a certain Sum of Money for every Ship
that Careens by her. He also provides Firing and other Necessaries for that
purpose: and the Ships do commonly hire of the Merchants here each 2 Cables to
moor by all the time they lie here, and so save their own Hempen Cables; for
these are made of a sort of Hair, that grows on a certain kind of Trees,
hanging down from the Top of their Bodies, and is very like the black Coyre in
the East Indies, if not the same. These Cables are strong and lasting: And so
much for the European Ships.

The Ships that use the Guinea-Trade are small Vessels in comparison of the
former. They carry out from hence Rum, Sugar, the Cotton-cloaths of St. Jago,
Beads, etc. and bring in return, Gold, Ivory, and Slaves; making very good
returns.

The small Craft that belong to this Town are chiefly employed in carrying
European Goods from Bahia, the Center of the Brasilian Trade, to the other
Places on this Coast; bringing back hither Sugar, Tobacco, etc. They are sailed
chiefly with Negro-Slaves; and about Christmas these are mostly employed in
Whale-killing: for about that time of the Year a sort Whales, as they call
them, are very thick on this Coast. They come in also into the Harbors and
inland Lakes, where the Seamen go out and kill them. The Fat of them is boiled
to Oil; the Lean is eaten by the Slaves and poor People: And I was told by one
that had frequently eaten of it that the Flesh was very sweet and wholesome.
These are said to be but small Whales: yet here are so many, and so easily
killed, that they get a great deal of Money by it. Those that strike them buy
their License for it of the King: And I was informed that he receives 30000
Dollars per Annum for this Fishery. All the small Vessels that use this
Coasting Traffic are built here; and so are some Men of War also for the
King'sService. There was one a Building when I was here, a Ship of 40 or 50
Guns: And the Timber of this Country is very good and proper for this purpose.
I was told it was very strong, and more durable than any we have in Europe: and
they have enough of it. As for their Ships that use the European Trade, some of
them that I saw there were English built, taken from us by the French during
the late War, and sold by them to the Portugese.

Besides Merchants and others that Trade by Sea from this Port, here are other
pretty Wealthy Men, and several Artificers and Tradesmen of most sorts, who by
Labor and Industry maintain themselves very well; especially such as can
arrive at the purchase of a Negro-Slave or two. And indeed, excepting People of
the lowest degree of all, here are scarce any but what keep Slaves in their
Houses. The Richer Sort, besides the Slaves of both Sexes whom they keep for
servile Uses in their Houses, have Men-slaves who wait on them abroad, for
State; either running by their Horses-sides when they ride out, or to carry
them to and fro on their Shoulders in the Town when they make short Visits near
home. Every Gentleman or Merchant is provided with Things necessary for this
sort of Carriage. The main Thing is a pretty large Cotton Hammock of the
West India Fashion, but mostly dyed Blue, with large Fringes of the same,
hanging down on each side. This is carried on the Negro's Shoulders by the help
of a Bambo about 12 or 14 Foot long, to which the Hammock is hung; and a
Covering comes over the Pole, hanging down on each side like a Curtain: So that
the Person so carried cannot be seen unless he pleases; but may either ly down,
having Pillows for his Head; or may sit up by being a little supported with
these Pillows, and by letting both his Legs hang out over one side of the
Hammock. When he has a mind to be seen he puts by his Curtain, and salutes
every one of his Acquaintance whom he meets in the Streets: for they take a
piece of Pride in greeting one another from their Hammocks, and will hold long
Conferences thus in the Streets: But then their two Slaves who carry the
Hammock have each a strong well-made Staff, with a fine Iron Fork at the upper
end, and a sharp Iron below, like the Rest for a Musket, which they stick fast
in the Ground, and let the Pole or Bambo of the Hammock rest upon them, till
their Masters Business or the Complement is over. There is scarce a Man of any
fashion, especially a Woman, will pass the Streets but so carried in a Hammock.
The chief Mechanic Traders here, are Smiths, Hatters, Shoemakers, Tanners,
Sawyers, Carpenters, Coopers, etc. Here are also Tailors, Butchers, etc. which
last kill the Bullocks very dexterously, sticking them at one Blow with a
sharp-pointed Knife in the Nape of the Neck, having first drawn them close to a
Rail; but they dress them very slovenly. It being Lent when I came hither there
was no buying any Flesh till Easter-Eve, when a great number of Bullocks were
killed at once in the Slaughter-houses within the Town, Men, Women and Children
flocking thither with great Joy to buy, and a multitude of Dogs, almost
starved, following them; for whom the Meat seemed fittest, it was so Lean. All
these Tradesmen buy Negro's, and train them up to their several Employments,
which is a great help to them: and they having so frequent Trade to Angola, and
other parts of Guinea, they have a constant supply of Blacks both for their
Plantations and Town. These Slaves are very useful in this Place for Carriage,
as Porters; for as here is a great Trade by Sea, and the Landing-place is at
the foot of a Hill, too steep for drawing with Carts, so there is great need of
Slaves to carry Goods up into the Town, especially for the inferior sort: but
the Merchants have also the Convenience of a great Crane that goes with Ropes
or Pullees, one end of which goes up while the other goes down. The House in
which this Crane is stands on the Brow of the Hill toward the Sea, hanging
over the Precipice: and there are Planks set shelving against the Bank from
thence to the Bottom, against which the Goods lean or slide as they are hoisted
up or let down. The Negro-Slaves in this Town are so numerous, that they make
up the greatest part or bulk of the Inhabitants: Every House, as I said, having
some, both Men and Women, of them. Many of the Portuguese, who are Batchelors,
keep of these black Women for Misses, though they know the danger they are in of
being poisoned by them, if ever they give them any occasion of Jealousy. A
Gentleman of my Acquaintance, who had been familiar with his Cook-maid, lay
under some such Apprehensions from her when I was there. These Slaves also of
either Sex will easily be engaged to do any sort of Mischief; even to Murder,
if they are hired to do it, especially in the Night: for which Reason, I kept
my Men on board as much as I could; for one of the French King's Ships being
here had several Men murdered by them in the Night, as I was credibly informed.

Having given this account of the Town of Bahia, I shall next say somewhat of
the Country. There is a Salt Water Lake runs 40 Leagues, as I was told, up the
Country, N. W. from the Sea, leaving the Town and Dutch Fort on the Starboard
fide. The Country all round about is for the most part a pretty flat even
Ground, not high, nor yet very low: It is well watered with Rivers, Brooks and
Springs, neither wants it for good Harbors, Navigable Creeks, and good Bays
for Ships to ride in. The Soil in general is good, naturally producing very
latge Trees of diverse sorts, and fit for any uses. The Savannahs also are
laden with Grass, Herbs, and many sorts of smaller Vegetables; and being
cultivated, produce any thing that is proper for those hot Countries, as
Sugarcanes, Cotton, Indico, Tobacco, Maiz, Fruit Trees of several kinds, and
Eatable Roots of all sorts. Of the several kinds of Trees that are here, I
shall give an account of some, as I had it partly from an Inhabitant of Bahia,
and partly from my knowledge of them otherwise, viz. Sapiera, Vermiatico,
Comesserie, Guitteba, Serrie, as they were pronounced to me, three sorts of
Mangrove, speckled Wood, Fustick, Cotton-Trees of three sorts, etc. together
with Fruit Trees of diverse sorts that grow wild, beside such as are planted.

Of Timber Trees, the Sapiera is said to be large and tall; it is very good
Timber, and is made use of in building of Houses; so is the Vermiatico, a tall
streight-bodied Tree, of which they make Plank 2 Foot broad, and they also make
Canoa's with it. Comesserie and Guitteba are chiesly used in building Ships;
these are as much esteemed here, as Oaks are in England, and they say either
sort is harder and more durable than Oak. The Serrie is a sort of Tree much
like Elm, very durable in water. Here are also all the three sorts of Mangrove
Trees, viz. the Red, the White, and the Black, which I have described [ Vol. I.
p. 54.] The Bark of the Red Mangrove, is here used for Tanning of Leather, and
they have great Tan-pits for it. The Black Mangrove grows larger here than in
the West Indies, and of it they make good Plank. The White Mangrove is larger
and tougher than in the West Indies; of these they make Masts and Yards for
Barks.

There grow here Wild or Bastard Coco Nut Trees, neither so large nor so tall
as the common ones in the East or West Indies. They bear Nuts as the others,
but not a quarter so big as the right Coco-Nuts. The shell is full of Kernel,
without any hollow Place or Water in it; and the Kernel is sweet and wholesome,
but very hard both for the Teeth and for Digestion. These Nuts are in much
esteem for making Beads for Pater-noster's, Boles of Tobacco-pipes, and other
Toys: and every small Shop here has a great many of them to sell. At the top of
these Bastard Coco-trees, among the Branches, there grows a sort of long black
Thread like Horse-hair, but much longer, which by the Portuguese is called
Tresabo. Of this they make Cables which are very serviceable, strong and
lasting; for they will not rot as Cables made of Hemp, though they ly exposed
both to Wet and Heat. These are the Cables which I said they keep in their
Harbors here, to let to hire to European Ships, and resemble the Coyre-Cables.

Here are three sorts of Cotton Trees that bear Silk-cotton. One sort is such
as I have formerly described, [Vol. I. p. 165.] by the Name of the Cotton-tree.
The other two sorts I never saw any where but here. The Trees of these latter
sorts are but small in comparison of the former, which are reckoned the biggest
in all the West India Woods; yet are however of a good bigness and height. One
of these last sorts is not so full of Branches as the other of them; neither do
they produce their Fruit the same time of the Year: for one sort had its Fruit
just ripe, and was shedding its Leaves while the other sort was yet green, and
its Fruit small and growing, having but newly done blossoming; the Tree being
as full of young Fruit as an Apple Tree ordinarily in England. These last yield
very large Pods, about 6 inches long, and as big as a Man's Arm. It is ripe in
September and October; then the Pod opens, and the Cotton bursts out in a great
Lump as big as a Man's Head. They gather these Pods before they open: otherways
it would fly all away. It opens as well after it is gathered; and then they take
out the Cotton, and preserve it to sill Pillows and Bolsters, for which use
it is very much esteemed: but it is fit for nothing else, being so short that it
cannot be spun. It Is of a tawney Color; and the Seeds are black, very round,
and as big as a white Pea. The other sort is ripe in March or April. The Fruit
or Pod is like a large Apple, and very round. The outside Shell is as thick as
the top of ones Finger. Within this there is a very thin whitish Bag or Skin
which incloseth the Cotton. When the Cotton-Apple is ripe the outer thick green
Shell splits it self into 5 equal parts from Stemb to Tail, and drops off,
leaving the Cotton hanging upon the Stemb, only pent up in its fine Bag. A day
or two afterward the Cotton swells by the heat of the Sun, breaks the Bag and
bursts out, as big as a Man's Head: And then as the Wind blows it is by degrees
driven away, a little at a time, out of the Bag that still hangs upon the
Stemb, and is scattered about the Fields; the Bag soon following the Cotton,
and the Stemb the Bag. Here is also a little of the right West India Cotton
Shrub; but none of the Cotton is exported, nor do they make much Cloth of it.

This Country produces great variety of fine Fruits, as very good Oranges of 3
or 4 sorts; (especially one sort of China Oranges;) Limes in abundance,
Pomgranets, Pomecitrons, Plantains, Bonano's, right Coco-nuts, Guava's,
Coco-plumbs, (called here Munsheroo's) Wild-Grapes, such as I have described
[Vol. II. Part 2. p. 46.] beside such Grapes as grow in Europe Here are also
Hog-plumbs, Custard-Apples, Sour-sops, Cashews, Papah's (called here Mamoons)
Jennipah's (called here Jenni-papah's) Manchineel-Apples and Mango's. Mango's
are yet but rare here: I saw none of them but in the Jesuit's Garden, which has
a great many fine Fruits, and some Cinamon-trees. These, both of them, were
first brought from the East Indies, and they thrive here very well: So do
Pumplemusses, brought also from thence; and both China and Sevil Oranges are
here very plentiful as well as good.

The Sour-sop (as we call it) is a large Fruit as big as a Man's Head, of a
long or oval Shape, and of a green Color; but one side is Yellowish when ripe.
The outside Rind or Coat is pretty thick, and very rough, with small sharp
Knobs; the inside is full of spungy Pulp, within which also are many black
Seeds or Kernels, in shape and bigness like a Pumkin-seed. The Pulp is very
juicy, of a pleasant Taste, and wholesome. You suck the Juice out of the Pulp,
and so spit it out. The Tree or Shrub that bears this Fruit grows about 10 or
12 Foot high, with a small short Body; the Branches growing pretty strait up;
for I did never see any of them spread abroad. The Twigs are slender and tough;
and so is the Stemb of the Fruit. This Fruit grows also both in the East and
West Indies.

The Cashew is a Fruit as big as a Pippin, pretty long, and bigger near the
Stemb than at the other end, growing tapering. The Rind is smooth and thin, of
a red and yellow Color. The Seed of this Fruit grows at the end of it; it is of
an Olive Color shaped like a Bean, and about the same bigness, but not
altogether so flat. The Tree is as big as an Apple tree, with Branches not
thick, yet spreading off. The Boughs are gross, the Leaves broad and round, and
in substance pretty thick. This Fruit is soft and spongy when ripe, and so full
of Juice that in biting it the Juice will run out on both sides of ones Mouths.
It is very pleasant, and gratefully rough on the Tongue; and is accounted a
very wholesome Fruit. This grows both in the East and West Indies, where I have
seen and eaten of it.

The Jenipah or Jenipapah is a sort of Fruit of the Calabash or Gourd-kind. It
is about the bigness of a Duck-Egg, and somewhat of an Oval Shape; and is of a
gray Color. The Shell is not altogether so thick nor hard as a Calabash: It Is
full of whitish Pulp mixed with small flat Seeds; and both Pulp and Seeds must
be taken into the Mouth, where sucking out the Pulp you spit out Seeds. It is
of a sharp and pleasing Taste, and is very innocent. The Tree that bears it is
much like an Ash, strait-bodied, and of a good height; clean from Limbs till
near the top, where there branches forth a small Head. The Rind is of a pale
gray, and so is the Fruit. We used of this Tree to make Helves or Handles for
Axes (for which it is very proper) in the Bay of Campeachy; where I have seen
of them, and no where else but here.

Beside these, here are many sorts of Fruits which I have not met with any
where but here; as Arisah's, Mericasah's, Petango's, etc. Arisah's are an
excellent Fruit, not much bigger than a large Cherry; shaped like a
Catherine-Pear, being small at the Stemb, and swelling bigger toward the end.
They are of a greenish color, and have small Seeds as big as Mustard-Seeds.
They are somewhat tart, yet pleasant, and very wholesome, and may be eaten by
sick People.

Mericasah's, are an excellent Fruit, of which there are two sorts; one growing
on a small Tree or Shrub, which is counted the best; the other growing on a
kind of Shrub like a Vine, which they plant about Arbours to make a shade,
having many broad Leaves. The Fruit is as big as a small Orange, round and
green. When they are ripe they are soft and fit to eat; full of white pulp mixed
thick with little black Seeds, and there is no separating one from the other,
till they are in your Mouth; when you suck in the white Pulp and spit out the
Stones. They are tart, pleasant, and very wholesome.

Petango's are a small red Fruit, that grow also on small Trees, and are as big
as Cherries, but not so Globular, having one flat side, and also 5 or 6 small
protulerant Ridges. It Is a very pleasant tart Fruit, and has a pretty large
flattish Stone in the middle.

Petumbo's, are a yellow Fruit (growing on a shrub like a Vine) bigger than
Cherries, with a pretty large Stone: These are sweet, but rough in the Mouth.

Mungaroo's, are a Fruit as big as Cherries, red on one side and white on the
other side: They are said to be full of small Seeds, which are commonly
swallowed in eating them.

Muckishaw's, are said to be a Fruit as big as Crab-Apples, growing on large
Trees. They have also small Seeds in the middle, and are well tasted.

Ingwa's, are a Fruit like the Locust-Fruit, 4 Inches long, and one broad. They
grow on high Trees.

Otee, is a Fruit as big as a large Coco-Nut. It has a Husk on the outside,
and a large Stone within, and is a accounted a very fine Fruit.

Musteran-de-ova's, are a round Fruit as big as large Hazel-Nuts, covered with
thin brittle shells of a blackish color: They have a small Stone in the
middle, enclosed within a black pulpy substance, which is of a pleasant taste.
The outside shell is chewed with the Fruit, and spit out with the Stone, when
the pulp is sucked from them. The Tree that bears this Fruit is tall, large,
and very hard Wood. I have not seen any of these five last named Fruits, but
had them thus described to me by an Irish Inhabitant of Bahia; though as to this
last, I am apt to believe, I may have both seen and eaten of them in Achin in
Sumatra.

Palm-Berries (called here Dendees) grow plentifully about Bahia; the largest
are as big as Wall-nuts; they grow in bunches on the top of the Body of the
Tree, among the Roots of the Branches or Leaves, as all Fruits of the Palm kind
do. These are the same kind of Berries or Nuts as those they make the Palm-Oyl
with on the Coast of Guinea, where they abound: And I was told that they make
Oil with them here also. They sometimes roast and eat them; but when I had one
roasted to prove it, I did not like it.

Physick-Nuts, as our Seamen call them, are called here Pineon; and Agnus
Castus is called here Carrepat: These both grow here: so do Mendibees, a Fruit
like Physick-Nuts. They scorch them in a Pan over the fire before they eat them.

Here are also great plenty of Cabbage-Trees, and other Fruits, which I did not
get information about, and which I had not the opportunity of seeing; because
this was not the Season, it being our Spring, and consequently their Autumn,
when their best Fruits were gone, though some were left. However I saw abundance
of wild Berries in the Woods and Field, but I could not learn their Names or
Nature.

They have withal good plenty of ground Fruit, as Callavances, Pine-Apples,
Pumkins, Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, Cucumbers; and Roots, as Yams, Potato's
Cassava's, etc. Garden Herbs also good store; as Cabbages, Turnips, Onions,
Leeks, and abundance of other Salading, and for the Pot. Drugs of several
sorts, viz. Sassafras, Snake-Root, etc. Beside the Woods I mentioned for Dying,
and other Uses, as Fustick, Speckled-wood, etc.

I brought home with me from hence a good number of Plants, dried between the
leaves of Books; of some of the choicest of which, that are not spoiled, I may
give a Specimen at the End of the Book.

Here are said to be great plenty and variety of Wild-Fowl, viz. Yemma's,
Maccaw's (which are called here Jackoo's, and are a larger sort of Parrots, and
scarcer) Parrots, Parakites, Flamingo's, Carrion-Crows, Chattering-Crows,
Cockrecoes, Bill-Birds finely painted, Corresoes, Doves, Pigeons, Jenetees,
Clocking-Hens, Crabcatchers, Galdens, Currecoo's, Moscovy Ducks, common Ducks,
Widgeons, Teal, Curlews, Men of War Birds, Booby's, Noddy's, Pelicans, etc.

The Yemma is bigger than a Swan, greyfeathered, with a long thick
sharp-pointed Bill.

The Carrion-Crow and Chattering-Crows, are called here Mackeraw's, and are
like those I described in the West Indies, [ Vol. II. Part II. p. 67.] The Bill
of the Chattering-Crow is black, and the Upper-Bill is round, bending downwards
like a Hawks-Bill, rising up in a ridge almost semicircular, and very sharp,
both at the Ridge or Convexity, and at the Point or Extremity: The Lower-Bill
is flat and shuts even with it. I was told by a Portegueze here, that their
Negro-Wenches make Love-Potions with these Birds. And the Portuguese care not
to let them have any of these Birds, to keep them from that Superstition: As I
found one Afternoon when I was in the Fields with a Padre and another, who shot
two of them, and hid them, as they said, for that reason. They are not good
Food, but their Bills are reckoned a good Antidote against Poison.

The Bill-Birds are so called by the English, from their monstrous Bills, which
are as big as their Bodies. I saw none of these Birds here, but saw several of
the Breasts flayed off and dried, for the beauty of them; the Feathers were
curiously colored with red, yellow, and Orange-colour.

The Curreso's (called here Mackeraw's) are such as are in the Bay of Campeachy
[Vol. 2. Part 2. p. 67.]

Turtle-Doves are in great plenty here; and two sorts of Wild Pigeons; the one
sort blackish, the other a light gray: The blackish or dark gray are the
bigger, being as large as our Wood-Quests, or Wood-Pigeons in England. Both
sorts are very good Meat; and are in such plenty from May till September, that
a Man may shoot 8 or 10 Dozen in several Shots at one standing, in a close
misty Morning, when they come to seed on Berries that grow in the Woods.

The Jenetee is a Bird as big as a Lark, with blackish Feathers, and yellow
Legs and Feet. It Is accounted very wholesome Food.

Clocking-Hens, are much like the Crabcatchers, which I have described [ Vol.
II. Part 2. p. 70.] but the Legs are not altogether so long. They keep always
in swampy wet places, though their Claws are like Land-Fowl's Claws. They make a
Noise or Cluck like our Brood-Hens, or Dunghil-Hens, when they have Chickens,
and for that reason they are called by the English Clocking Hens. There are
many of them in the Bay of Campeachy (though I omitted to speak of them there)
and elsewhere in the West Indies. There are both here and there four sorts of
these longleg'd Fowls, near akin to each other, as so many Sub-Species of the
same Kind; viz. Crab catchers, Clocking-Hens, Galdens (which three are in shape
and color like Herons in England, but less; the Galden, the biggest of the
three, the Crabcatcher the smallest;) and a fourth sort which are black, but
shaped like the other, having long Legs and short Tails; these are about the
bigness of Crab-catchers, and feed as they do.

Currecoos, are Water Fowls, as big as pretty large Chickens, of a bluish
color, with short Legs and Tail; they feed also in swampy Ground, and are very
good Meat. I have not seen of them elsewhere.

The Wild-Ducks here are said to be of two sorts, the Muscovy, and the
common-Ducks. In the wet Season here are abundance of them, but in the dry time
but few. Wigeon and Teal also are said to be in great plenty here in the wet
Season.

To the Southward of Bahia there are also Ostridges in great plenty, though, it is
said, they are not so large as those of Africa: They are found chiefly in the
Southern Parts of Brasil, especially among the large Savanahs near the River of
Plate; and from thence further South toward the Streights of Magellan.

As for Tame Fowl at Bahia, the chief beside their Ducks, are Dunghil-Fowls, os
which they have two sorts; one sort much of the size of our Cocks and Hens; the
other very large: and the Feathers of these last are a long time coming forth;
so that you see them very naked when half grown; but when they are full grown
and well feathered, they appear very large Fowls, as indeed they are; neither
do they want for price; for they are sold at Bahia sor half a Crown or three
Shillings apiece, just as they are brought first to Market out of the Country,
when they are so lean as to be scarce fit to Eat.

The Land Animals here are Horses, black Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Rabbits, Hogs,
Leopards, Tigers, Foxes, Monkeys, Pecary (a sort of wild Hogs, called here
Pica) Armadillo, Alligaters, Guano's (called Quittee) Lizards, Serpents, Toads,
Frogs, and a sort of Amphibious Creatures called by the Portuguese Cuchora's de
agua, in English Water-Dogs.

The Leopards and Tigers of this Country are said to be large and very fierce:
But here on the Coast they are either destroyed, or driven back toward the
heart of the Country; and therefore are seldom found but in the Borders and
Out-plantations, where they oftentimes do Mischief. Here are three or four
sorts of Monkeys, of different Sizes and Colors. One sort is very large; and
another sort is very small: These last are ugly in Shape and Feature, and have
a strong Scent of Musk.

Here are several sorts of Serpents, many of them vastly great, and most of
them very venomous: As the Rattle-snake for one: and for Venom, a small Green
Snake is bad enough, no bigger than the Stemb of a Tobacco-pipe, and about 18
Inches long, very common here.

They have here also the Amphisbaena, or Two-headed Snake, of a gray Color,
mixed with blackish Stripes, whose Bite is reckoned to be incurable. It Is said
to be blind, though it has two small Specks in each Head like Eyes: but whether
it sees or not I cannot tell. They say it lives like a Mole, mostly under
Ground; and that when it is found above Ground it is easily killed, because it
moves but slowly: Neither is its Sight (if it has any) so good as to discern
any one that comes near to Kill as few of these Creatures fly at a Man, or hurt
him but when he comes in their Way. It Is about 14 Inches long, and about the
bigness of the inner joint of a Man's middle Finger; being of one and the same
bigness from one end to the other, with a Head at each end, (as they said; for
I cannot vouch it, for one I had was cut short at one end) and both alike in
shape and bigness; and it is said to move with either Head foremost,
indifferently; whence it is called by the Portugueze, Cobra de dos Cabesas, the
Snake with two Heads.

The small black Snake is a very venomous Creature.

There is also a gray Snake, with red and brown Spots all over its Back. It Is
as big as a Man's Arm, and about 3 Foot long, and is said to be venomous. I saw
one of these.

Here are two sorts of very large Snakes or Serpents: One of 'em a Land-snake,
the other a Water-snake. The Land-snake is of a gray color, and about 18 or 20
Foot long: Not very Venomous, but Ravenous. I was promised the sight of one of
their Skins, but wanted opportunity.

The Water-snake is said to be near 30 Foot long. These live wholly in the
Water, either in large Rivers, or great Lakes, and prey upon any Creature that
comes within their reach, be it Man or Beast. They draw their Prey to them with
their Tails: for when they see any thing on the Banks of the River or Lake
where they lurk, they swing about their Tails 10 or 12 Foot over the Bank; and
whatever stands within their Sweep is snatched with great Violence into the
River, and drowned by them. Nay it is reported very credibly that if they see
only a shade of any Animal at all on the Water, they will flourish their Tails
to bring in the Man or Beast whose shade they see, and are oftentimes too
successful in it. Wherefore Men that have Business near any place where these
Water-Monsters are suspected to lurk, are always provided with a Gun, which
they often fire, and that scares them away, or keeps them quiet. They are said
to have great Heads, and strong Teeth about 6 Inches long. I was told by an
Irish Man who lived here, that his Wives Father was very near being taken by
one of them about the time of my first Arrival here, when his Father was with
him up in the Country: for the Beast flourisht his Tail for him, but came not
nigh enough by a yard or two; however it scared him sufficiently.

The Amphibious Creatures here which I said are called by the Portuguese
Cuchora's de Agua, or Water-dogs, are said to be as big as small Mastives, and
are all hairy and shaggy from Head to Tail. They have 4 short Legs, a pretty
long Head and short Tail; and are of a blackish color. They live in fresh
Water-ponds, and oftentimes come ashore and Sun themselves; but retire to the
Water if assaulted. They are eaten, and said to be good Food. Several of these
Creatures which I have now spoken of I have not seen, but informed my self
about them while I was here at Bahia, from sober and sensible Persons among the
Inhabitants, among whom I met with some that could speak English.

In the Sea upon this Coast there is great store and diversity of Fish, viz.
Jew-fish, for which there is a great Market at Bahia in Lent: Tarpom's,
Mullets, Groopers, Snooks, Gar-fish (called here Goolion's), Gorasses,
Barrama's, Coquinda's, Cavallie's, Cuchora's (or Dog-fish) Conger-Eeles,
Herrings (as I was told) the Serrew, the Olio de Boy, (I write and spell them
just as they were named to me) Whales, etc.

Here is also Shellfish (though in less plenty about Bahia than on other parts
of the Coast) viz. Lobsters, Craw-fish, Shrimps, Crabs, Oysters of the common
sort, Conchs, Wilks, Cockles, Muscles, Perriwinkles, etc. Here are three sorts
of Sea-Turtle, viz. Hawksbill, Loggerhead, and Green: but none of them are in
any esteem, neither Spaniards nor Portuguese loving them: Nay they have a great
Antipathy against them, and would much rather eat a Porpose, though our English
count the Green Turtle very extraordinary Food. The Reason that is commonly
given in the West Indies for the Spaniards not caring to eat of them, is the
fear they have lest being usually foul-bodied, and many of them pox'd (lying,
as they do, so promiscuously with their Negrines and other Sheslaves) they
should break out loathsomely like Lepers; which this sort of Food, it is said,
does much incline Men to do, searching the Body, and driving out any such gross
Humors: for which cause many of our English Valetudinarians have gone from
Jamaica (though there they have also Turtle) to the I. Caimanes, at the
Layingtime, to live wholly upon Turtle that then abound there; purposely to
have their Bodies scoured by this Food, and their Distempers driven out: and
have been said to have found many of them good Success in it. But this by the
way. The Hawksbill-Turtle on this Coast of Brazil is most sought after of any,
for its Shell, which by Report of those I have conversed with at Bahia, is the
clearest and best-clouded Tortoise-shell in the World. I had some of it shown
me, which was indeed as good as I ever saw. They get a pretty deal of it in
some Parts on this Coast; but it is very dear.

Besides this Port of Bahia de todos los Santos, there are two more principal
Ports on Brazil, where European Ships Trade, viz. Pernambuc and Ria Janeira;
and I was told that there go as many Ships to each of these Places as to Bahia,
and two Men of War to each Place for their Convoys. Of the other Ports in this
Country none is of greater Note than that of St. Paul's, where they gather much
Gold; but the Inhabitants are said to be a sort of Banditti, or loose People
that live under no Government: but their Gold brings them all sorts of
Commodities that they need, as Cloths, Arms, Ammunition, etc. The Town is said
to be large and strong.

CHAP. III.
The A.'s Stay and Business at Bahia: Of the Winds, and Seasons of the Year
there. His departure for N. Holland. C. Salvadore. The Winds on the Brasilian
Coast; and Abrohlo Shoal; Fish, and Birds: The Shear-water Bird, and Cooking of
Sharks. Excessive number of Birds about a dead Whale; of the Pintado-Bird, and
the Petrel, etc. Of a Bird that shows the C. of G. Hope to be near: of the
Seareckonings, and Variations: and a Table of all the Variations observed in
this Voyage. Occurrences near the Cape; and the A.'s passing by it. Of the
Westerly Winds beyond it: A Storm, and its Presages. The A.'s Course to N.
Holland; and Signs of approaching it. Another Abrohlo Shole and Storm, and the
A.'s Arrival on part of N. Holland. That part described; and Shark's Bay, where
he first Anchors. Of the Land there, Vegetables, Birds, etc. A particular sort
of Guano: Fish, and beautiful Shells; Turtle, large Shark, and Water-Serpents.
The A.'s removing to another part of N. Holland: Dolphins, Whales, and more
Sea-Serpents: and of a Passage or Straight suspected here: Of the Vegetables,
Birds, and Fish. He anchors on a third Part of N. Holland, and digs Wells, but
brackish. Of the Inhabitants there, the great Tides, the Vegetables and
Animals, etc.

MY stay here at Bahia was about a Month: during which time the Vice Roy of Goa
came hither from thence in a great Ship, said to be richly laden with all sorts
of India Goods; but she did not break Bulk here, being bound home for Lisbon:
only the Viceroy intended to refresh his Men (of whom he had lost many, and
most of the rest were very sickly, having been 4 Months in their Voyage hither)
and so to take in Water, and depart for Europe, in Company with the other
Portuguese Ships thither Bound; who had Orders to be ready to Sail by the
twentieth of May. He desired me to carry a Letter for him, directed to his
Successor, the new Viceroy of Goa: Which I did; sending it thither afterward
by Captain Hammond, whom I found near the Cape of Good Hope. The Refreshing my
Men, and taking in Water, was the main also of my Business here; beside the
having the better opportunity to compose the Disorders among my Crew: Which, as
I have before related, were grown to so great a Height, that they could not
without great Difficulty be appeased: However, finding Opportunity, during my
stay in this Place, to allay in some measure the Ferment that had been raised
among my Men, I now set my self to provide for the carrying on of my Voyage
with more Heart than before, and put all Hands to work, in order to it, as fast
as the backwardness of my Men would permit; who showed continually their
unwillingness to proceed farther. Besides, their Heads were generally filled
with strange Notions of Southerly Winds that were now setting in (and there had
been already some Flurries of them) which, as they surmiz'd, would hinder any
farther Attempts of going on to the Southward, so long as they should last.

The Winds begin to shift here in April and September, and the Seasons of the
Year (the Dry and the Wet) alter with them. In April the Southerly Winds make
their entrance on this Coast, bringing in the Wet Season, with violent
Tornado's, Thunder and Lightning, and much Rain. In September the other
Coasting Trade, at East North East comes in, and clears the Sky, bringing fair
Weather. This, as to the change of Wind, is what I have observed Vol. II. Part
3. p. 19. but as to the change of Weather accompanying it so exactly here at
Bahia, this is a particular Exception to what I have Experienced in all other
Places of South Latitudes that I have been in between the Tropicks, or those I
have heard of; for there the Dry Seasons sets in, in April, and the Wet about
October or November, sooner or later (as I have said that they are, in South
Latitudes, the Reverse of the Seasons, or Weather, in the same Months in N.
Latitudes Vol. II. Part 3. p. 77.) whereas on this Coast of Brazil, the Wet
Season comes in in April, at the same time that it does in N. Latitudes, and
the Dry (as I have said here) in September; the Rains here not lasting so far
in the year as in other Places: for in September the Weather is usually so
fair, that in the latter part of that Month they begin to cut their Sugarcanes
here, as I was told; for I enquired particularly about the Seasons: Though
this, as to the Season of cutting of Canes, which I was now assured to be in
September, agrees not very well with what I was formerly told [Vol. II. Part 3.
p. 82.] that in Brazil they cut the Canes in July. And so, as to what is said a
little lower in the same Page, that in managing their Canes they are not
confined to the Seasons, this ought to have been expressed only of Planting
them; for they never cut them but in the Dry Season.

But to return to the Southerly Winds, which came in (as I expected they would)
while I was here: These daunted my Ship's Company very much, though I had told
them they were to look for them: But they being ignorant as to what I told them
farther, that these were only Coasting-Winds, sweeping the Shore to about 40 or
50 Leagues in breadth from it; and imagining that they had blown so all the ^ea
over, between America and Africa; and being confirmed in this their Opinion by
the Portuguese Pilots of the European Ships, with whom several of my Officers
conversed much, and who were themselves as ignorant that these were only
Coasting Trade-Winds (themselves going away before them, in their return
homewards, till they cross the Line, and so having no experience of the Breadth
of them) being thus possessed with a Conceit that we could not Sail from hence
till September; this made them still the more remiss in their Duties, and very
listless to the getting Things in a readiness for our Departure. However I was
the more diligent my Self to have the Ship scrub'd, and to send my Water-Casks
ashore to get them trimmed, my Beer being now out. I went also to the Governor
to get my Water filled; sor here being but one Watering-place (and the Water
running low, now at the end of the Dry Season) it was always so crowded with
the European Ships Boats, who were preparing to be gone, that my Men could
seldom come nigh it, till the Governor very kindly sent an Officer to clear the
Water-place for my Men, and to stay there till my Wates-Casks were all full,
whom I satisfied sor his Pains. Here I also got Aboard 9 or 10 Tun of Ballast,
and made my Boatswain fit the Rigging that was amiss: and I enquired also of my
particular Officers whose Business it was, whether they wanted any Stores,
especially Pitch and Tar; for that here I would supply my self before I
proceeded any farther: but they say they had enough, though it did not afterward
prove so.

I commonly went ashore every day, either upon Business, or to recreate my self
in the Fields, which were very pleasant, and the more for a shower of Rain now
and then, that ushers in the Wet Season. Several sorts of good Fruits were also
still remaining, especially Oranges, which were in such plenty, that I and all
my Company stocked our selves for our Voyage with them, and they did us a great
kindness; and we took in also a good quantity of Rum and Sugar: But for Fowls,
they being here lean and dear, I was glad I had stockt my self at St. Jago. But
by the little care my Officers took for fresh Provisions, one might conclude,
they did not think of going much farther. Besides, I had like to have been
imbroiled with the Clergy here (of the Inquisition, as I suppose) and so my
Voyage might have been hindered. What was said to them of me, by some of my
Company that went ashore, I know not; but I was assured by a Merchant there,
that if they got me into their Clutches (and it seems, when I was last ashore
they had narrowly watched me) the Governor himself could not release me.
Besides I might either be murdered in the Streets, as he sent me word, or
Poisoned, if I came ashore any more; and therefore he advised me to stay
aboard. Indeed I had now no further Business ashore but to take leave of the
Governor, and therefore took his Advice.

Our Stay here was till the 23d of April. I would have gone before if I could
sooner have fitted my self; but was now earnest to be gone, because this
Harbor lies open to the S. and S. S. W. which are raging Winds here, and now
was the Season for them. We had had two or three Touches of them; and one
pretty severe: and the Ships ride there so near each other, that if a Cable
should fail, or an Anchor start, you are instantly aboard of one Ship or other:
and I was more afraid of being disabled here in Harbor by these blustering
Winds, than discouraged by them, as my People were, from prosecuting the
Voyage; for at present I even wished for a brisk Southerly Wind as soon as I
should be once well out of the Harbor, to set me the sooner into the True
General Trade-Wind.

The Tide of Flood being spent, and having a fine Land-Breez on the 23d. in the
Morning, I went away from the Anchoring-place before 'twas light; and then lay
by till Daylight that we might see the better how to go out of the Harbor. I
had a Pilot belonging to Mr. Cock who went out with me, to whom I gave three
Dollars; but I found I could as well have gone out my Self, by the Soundings I
made at coming in. The Wind was E. by N. and fair Weather. By 10 a Clock I was
got past all danger, and then sent away my Pilot. At 12 Cape Salvadore bore N.
distant 6 Leagues, and we had the Winds between the E. by N. and S. E. a
considerable time, so that we kept along near the Shore, commonly in sight of
it. The Southerly Blasts had now left us again; for they come at first in short
Flurries, and shift to other Points (for 10 or 12 days sometimes) before they
are quite set in: And we had uncertain Winds, between Sea and Land-Breezes, and
the Coasting-Trade, which was its self unsettled.

The Easterly-Winds at present made me doubt I should not weather a great Shoal
which lies in Lat. between 18 degrees. and 19 degrees. S. and runs a great way into the
Sea, directly from the Land, Easterly. Indeed the Weather was fair (and
continued so a good while) so that I might the better avoid any Danger from it:
and if the Wind came to the Southward I knew I could stretch off to Sea; so
that I jogged on courageously. The 27th of April we saw a small Brigantine
under the Shore plying to the Southward. We also saw many Men of War-birds and
Boobies, and abundance of Albicore-Fish. Having still fair Weather, small
Gales, and some Calms, I had the opportunity of trying the Current, which I
found to set sometimes Northerly and sometimes Southerly: and therefore knew I
was still within the Verge of the Tides. Being now in the Lat. of the Abrohlo
Shoals, which I expected to meet with, I sounded, and had Water lessening from
40 to 33. and so to 25 Fathom: but then it rose again to 33, 35, 37. etc. all
Coral Rocks. Whilst we were on this Shoal (which we crosst toward the further
part of it from Land, where it lay deep, and so was not dangerous) we caught a
great many Fish with Hook and Line; and by evening Amplitude we had 6 degrees. 38
min. East Variation. This was the 27th of April; we were then in Lat. 18 degrees.
13 min. S. and East Longitude from Cape Salvadore 31 min. On the 29th, being
then in Lat. 18 degrees. 39 min. S. we had small Gales from the W. N. W. to the W.
S. W. often shifting. The 30th we had the Winds from W. to S. S. E. Squals and
Rain: and we saw some Dolphins and other Fish about us. We were now out of
sight of Land, and had been so 4 or 5 Days: but the Wind's now hanging in the
South was an apparent Sign that we were still too nigh the Shore to receive the
True General East-Trade; as the Easterly Winds we had before showed that we
were too far off the Land to have the Benefit of the Coasting South-Trade: and
the faintness of both these Winds, and their often shifting from the S. S. W.
to the S. E. with Squalls, Rain and small Gales, were a Confirmation of our
being between the Verge of the S. Coasting-Trade, and that of the True Trade;
which is here, regularly, S. E.

The third of May being in Lat. 20 degrees. 00 min. and Merid. distance West from
Cape Salvadore 234 Miles, the Variation was 7 degrees. 00 min. We saw no Fowl but
Shear-waters, as our Seamen call them, being a small black Fowl that sweep the
Water as they fly, and are much in the Seas that lie without either of the
Tropicks: they are not eaten. We caught 3 small Sharks, each 6 Foot 4 Inches
long; and they were very good Food for us. The next day we caught 3 more Sharks
of the same size, and we eat them also, esteeming them as good Fish boiled and
presst, and then stewed with Vinegar and Pepper.

We had nothing of Remark from the 3d of May to the 10th, only now and then
seeing a small Whale spouting up the Water. We had the Wind Easterly, and we
ran with it to the Southward, running in this time from the Lat. of 20 degrees. 00
m. to 29 degrees. 5 min. S. and having, then, 7 d. 3 m. E. Long. from C. Salvadore;
the Variation increasing upon us, at present, notwithstanding we went East. We
had all along a great difference between the Morning and Evening Amplitudes;
usually a degree or two, and sometimes more. We were now in the True Trade, and
therefore made good way to the Southward, to get without the Verge of the
General Trade Wind into a Westerly Wind's way, that might carry us toward the
Cape of Good Hope. By the 12th of May, being in Lat. 31 degrees. 10 min. we began
to meet with Westerly Winds, which freshned on us, and did not leave us till a
little before we made the Cape. Sometimes it blew so hard that it put us under
a fore-course; especially in the Night: but in the daytime we had commonly our
Main Top-sail rist. We met with nothing of moment; only we past by a dead
Whale, and saw millions (as I may say) of Sea-Fowls about the Carcass (and as
far round about it as we could see) some Feeding, and the rest flying about, or
sitting on the Water, waiting to take their Turns. We first discovered the
Whale by the Fowls; for indeed I did never see so many Fowls at once in my Life
before, their Numbers being inconceivably great: They were of diverse sorts, in
Bigness, Shape and Color. Some were almost as big as Geese, of a gray Color,
with White Breasts, and with such Bills, Wings, and Tails. Some were Pintado
Birds, as big as Ducks, and speckled Black and White. Some were Shear-waters;
some Petrels; and there were several sorts of large Fowls. We saw of these
Birds, especially the Pintado-birds, all the Sea over from about 200 Leagues
distant from the Coast of Brazil, to within much the same distance of New
Holland. The Pintado is a Southern Bird, and of that Temperate Zone; for I
never saw of them much to the Norward of 30 degrees. S. The Pintado-bird is as big
as a Duck; but appears, as it flies, about the bigness of a tame Pigeon, having
a short Tail, but the Wings very long, as most Sea-Fowls have; especially such
as these that fly far from the Shore, and seldom come nigh it: for their
Resting is sitting afloat upon the Water; but they lay, I suppose, ashore.
There are three sorts of these Birds, all of the same make and bigness, and are
only different in Color. The first is black all over: The second sort are
gray, with white Bellies and Breasts. The third sort, which is the true
Pintado, or Painted-bird, is curiously spotted white and black. Their Heads,
and the tips of their Wings and Tails, are black for about an Inch; and their
Wings are also edged quite round with such a small black List: only within the
black on the tip of their Wings there is a white Spot seeming as they fly (for
then their Spots are best seen) as big as a Half-crown. All this is on the
outside of the Tails and Wings; and as there is a white Spot in the black Tip
of the Wings, so there is in the middle of the Wings which is white, a black
Spot; but this, toward the Back of the Bird, turns gradually to a dark gray.
The Back its self, from the Head to the Tip of the Tail, and the Edge of the
Wings next to the Back, are all over-spotted with fine small, round, white and
black Spots, as big as a Silver Twopence, and as close as they can stick one
by another: The Belly, Thighs, Sides, and inner part of the Wings are of a
light Gray. These Birds, of all these sorts, fly many together, never high, but
almost sweeping the Water. We shot one a while after on the Water in a Calm,
and a Water-Spaniel we had with us brought it in: I have given a Picture of it
[See Birds. Fig. 1.] but it was so damaged, that the Picture depictions of
birds F. 2. This very much resembles the Guarauna, described, and figured by
Piso. P. 123
F. 1. The Pintado Bird. P. 96
does not show it to advantage; and its Spots are best seen when the Feathers
are spread as it flies.

The Petrel is a Bird not much unlike a Swallow, but smaller, and with a
shorter Tail. It Is all over black, except a white Spot on the Rump. They fly
sweeping like Swallows, and very near the Water. They are not so often seen in
fair Weather; being Foul-weather Birds, as our Seamen call them, and presaging
a Storm when they come about a Ship; who for that Reason don't love to see
them. In a Storm they will hover close under the Ship's Stern, in the Wake of
the Ship (as it is called) or the smoothness which the Ship's passing has made
on the Sea: and there as they fly (gently then) they pat the Water alternately
with their Feet, as if they walked upon it; though still upon the Wing. And from
hence the Seamen give them the name of Petrels, in allusion to St. Peter's
walking upon the Lake of Gennesareth.

We also saw many Bunches of Seaweeds in the Lat. of 39. 32. and by Judgment,
near the Meridian of the Island Tristian d'Aconha: and then we had about 2 d.
20 min. East Variation; which was now again decreasing as we ran to the
Eastward, all near the Meridian of Ascension; where we found little or no
Variation: But from thence, as we ran farther to the East, our Variation
increased Westerly.

Two days before I made the Cape of G. Hope, my Variation was 7 degrees. 58 min.
West. I was then in 43 degrees. 27 min. East Longit. from C. Salvador, being in
Lat. 35 degrees. 30 min. this was the first of June. The second of June I saw a
large black Fowl, with a whitish flat Bill, fly by us; and took great notice of
it, because in the East India Waggoner, or Pilot-book, there is mention made of
large Fowls, as big as Ravens, with white flat Bills and black Feathers, that
fly not above 30 Leagues from the Cape, and are looked on as a Sign of ones
being near it. My Reckoning made me then think my self above 90 Leagues from
the Cape, according to the Longitude which the Cape has in the common
Sea-Charts: so that I was in some doubt, whether these were the right Fowls
spoken of in the Waggoner; or whether those Fowls might not fly farther off
Shore than is there mentioned; or whether, as it proved, I might not be nearer
the Cape than I reckoned my self to be: for I found, soon after, that I was not
then above 25 or 30 Leagues at most from the Cape. Whether the fault were in
the Charts laying down the Cape too much to the East from Brazil, or were
rather in our Reckoning, I could not tell: but our Reckonings are liable to
such Uncertainties from Steerage, Log, Currents, Half Minute-Glasses, and
sometimes want of Care, as in so long a Run cause often a difference of many
Leagues in the whole Account.

Most of my Men that kept Journals imputed it to the Half-Minute-glasses; and
indeed we had not a good Glass in the Ship beside the Half-watch or Two
Hour-Glasses. As for our Half-Minute-Glasses we tried them all at several
times, and we found those that we had used from Brazil as much too short, as
others we had used before were too long: which might well make great Errors in
those several Reckonings. A Ship ought therefore to have its Glasses very
exact: and besides, an extraordinary Care ought to be used in heaving the Log,
for fear of giving too much Stray-Line in a moderate Gale; and also to stop
quickly in a brisk Gale; for when a Ship runs 8, 9, or 10 Knots, half a Knot or
a Knot is soon run out, and not heeded: But to prevent danger, when a Man
thinks himself near Land, the best way is to look out betimes, and lie by in
the Night: for a Commander may err easily himself; beside the Errors of those
under him, though never so carefully eyed.

Another thing that stumbled me here was the Variation, which, at this time, by
the last Amplitude I had I found to be but ^ degrees. 58 min. W. whereas the
Variation at the Cape (from which I found my self not 30 Leagues distant) was
then computed, and truly, about 11 Degrees. or more: And yet a while after this,
when I was got 10 Leagues to the Eastward of the Cape, I found the Variation
but 10 Degrees. 40 Min. W. whereas it should have been rather more than at the
Cape. These Things, I confess, did puzzle me: neither was I fully satisfied as
to the Exactness of the taking the Variation at Sea: For in a great Sea, which
we often meet with, the Compass will traverse with the motion of the Ship;
besides the Ship may and will deviate somewhat in Steering, even by the best
Helmsmen: And then when you come to take an Azimuth, there is often some
difference between him that looks at the Compass, and the Man that takes the
Altitude height of the Sun; and a small Error in each, if the Error of both
should be one way, will make it wide of any great Exactness. But what was most
shocking to me, I found that the Variation did not always increase or decrease
in proportion to the Degrees of Longitude East or West; as I had a Notion they
might do to a certain Number of Degrees of Variation East or West, at such or
such particular Meridians. But finding in this Voyage that the Difference of
Variation did not bear a regular proportion to the difference of Longitude, I
was much pleased to see it thus Observed in a Scheme shown me after my Return
home, wherein are represented the several Variations in the Atlantic Sea, on
both sides the Equator; and there, the Line of no Variation in that Sea is not
a Meridian Line, but goes very oblique, as do those also which show the
Increase of Variation on each side of it. In that Draught there is so large an
Advance made as well toward the Accounting for those seemingly Irregular
Increases and Decreases of Variation toward the S. E. Coast of America, as
toward the fixing a general Scheme or System of the Variation every where,
which would be of such great Use in Navigation, that I cannot but hope that the
Ingenious Author, Capt. Halley, who to his profound Skill in all Theories of
these kinds, has added and is adding continually Personal Experiments, will
ever long oblige the World with a fuller Discovery of the Course of the
Variation, which has hitherto been a Secret. For my part I profess my self
unqualified for offering at any thing of a General Scheme; but since Matter of
Fact, and whatever increases the History of the Variation, may be of use
toward the settling or confirming the Theory of it, I shall here once for all
insert a Table of all the Variations I observed beyond the Equator in this
Voyage, both in going out, and returning back; and what Errors there may be in
it, I shall leave to be Corrected by the Observations of Others.

A Table of Variations.
D. M. D. M. D. M. S. Lat. Longit. Variat. 1699 Mar. 14 6 15 1 47 W. from St.
Jago.
3 27 E 21 12 45 12 9 3 27 Apr. 25 14 49 00 10 E. from C. Salvador in Brazil.
7 0 28 18 13 00 31 6 38 30 19 00 2 20 6 30 May 2 19 22 3 51 8 15 3 20 1 3 40 7
0 5 22 47 3 48 9 40 6 24 23 3 53 7 36 7 25 44 3 53 10 15 8 26 47 4 35 7 14 9 28
9 5 50 9 45 10 29 5 7 3 11 41 11 29 23 7 38 12 47 17 34 58 18 43 5 40 18 34 54
19 06 6 19 19 35 48 19 45 5 6 23 39 42 27 1 2 55 25 39 11 31 35 2 0 June 1 35
30 43 27 7 58 W 5 35 8 00 23 E. from C. G. Hope.
10 40 W 6 36 7 3 6 11 10 8 36 17 10 3 15 00 9 35 59 12 0 19 38 12 35 20 20 18
21 35 14 35 5 26 13 23 50 15 34 51 29 24 25 56 17 34 27 36 8 24 54 19 34 17 39
24 25 29 20 34 15 42 25 24 22 22 33 34 45 41 22 15 25 35 8 45 28 24 30 28 36 40
49 33 22 50 29 36 40 53 12 22 44 30 36 15 56 22 21 40 July 1 35 35 58 44 19 45
4 33 32 66 22 16 40 6 31 30 68 34 12 20 7 31 45 69 00 12 2 10 32 39 70 21 13 36
11 33 4 72 00 12 29 13 31 17 74 43 10 0 15 29 20 75 25 10 28 18 28 16 78 29 9
51 23 26 43 84 19 9 11 24 26 28 85 20 8 9 25 26 14 85 52 8 40 26 25 36 80 21 8
20 27 26 43 86 16 7 0 W 29 27 38 87 25 8 20 31 26 54 88 1 9 0 Aug. 5 25 30 86 3
7 24 15 24 41 86 2 E. from Sharks-Bay in N. Holland.
6 6 17 23 2 00 22 7 6 20 19 37 3 00 7 00 24 19 52 4 41 7 7 25 19 45 5 10 6 40
27 19 24 6 11 5 18 28 18 38 6 57 6 12 Sept. 6 17 16 9 18 4 3 7 16 9 8 57 2 7 8
15 37 9 34 2 20 10 13 55 10 55 1 47 11 13 12 11 42 1 47 Dec. 29 5 1 6 34 E.
from Babao-Bay in I. Timor.
1 2 E 1700. Jan. 3 1 32 6 53 4 8 Feb. 13 0 9 2 48 E. from C. Maba in N. Guinea.
4 0 16 0 12 7 31 6 26 21 0 12 15 23 8 45 23 0 43 18 00 8 45 27 2 43 19 41 9 50
Mar. 10 5 10 00 5 E. from C. St. George on I. N. Britannia.
1 0 13 5 35 00 44 W. from ditto.
9 0 30 5 15 6 4 8 25 W Apr. 6 3 32 8 25 7 16 22 1 32 00 37 W. from C. Maba.
3 00 W May 1 3 00 At Anchor off I. Ceram.
2 15 E 24 9 59 00 25 W. from Babao-Bay.
0 15 W 27 14 33 3 30 1 25 June 2 19 44 8 7 5 38 3 19 51 9 58 6 10 4 19 46 11 6
6 20 5 20 00 12 22 4 58 6 20 00 14 17 7 20 9 19 59 16 01 6 32 11 19 57 17 42 8
1 12 19 48 19 0 6 0 Nov. 7 21 26 W. from Princes Isle by Java-Head.
9 0 14 27 1 35 35 16 50 15 27 10 36 34 18 57 16 27 11 37 54 17 24 19 28 14 41
40 19 39 21 29 24 44 47 20 50 23 29 42 47 34 21 38 24 30 16 49 26 26 00 25 30
40 51 24 22 38 27 31 51 55 5 22 40 29 32 55 56 28 27 10 30 31 55 57 25 27 10
Dec. 1 31 57 58 17 24 30 2 31 57 59 33 27 57 4 32 3 61 45 24 50 6 32 15 66 00
23 30 W 7 37 28 68 36 24 48 8 33 49 64 38 21 53 9 32 49 70 09 24 00 11 32 50 71
45 21 15 13 31 55 72 32 20 16 14 31 35 73 39 20 00 15 32 21 75 22 20 00 17 33 5
79 39 18 42 18 33 0 80 39 17 15 21 34 39 82 46 16 41 22 34 36 83 19 14 36 23 34
21 83 42 14 00 25 34 38 84 21 14 00 1701. Jan. 15 31 25 2 32 W. from the
Table-Land at C. G. Hope.
10 20 16 30 5 4 42 9 36 17 28 46 6 8 8 25 18 27 26 7 32 7 40 19 26 11 9 9 7 30
20 25 00 10 49 7 9 21 23 42 12 34 6 55 22 22 51 14 10 5 56 23 21 48 15 17 5 32
24 21 24 15 51 4 56 36 19 57 16 48 4 20 27 19 10 17 22 3 24 28 18 13 18 23 4 00
29 17 22 19 29 2 00 Feb. 16 12 52 3 8 W. from Santa Helena.
1 50 W 17 11 55 4 42 1 10 18 11 17 5 30 0 20 19 10 22 6 32 1 10 21 We made the
I. Ascension.

But to return from this Digression: Having fair Weather, and the Winds hanging
Southerly, I jog'd on to the Eastward, to make the Cape. On the third of June
we saw a Sail to Leeward of us, showing English Colors. I bore away to speak
with her, and found her to be the Antelope of London, commanded by Captain
Hammond, and bound for the Bay of Bengal in the Service of the New-East-India
Company. There were many Passengers aboard, going to settle there under Sir
Edward Littleton, who was going Chief thither: I went aboard, and was known by
Sir Edward, and Mr. Hedges, and kindly received and treated by them and the
Commander; who had been afraid of us before, though I had sent one of my Officers
aboard. They had been in at the Cape, and came from thence the Day before,
having stockt themselves with Refreshments. They told me that they were by
Reckoning, 60 Miles to the West of the Cape. While I was aboard them, a fine
small Westerly Wind sprang up; therefore I shortened my stay with them, because
I did not design to go in to the Cape. When I took leave I was presented with
half a Mutton, 12 Cabbages, 12 Pumkins, 6 Pound of Butter, 6 Couple of
Stockfish, and a quantity of Parsnips; sending them some Oatmeal, which they
wanted.

From my first setting out from England, I did not design to touch at the Cape;
and that was one Reason why I touched at Brazil, that there I might refresh my
Men, and prepare them for a long Run to New Holland. We had not yet seen the
Land; but about 2 in the Afternoon we saw the Cape-Land bearing East, at above
16 Leagues distance: And Captain Hammond being also bound to double the Cape,
we jog'd on together this Afternoon and the next Day, and had several fair
Sights of it; which may be seen [ Table III. No. 6. 7. 8.]

To proceed, having still a Westerly Wind, I jog'd on in company with the
Antelope, till Sunday June the 4th at 4 in the Afternoon, when we parted; they
steering away for the East Indies, and I keeping an E. S. E. Course, the better
to make my way for New Holland: For though New Holland lies North-Easterly from
the Cape, yet all Ships bound toward that Coast, or the Streights of Sundy,
ought to keep for a while in the same Parallel, or in a Lat. between 35 and 40.
at least a little to the S. of the East, that they may continue in a variable
Winds way; and not venture too soon to stand so far to the North, as to be
within the verge of the Trade-Wind, which will put them by their Easterly
Course. The Wind increased upon us; but we had yet sight of the Antelope, and
of the Land too, till Tuesday the 6th of June: And then we saw also by us an
inumerable Company of Fowls of diverse sorts; so that we looked about to see if
there were not another dead Whale, but saw none.

The Night before, the Sun set in a black Cloud, which appeared just like Land;
and the Clouds above it were gilded of a dark red Color. And on the Tuesday,
as the Sun drew near the Horizon, the Clouds were gilded very prettily to the
Eye, though at the same time my Mind dreaded the Consequences of it. When the Sun
was now not above 2 degrees. high, it entered into a dark smoaky-coloured Cloud
that lay parallel with the Horizon, from whence presently seemed to issue many
dusky blackish Beams. The Sky was at this time covered with small hard Clouds
(as we call such as lie scattering about, not likely to Rain) very thick one by
another; and such of them as lay next to the Bank of Clouds at the Horizon,
were of a pure Gold color to 3 or 4 degrees. high above the Bank: From these to
about 10 degrees. high they were redder, and very bright; above them they were of a
darker Color still, to about 60 or 70 degrees. high; where the Clouds began to be
of their common Color. I took the more particular Notice of all this, because
I have generally observed such colored Clouds to appear before an approaching
Storm: And this being Winter here, and the time for bad Weather, I expected and
provided for a violent Blast of Wind, by riffing our Topsails, and giving a
strict charge to my Officers to hand them or take them in, if the Wind should
grow stronger. The Wind was now at W. N. W. a very brisk Gale. About 12 a Clock
at Night we had a pale whitish Glare in the N. W. which was another Sign, and
intimated the Storm to be near at hand; and the Wind increasing upon it, we
presently handed our Topsails, furled the Mainsail, and went away only with our
Foresail. Before 2 in the Morning it came on very fierce, and we kept right
before Wind and Sea, the Wind still increasing: But the Ship was very
governable, and Steered incomparably well. At 8 in the Morning we settled our
Fore-Yard, lowering it 4 or 5 Foot, and we ran very swiftly; especially when
the Squals of Rain or Hail, from a black Cloud, came over head, for then it
blew excessive hard. These, though they did not last long, yet came very thick
and fast one after another. The Sea also ran very high: But we running so
violently before Wind and Sea, we Shipped little or no Water; though a little washed
into our upper Deck-Ports; and with it a Scuttle or Cuttle-Fish was cast upon
the Carriage of a Gun.

The Wind blew extraordinary hard all Wednesday, the 7th of June, but abated of
its fierceness before Night: Yet it continued a brisk Gale till about the 16th,
and still a moderate one till the 19th Day; by which time we had run about 600
Leagues: For the most part of which time the Wind was in some point of the
West, viz. from the W. N. W. to the S. by W. It blew hardest when at W. or
between the W. and S. W. but after it veered more Southerly the foul Weather
broke up: This I observed at other times also in these Seas, that when the
Storms at West veered to the Southward they grew less; and that when the Wind
came to the E. of the S. we had still smaller Gales, Calms, and fair Weather.
As for the Westerly Winds on that side the Cape, we like them never the worse
for being violent, for they drive us the faster to the Eastward; and are
therefore the only Winds coveted by those who sail toward such parts of the
East Indies, as lie South of the Equator; as Timor, Java, and Sumatra; and by
the Ships bound for China, or any other that are to pass through the Streights
of Sundy. Those Ships having once past the Cape, keep commonly pretty far
Southerly, on purpose to meet with these West Winds, which in the Winter Season
of these Climates they soon meet with; for then the Winds are generally
Westerly at the Cape, and especially to the Southward of it: But in their
Summer Months they get to the Southward of 40 degrees. usually ever they meet with
the Westerly Winds. I was not at this time in a higher Lat. than 36 degrees. 40
min. and oftentimes was more Northerly, altering my Latitude often as Winds and
Weather required; for in such long Runs it is best to shape ones Course
according to the Winds. And if in Steering to the East, we should be obliged to
bear a little to the N. or S. of it, it is no great matter; for it is but Sailing
2 or 3 Points from the Wind, when it is either Northerly or Southerly; and this
not only eases the Ship from straining, but shortens the way more than if a
Ship was kept close on a Wind, as some Men are fond of doing.

The 19th of June we were in Lat. 34 degrees. 17 min. S. and Long. from the Cape 39
degrees. 24 min. E. and had small Gales and Calms. The Winds were at N. E. by E.
and continued in some part of the E. till the 27th Day. When it having been
some time at N. N. E. it came about at N. and then to the W. of the N. and
continued in the West-board (between the N. N. W. and S. S. W.) till the 4th of
July; in which time we ran 782 Miles; then the Winds came about again to the
East, we reckoning our selves to be in a Meridian 1100 L. East of that of the
Cape; and having fair Weather sounded, but had no Ground.

We met with little of Remark in this Voyage, besides being accompanied with
Fowls all the way, especially Pintado-Birds, and seeing now and then a Whale:
But as we drew nigher the Coast of New-Holland, we saw frequently 3 or 4 Whales
together. When we were about 90 Leagues from the Land we began to see
Sea-weeds, all of one sort; and as we drew nigher the Shore we saw them more
frequently. At about 30 Leagues distance we began to see some Scutle-bones
floating on the Water; and drawing still nigher the Land we saw greater
quantities of them.

July the 25th being in Lat. 26 degrees. 14 min. S. and Longitude E. from the C. of
G. Hope 85 degrees. 52 min. we saw a large Garfish leap 4 times by us, which seemed
to be as big as a Porpose. It was now very fair Weather, and the Sea was full
of a sort of very small Grass or Moss, which as it floated in the Water seemed
to have been some Spawn of Fish; and there was among it some small Fry. The
next Day the Sea was full of small round things like Pearl, some as big as
white Peace; they were very Clear and Transparent, and upon crushing any of them
a drop of Water would come forth: The Skin that contained the Water was so thin
that it was but just deseernable. Some Weeds swam by us, so that we did not
doubt but we should quickly see Land. On the 27th also, some Weeds swam by us,
and the Birds that had flown along with us all the way almost from Brazil, now
left us, except only 2 or 3 Shear-waters. On the 28th we saw many Weeds swim by
us, and some Whales, blowing. On the 29th we had dark cloudy Weather, with much
Thunder, Lightning, and violent Rains in the Morning: But in the Evening it
grew fair. We saw this Day a Scutle-bone swim by us, and some of our young Men
a Seal, as it should seem by their Description of its Head. I saw also some
Boneta's, and some Skipjacks, a Fish about 8 Inches long, broad and sizable,
not much unlike a Roach; which our Seamen call so from their leaping about.

The 30th of July, being still nearer the Land, we saw abundance of
Scutle-bones and Sea-weed, more Tokens that we were not far from it; and saw
also a sort of Fowls the like of which we had not seen in the whole Voyage, all
the other Fowls having now left us. These were as big as Lapwings; of a gray
Color, black about their Eyes, with red sharp Bills, long Wings, their Tails
long and forked like Swallows; and they flew flapping their Wings like
Lapwings. In the Afternoon we met with a Ripling like a Tide or Current, or the
Water of some Shole or Overfal; but were past it before we could sound. The
Birds last mentioned and this were further Signs of Land. In the Evening we had
fair Weather, and a small Gale at West. At 8 a Clock we sounded again; but had
no Ground.

We kept on still to the Eastward, with an easy Sail, looking out sharp: for by
the many Signs we had, I did expect that we were near the Land. At 12 a Clock
in the Night I sounded, and had 45 Fathom, course Sand and small white Shells.
I presently clapped on a Wind and stood to the South, with the Wind at W. because
I thought we were to the South of a Shoal called the Abrohles (an Appellative
Name for Shoals, as it seems to me) which in a Draught I had of that Coast is
laid down in 27 degrees. 28 min. Lat. stretching about 7 Leagues into the Sea. I
was the Day before in 27 degrees. 38 min. by Reckoning. And afterward steering E.
by S. purposely to avoid it, I thought I must have been to the South of it: but
sounding again, at One a Clock in the Morning, Aug. the first, we had but 25
Fathom, Coral-Rocks; and so found the Shoal was to the South of us. We
presently tackt again, and stood to the North, and then soon deepned our Water;
for at two in the Morning we had 26 Fathom Coral still: At three we had 28
Coral-ground: At 4 we had 30 Fathom, course Sand, with some Coral: At
depictions of New Holland [Australia] Table IV. New Holland No. 1. N. Holland,
from Topmast head in ye Lat: 27 D. 30 M. S. at these Bearings did: 10 L. No.
2. N. Holland, the same Coast from 8 L. did: Lat: 27 D. 28 M. S No. 3. N.
Holland, at 5 L. did: in Lat: 26-46 S. No. 4. N. Holland, at 6 L. did: in
Lat: 26-35 S. No. 5. N. Holland, from Lat: 26-10. 8 L. from ye White Hills No.
6. Part of New HOLLAND No. 7. This white hill did: 7 L. Lat: 23-5. No. 8. This
Head shows thus in Lat: 20-20. did. 4 ^ No. 9. This Head-land is only an
Is It: maeks thus at these bearing L. 20-21. d. 6 L. No. 10. Thus shows ye Head
and Pt. of ye other Is It: yt makes to ye N. ward did: from ye Head 5 L.

5 we had 45 Fathom, course Sand and Shells; being now off the Shole, as
appeared by the Sand and Shells, and by having left the Coral. By all this I
knew we had fallen in to the North of the Shole, and that it was laid down
wrong in my Sea-Chart: for I found it lie in about 27 degrees. Lat. and by our Run
in the next day, I found that the Outward-edge of it, which I sounded on, lies
16 Leagues off Shore. When it was day we steered in E. N. E. with a fine brisk
Gale; but did not see the Land till 9 in the Morning, when we saw it from our
Topmast-head, and were distant from it about 10 Leagues; having then 40
Fathom-water, and clean Sand. About 3 Hours after we saw it on our
Quarter Deck, being by Judgment about 6 Leagues off: and we had then 40 Fathom,
clean Sand. As we ran in, this day and the next, we took several Sights of it,
at different Bearings and Distances; from which it appeared as you see in [
Table IV. No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.] And here I would Note once for all, That the
Latitudes marked in the Draughts, or Sights here given, are not the Latitude of
the Land, but of the Ship when the Sight was taken. This Morning, August the
first, as we were standing in we saw several large Sea-fowls, like our Gannets
on the Coast of England, flying three or four together; and a sort of white
Sea-Mews, but black about the Eyes, and with forked Tails. We strove to run in
near the Shore to seek for a Harbor to refresh us after our tedious Voyage;
having made one continued stretch from Brazil hither of about 114 Degrees.;
designing from hence also to begin the Discovery I had a mind to make on N.
Holland and N. Guinea. The Land was low, and appeared even, and as we drew
nearer to it, it made (as you see in Table IV. No. 3, 4, 5.) with some red and
some white Clifts; these last in Lat. 26. 10 S. where you will find 54 Fathom,
within four Miles of the Shore.

About the Lat. of 26 degrees. S. we saw an Opening, and ran in, hoping to find a
Harbor there: but when we came to its Mouth, which was about two Leagues wide,
we saw Rocks and foul Ground within, and therefore stood out again: There we
had 20 Fathom-water within two mile of the Shore. The Land every where appeared
pretty low, flat and even; but with steep Cliffs to the Sea; and when we came
near it there were no Trees, Shrubs or Grass to be seen. The Soundings in the
Lat. of 26 degrees. S. from about 8 or 9 Leagues off till you come within a League
of the Shore, are generally about 40 Fathom; differing but little, seldom above
three or four Fathom. But the Lead brings up very different sorts of Sand, some
course, some fine; and of several Colors, as Yellow, White, Gray, Brown,
Bluish and Reddish.

When I saw there was no Harbor here, nor good Anchoring, I stood off to Sea
again, in the Evening of the second of August, fearing a Storm on a Lee-shore,
in a place where there was no shelter, and desiring at least to have Sea-Room:
For the Clouds began to grow thick in the Western-board, and the Wind was
already there, and began to blow fresh almost upon the Shore; which at this
Place lies along N. N. W. and S. S. E. By Nine a Clock at Night we had got a
pretty good Offin; but the Wind still increasing, I took in my Main Top-sail,
being able to carry no more Sail than two Courses and the Mizen. At two in the
Morning, Aug. 3. it blew very hard, and the Sea was much raised; so that I
furled all my Sails but my Main-sail. Though the Wind blew so hard, we had yet
pretty clear Weather till Noon: But then the whole Sky was blackned with thick
Clouds, and we had some Rain, which would last a quarter of an hour at a time,
and then it would blow very fierce while the Squals of Rain were over our
Heads; but as soon as they were gone the Wind was by much abated, the stress of
the Storm being over. We sounded several times, but had no Ground till 8 a
Clock Aug. the 4th. in the Evening; and then had 60 Fathom-water, Coralground.
At Ten we had 56 Fathom fine Sand. At Twelve we had 55 Fathom, fine Sand, of a
pale, bluish Color. It was now pretty moderate Weather; yet I made no Sail
till Morning: but then, the Wind veering about to the S. W. I made Sail and
stood to the North: And at 11 a Clock the next day, Aug. 5. we saw Land again,
at about 10 Leagues distance. This Noon we were in Lat. 25 degrees. 30 min. and in
the Afternoon our Cook died, an Old Man, who had been sick a great while, being
infirm before we came out of England.

The 6th of August in the Morning we saw an Opening in the Land, and we ran in
to it and anchored in seven and a half Fathom-water, 2 miles from the Shore,
clean Sand. It was somewhat difficult getting in here, by reason of many Shoals
we met with: But I sent my Boat sounding before me. The Mouth of this Sound,
which I called Shark's Bay, lies in about 25 degrees. S. Lat. and our Reckoning
made its Longitude from the C. of Good Hope to be about 87 Degrees; which is
less by 195 Leagues than is usually laid down in our common Draughts, if our
Reckoning was right, and our Glasses did not deceive us. As soon as I came to
anchor in this Bay (of which I have given a Plan, Table IV. No. 6.) I sent my
Boat ashore to seek for fresh Water: But in the Evening my Men returned, having
found none. The next morning I went ashore my self, carrying Pick-axes and
Shovels with me, to dig for Water; and Axes to cut Wood. We tried in several
places for Water, but finding none after several Trials, nor in several miles
compass, we left any farther search for it, and spending the rest of the day in
cutting Wood, we went aboard at Night.

The Land is of an indifferent height, so that it may be seen 9 or 10 Leagues
off. It appears at a distance very even; but as you come nigher you find there
are many gentle Risings, though none steep nor high. It Is all a steep Shore
against the open Sea: but in this Bay or Sound we were now in, the Land is low
by the Seaside, rising gradually in within the Land. The Mould is Sand by the
Seaside, producing a large sort of Sampier, which bears a white Flower.
Farther in, the Mould is reddish, a sort of Sand producing some Grass, Plants,
and Shrubs. The Grass grows in great Tufts, as big as a Bushel, here and there
a Tuft: being intermixed with much Heath, much of the kind we have growing on
our Commons in England. Of Trees or Shrubs here are diverse sorts; but none
above ten Foot high: Their Bodies about 3 Foot about, and 5 or 6 Foot high
before you come to the Branches, which are bushy and composed of small Twigs
there spreading abroad, though thick set, and full of Leaves; which were mostly
long and narrow. The Color of the Leaves was on one side Whitish, and on the
other Green: and the Bark of the Trees was generally of the same Color with
the Leaves, of a pale Green. Some of these Trees were sweetscented, and reddish
within the Bark, like Sassafras, but redder. Most of the Trees and Shrubs had
at this time either Blossoms or Berries on them. The Blossoms of the different
sort of Trees were of several Colors, as Red, White, Yellow, etc. but mostly
Blue: and these generally smelt very sweet and fragrant, as did some also of
the rest. There were also beside some Plants, Herbs, and tall Flowers, some
very small Flowers, growing on the Ground, that were sweet and beautiful, and
for the most part unlike any I had seen elsewhere.

There were but few Land-Fowls: we saw none but Eagles, of the larger sorts of
Birds; but 5 or 6 sorts of small Birds. The biggest sort of these were not
bigger than Larks; some no bigger than Wrens, all depictions of birds F. 3. The
head and greatest part of ye neck of this bird is red. and therein differs from
the Avosetta of Italy.
F. 5. A noddy of N. Holland. P. 123
F. 6. A Common Noddy. P. ^
F. 4. The Bill and Legs of this Bird are of a Bright R^
singing with great variety of fine shrill Notes; and we saw some of their
Nests with young Ones in them. The Water-Fowls are Ducks, (which had young Ones
now, this being the beginning of the Spring in these Parts;) Curlews, Galdens,
Crabcatchers, Cormorants, Gulls, Pelicans; and some Waterfowl, such as I have
not seen any where besides. I have given the Pictures of 4 several Birds on
this Coast. [See Birds: Fig. 2, 3, 4, 5.]

The Land-Animals that we saw here were only a sort of Raccoons, different from
those of the West Indies, chiefly as to their Legs; for these have very short
fore Legs; but go Jumping upon them as the others do, and like them are very
good Meat:) and a sort of Guano's, of the same shape and size with other
Guano's, described [Vol. I. p. 57.] but differing from them in three remarkable
Particulars: For these had a larger and uglier Head; and had no Tail: And at
the Rump, instead of the Tail there, they had a stump of a Tail, which appeared
like another Head; but not really such, being without Mouth or Eyes: Yet this
Creature seemed by this means to have a Head at each end; and, which may be
reckoned a fourth difference, the Legs also seemed all four of them to be
Forelegs, being all alike in shape and length, and seeming by the Joints and
Bending to be made as if they were to go indifferently either Head or Tail
foremost. They were speckled black and yellow like Toads, and had Scales or
Knobs on their Backs like those of Crocodiles, plated on to the Skin, or stuck
into it, as part of the Skin. They are very slow. in motion; and when a Man
comes nigh them they will stand still and hiss, not endeavoring to get away.
Their Livers are also spotted black and yellow: and the Body when opened has a
very unsavory Smell. I did never see such ugly Creatures any where but here.
The Guano's I have observed to be very good Meat: and I have often eaten of
them with pleasure: But though I have eaten of Snakes, Crocodiles and Allegators,
and many Creatures that look frightfully enough, and there are but few I should
have been afraid to eat of if pressed by Hunger, yet I think my Stomach would
scarce have served to venture upon these N. Holland Guano's, both the Looks and
the Smell of them being so offensive.

The Seafish that we saw here (for here was no River, Land or Pond of Fresh
Water to be seen) are chiefly Sharks. There are abundance of them in this
particular Sound, that I therefore gave it the Name of Shark's Bay. Here are
also Skates Thornbacks, and other Fish of the Ray kind; (one sort especially
like the Sea-Devil) and Garfish, Boneta's, etc. Of Shellfish we got here
Muscles, Periwinkles, Limpits, Oysters, both of the Pearlkind and also
Eating-Oysters, as well the common sort as long Oysters; beside Cockles, etc.
The Shore was lined thick with many other sorts of very strange and beautiful
Shells, for variety of Color and Shape, most finely spotted with Red, Black,
or Yellow, etc. such as I have not seen any where but at this place. I brought
away a great many of them; but lost all, except a very few, and those not of
the best.

There are also some green Turtle weighing about 200 lb. Of these we caught 2
which the Water Ebbing had left behind a Ledge of Rock, which they could not
creep over. These served all my Company 2 Days; and they were indifferent sweet
Meat. Of the Sharks we caught a great many, which our Men eat very savourily.
Among them we caught one which was 11 Foot long. The space between its 2 Eyes
was 20 Inches, and 18 Inches from one Corner of his Mouth to the other. Its Maw
was like a Leather Sack, very thick, and so tough that a sharp Knife could
scarce cut it: In which we found the Head and Boans of a Hippopotomus; the
hairy Lips of which were still sound and not putrified, and the Jaw was also
firm, out of which we plucked a great many Teeth, 2 of them 8 Inches long, and
as big as a Man's Thumb, small at one end, and a little crooked; the rest not
above half so long. The Maw was full of Jelly which stank extremely: However I
saved for a while the Teeth and the Sharks Jaw: The Flesh of it was divided
among my Men; and they took care that no waste should be made of it.

'Twas the 7th of August when we came into Shark's-Bay; in which we Anchored at
three several Places, and stayed at the first of them (on the W. side of the
Bay) till the 11th. During which time we searched about, as I said, for fresh
Water, digging Wells, but to no purpose. However, we cut good store of
Firewood at this first Anchoring-place; and my Company were all here very well
refreshed with Raccoons, Turtle, Shark and other Fish, and some Fowls; so that
we were now all much brisker than when we came in hither. Yet still I was for
standing farther into the Bay, partly because I had a Mind to increase my stock
of fresh Water, which was began to be low; and partly for the sake of
Discovering this part of the Coast. I was invited to go further, by seeing from
this Anchoring-place all open before me^ which therefore I designed to search
before I left the Bay. So on the 11th about Noon^ I steered farther in, with an
easy Sail, because we had but shallow Water: We kept therefore good looking
out for fear of Sholes; sometimes shortning, sometimes deepning the Water.
About 2 in the Afternoon we saw the Land a Head that makes the S. of the Bay,
and before Night we had again Sholdings from that Shore: And therefore shortened
Sail and stood off and on all Night, under 2 Topsails, continually sounding,
having never more then 10 Fathom, and seldom less than 7. The Water deepned and
sholdned so very gently, that in heaving the Lead 5 or 6 times we should scarce
have a Foot difference. When we came into 7 Fathom either way, we presently
went about. From this S. part of the Bay, we could not see the Land from whence
we came in the Afternoon: And this Land we found to be an Island of 3 or 4
Leagues long, as is seen in the Plain, [Table IV. No. 6.] but it appearing
barren, I did not strive to go nearer it; and the rather because the Winds
would not permit us to do it without much Trouble, and at the Openings the
Water was generally Shole. I therefore made no farther attempts in this S. W.
and S. part of the Bay, but steered away to the Eastward, to see if there was
any Land that way, for as yet we had seen none there. On the 12th in the
Morning we passed by the N. Point of that Land, and were confirmed in the
Persuasion of its being an Island, by seeing an Opening to the East of it, as
we had done on the W. Having fair Weather, a small Gale and smooth Water, we
stood further on in the Bay, to see what Land was on the E. of it. Our
Soundings at first were 7 Fathom, which held so a great while, but at length it
decreased to 6. Then we saw the Land right ahead, that in the Plan makes the
E. of the Bay. We could not come near it with the Ship, having but Shole water:
and it being dangerous lying there, and the Land extraordinarily low, very
unlikely to have fresh Water (though it had a few Trees on it, seemingly
Mangroves) and much of it probably covered at High Water, I stood out again
that Afternoon, deepning the Water, and before Night anchored in 8 Fathom,
clean white Sand, about the middle of the Bay. The next day we got up our
Anchor; and that Afternoon came to an Anchor once more near two Islands, and a
Shole of Corral Rocks that face the Bay. Here I scrubb'd my Ship: and finding
it very improbable I should get any thing further here, I made the best of my
way out to Sea again, sounding all the way: but finding by the shallowness of
the Water that there was no going out to Sea to the East of the two Islands
that face the Bay, nor between them, I returned to the West Entrance, going out
by the same Way I came in at, only on the East instead of the West Side of the
small Shole to be seen in the Plan: in which Channel we had 10, 12, and 13
Fathom-water, still deepning upon us till we were out at Sea. The day before we
came out I sent a Boat ashore to the most Northerly of the Two Islands, which
is the least of them, catching many small Fish in the mean while with Hook and
Line. The Boat's Crew returning, told me, That the Ifle produces nothing but a
sort of green, short, hard, prickly Grass, affording neither Wood nor fresh
Water; and that a Sea broak between the two Islands, a Sign that the Water was
shallow. They saw a large Turtle, and many Skates and Thornbacks, but caught
none.

It was August the 14th when I sailed out of this Bay or Sound, the Mouth of
which lies, as I said, in 25 degrees. 5 min. designing to coast along to the N. E.
till I might commodiously put in at some other part of N. Holland. In passing
out we saw three Water-Serpents swimming about in the Sea, of a yellow Color,
spotted with dark, brown Spots. They were each about four Foot long, and about
the bigness of a Man's Wrist, and were the first I saw on this Coast, which
abounds with several sorts of them. We had the Winds at our first coming out at
N. and the Land lying North-Easterly. We plied off and on, getting forward but
little till the next day: When the Wind coming at S. S. W. and S. we began to
Coast it along the Shore to the Northward, keeping at 6 or 7 Leagues off Shore;
and sounding often, we had between 40 and 46 Fathom-water, brown Sand, with
some white Shells. This 15th of August we were in Lat. 24 degrees. 41 min. On the
16th Day at Noon we were in 23 degrees. 22 min. The Wind coming at E. by N. we
could not keep the Shore aboard, but were forced to go farther off, and lost
sight of the Land. Then sounding we had no Ground with 80 Fathom-line; however
the Wind shortly after came about again to the Southward, and then we jogged on
again to the Northward, and saw many small Dolphins and Whales, and abundance
of Scuttle-shells swimming on the Sea; and some Watersnakes every day. The 17th
we saw the Land again, and took a Sight of it. [See Table IV. No. 7.]

The 18th in the Afternoon, being 3 or 4 Leagues off Shore, I saw a Shole
point, stretching from the Land into the Sea, a League or more. The Sea broke
high on it; by which I saw plainly there was a Shole there. I stood farther
off, and coasted along Shore, to about 7 or 8 Leagues distance: And at 12 a
Clock at Night we sounded, and had but 20 Fathom, hard Sand. By this I found I
was upon another Shole, and so presently steered off W. half an hour, and had
then 40 Fathom. At One in the Morning of the 18th day we had 85 Fathom: By Two
we could find no Ground; and then I ventured to steer along Shore again, due N.
which is two Points wide of the Coast (that lies here N. N. E.) for fear of
another Shole. I would not be too far off from the Land, being desirous to
search into it wherever I should find an Opening or any Convenience of
searching about, for Water, etc. When we were off the Shole-point I mentioned
where we had but 20 Fathom-water, we had in the Night abundance of Whales about
the Ship, some a head, others a stern, and some on each side blowing and making
a very dismal Noise; but when we came out again into deeper Water they left us.
Indeed the Noise that they made by blowing and dashing of the Sea with their
Tails, making it all of a Breach and Foam, was very dreadful to us, like the
breach of the Waves in very Shole-water, or among Rocks. The Shole these Whales
were upon had depth of Water sufficient, no less than twenty Fathom, as I said;
and it lies in Lat. 22 degrees. 22 min. The Shore was generally bold all along: we
had met with no Shole at Sea since the Abrohlo-shole, when we first fell on the
N. Holland Coast in the Lat. of 28. till yesterday in the Afternoon, and this
Night. This Morning also when we expected by the Draught we had with us to have
been 11 Leagues off Shore, we were but 4: so that either our Draughts were
faulty, which yet hitherto and afterward we found true enough as to the lying
of the Coast, or else here was a Tide unknown to us that deceived us; though we
had found very little of any Tide on this Coast hitherto. As to our Winds in
the Coasting thus far, we had been within the Verge of the General Trade (though
interrupted by the Storm I mentioned) from the Lat. of 28, when we first fell
in with the Coast: and by that time we were in the Lat. of 25. we had usually
the regular Trade-wind (which is here S. S. E.) when we were at any distance
srom Shore: but we had often Sea and Land-Breezes, especially when near Shore,
and when in Sharks bay; and had a particular N. West Wind, or Storm, that set
us in thither. On this 18th of August we coasted with a brisk Gale of the True
Trade-wind at S. S. E. very sair and clear VVeather; but haling off in the
Evening to Sea, were next Morning out of sight of Land: and the Land now
trending away N. Easterly, and we being to the Norward of it, and the Wind also
shrinking from the S. S. E. to the E. S. E. (that is, from the True Trade-Wind
to the Sea-Breeze, as the Land now lay) we could not get in with the Land again
yet awhile, so as to see it, though we trimmed sharp and kept close on a Wind. We
were this 19th day in Lat. ^1 degrees. 42 min. The 20th we were in Lat. 19 degrees. 37
min. and kept close on a Wind to get sight of the Land again, but could not yet
see it. We had very fair Weather; and though we were so far from the Land as to
be out of sight of it, yet we had the Sea and Land-Breezes. In the Night we had
the Land-breeze at S. S. E. a small gentle Gale; which in the Morning about
Sunrising would shift about gradually (and withal increasing in Strength) till
about Noon we should have it at E. S. E. which is the true Sea-breeze here.
Then it would blow a brisk Gale, so that we could scarce carry our Top sails
double rift: and it would continue thus till 3 in the Afternoon, when it would
decrease again. The Weather was fair all the while, not a Cloud to be seen; but
very hazy, especially nigh the Horizon. We sounded several times this 20th day,
and at first had no Ground: but had afterward from 52 to 45 Fathom, course
brown Sand, mixed with small, brown and white Stones, with Dints besides in the
Tallow.

The 21st day also we had small Landbreezes in the Night, and Sea-breezes in
the day: and as we saw some Sea-snakes every day, so this day we saw a great
many, of two different sorts or shapes. One sort was yellow, and about the
bigness of a Man's Wrist, about 4 Foot long, having a flat Tail about 4 Fingers
broad. The other sort was much smaller and shorter, round and spotted black and
yellow. This day we sounded several times, and had 45 Fathom, Sand. We did not
make the Land till Noon, and then saw it first from our Topmast-head. It bore
S.E. by E. about 9 Leagues distance; and it appeared like a Cape or Head of
Land. The Sea-breeze this day was not so strong as the day before, and it
veered out more; so that we had a fair Wind to run in with to the Shore, and at
Sunset anchored in 20 Fathom, clean Sand, about 5 Leagues from the bluff
Point; which was not a Cape (as it appeared at a great distance) but the
Eastermost end of an Island, about 5 or 6 Leagues in length, and one in
breadth. There were 3 or 4 Rocky Islands about a I cague from us between us and
the bluff Point; and we saw many other Islands both to the East and West of
it, as far as we could see either way from our Topmast head: And all within
them to the S. there was nothing but Islands of a pretty height, that may be
seen 8 or 9 Leagues off. By what we saw of them they must have been a Range of
Islands of about 20 Leagues in length, stretching from E. N. E. to VV. S. VV.
and for ought I know, as far as to those of Sharks-Bay; and to a considerable
breadth also, (for we could see 9 or 10 Leagues in among them) toward the
Continent or main Land of N. Holland, if there be any such thing hereabouts:
and by the great Tides I met with awhile afterward, more to the N. East, I had
a strong suspicion that here might be a kind of Archipelago of Islands, and a
Passage possibly to the S. of N. Holland and N. Guinea into the great S. Sea
Eastward; which I had Thoughts also of attempting in my Return from N. Guinea
(had Circumstances permitted) and told my Officers so: but I would not attempt
it at this time, because we wanted Water, and could not depend upon finding it
there. This Place is in the Lat. of 20 degrees. 21 min. but in the Draught that I
had of this Coast, which was Tasman's, it was laid down in 19 degrees. 50 min. and
the Shore is laid down as all along joining in one Body or Continent, with some
Openings appearing like Rivers; and not like Islands, as really they are. See
several Sights of it, Table IV. No. 8, 9, 10. This Place therefore lies more
Northerly by 40 min. than is laid down in Mr. Tasman's Draught: And beside its
being made a firm, continued Land, only with some Openings like the Mouths of
Rivers, I sound the Soundings also different from what the pricked Line of his
Course shows them, and generally shallower than he makes them: which inclines
me to think that he came not so near the Shore as his Line shows, and so had
deeper Soundings, and could not so well distinguish the Islands. His Meridian
or Difference of Longitude from Sharks-Bay agrees well enough with my Account,
which is 232 Leagues though we differ in Lat. And to confirm my Conjecture that
the Line of his Course is made too near the Shore, at least not far to the East
of this place, the Water is there so shallow that he could not come there so
nigh.

But to proceed; in the Night we had a small Land-breeze, and in the Morning I
weighed Anchor, designing to run in among the Islands, for they had large
Channels between them, of a League wide at least, and some 2 or 3 Leagues wide.
I sent in my Boat before to sound, and if they sound Shole-water to return
again; but if they sound Water enough, to go ashore on one of the Islands, and
stay till the Ship came in; where they might in the mean time search for Water.
So we followed after with the Ship, sounding as we went in, and had 20 Fathom,
till within 2 Leagues of the Bluff-head, and then we had shole Water, and very
uncertain Soundings: Yet we ran in still with an easy Sail, sounding and
looking out well, for this was dangerous Work. When we came abreast of the
Bluff-head; and about 2 Mile from it, we had but 7 Fathom: Then we Edged away
from it, but had no more Water; and running in a little further, we had but 4
Fathoms: So we Anchored immediately; and yet when we had veered out a third of
a Cable we had 7 Fathom Water again; so uncertain was the Water. My Boat came
immediately aboard, and told me that the Island was very Rocky and Dry, and
they had little hopes of finding Water there. I sent them to sound, and bad
them, if they found a Channel of 8 or 10 Fathom Water, to keep on, and we would
follow with the Ship. We were now about 4 Leagues within the outer small Rocky
Islands, but still could see nothing but Islands within us; some 5 or 6 Leagues
long, others not above a Mile round. The large Islands were pretty high; but
all appeared Dry, and mostly Rocky and Barren. The Rocks looked of a rusty
yellow Color, and therefore I dispair'd of getting Water on any of them: but
was in some hopes of finding a Channel to run in beyond all these Islands,
could I have spent time here, and either get to the Main of New Holland, or
find out some other Islands that might afford us Water and other Refreshments:
Besides, that among so many Islands, we might have found some sort of Rich
Mineral, or Ambergreese, it being a good Latitude for both these. But we had
not Sailed above a League farther before our Water grew sholer again, and then
we Anchored in 6 Fathom hard Sand.

We were now on the inner side of the Island, on whose outside is the
Bluff-point. We rode a League from the Island, and I presently went ashore, and
carried Shovels to dig for Water, but found none. There grow here 2 or 3 sorts
of Shrubs, one just like Rosemary; and therefore I called this Rosemary Island.
It grew in great plenty here, but had no smell. Some of the other Shrubs had
blue and yellow Flowers; and we found 2 sorts of Grain like Beans: The one grew
on Bushes; the other on a sort of a creeping Vine that runs along on the
Ground, having very thick broad Leaves, and the Blossom like a Bean Blossom,
but much larger, and of a deep red Color, looking very Beautiful. We saw here
some Cormorants, Gulls, Crabcatchers, etc. a few small Land Birds, and a sort
of white Parrots, which flew a great many together. We found some Shellfish,
viz. Limpits, Perriwinkles, and abundance of small Oysters growing on the
Rocks, which were very sweet. In the Sea we saw some green Turtle, a pretty
many Sharks, and abundance of Water-Snakes of several sorts and sizes. The
Stones were all of rusty Color, and Ponderous.

We saw a Smoke on an Island 3 or 4 Leagues off; and here also the Bushes had
been burned, but we found no other sign of Inhabitants: 'T was probable that on
the Island where the Smoke was there were Inhabitants, and fresh Water for
them. In the Evening I went aboard, and consulted with my Officers whether it
was best to send thither, or to search among any other of these Islands with my
Boat; or else go from hence, and Coast along Shore with the Ship, till we could
find some better Place than this was to ride in, where we had shole Water, and
lay exposed to Winds and Tides. They all agreed to go from hence; so I gave
Orders to weigh in the Morning as soon as it should be light, and to get out
with the Land-breeze.

Accordingly, August the 23d. at 5 in the Morning we ran out, having a pretty
fresh Land-breeze at S. S. E. By 8 a Clock we were got out: and very
seasonably; for before 9 the Sea-breeze came on us very strong, and increasing,
we took in our Topsails and stood off under 2 Courses and a Mizan, this being
as much Sail as we could carry. The sky was clear, there being not one Cloud to
be seen; but the Horizon appeared very hazy, and the Sun at setting the Night
before, and this Morning at rising, appeared very Red. The Wind continued very
strong till Twelve, then it began to abate: I have seldom met with a stronger
Breeze. These strong Sea-breezes lasted thus in their Turns 3 or 4 Days. They
sprung up with the Sun rise: By 9 a Clock they were very strong, and so
continued till Noon, when they began to abate: And by Sunset there was little
Wind, or a Calm till the Land-breezes came; which we should certainly have in
the Morning about 1 or 2 a Clock. The Land-breezes were between the S. S. W.
and S. S. E. The Sea-breezes between the E. N. E. and N. N. E. In the Night
while Calm we fished with Hook and Line, and caught good store of Fish, viz.
Snappers, Breams, Old Wives, and Dog-fish. When these last came we seldom
caught any others; for if they did not drive away the other Fish, yet they
would be sure to keep them from taking our Hooks, for they would depictions of
fish Plate 1.
F.3. A Fish taken on the Coast of New Holland
F. 8. A Cuttle taken near N. Holland.
F.9 A Flying Fish taken in ye open Sea
F. 1. The Monk Fish. Page 141.
F. 6. A Remora taken sticking to Sharks ba^
first have them themselves, biting very greedily. We caught also a Monk-fish,
of which I brought home the Picture. See Fish, Fig. I.

On the 25th of August, we still Coasted along Shore, that we might the better
see any Opening; kept sounding, and had about 20 Fathom clean Sand. The 26th
Day, being about 4 Leagues off Shore the Water began gradually to sholden from
20 to 14 Fathom. I was Edging in a little toward the Land, thinking to have
Anchored: But presently after the Water decreased almost at once, till we had
but 5 Fathom. I durst therefore adventure no farther, but steered out the same
way that we came in; and in a short time had 10 Fathom (being then about 4
Leagues and a half from the Shore) and even Soundings. I steered away E. N. E.
Coasting along as the Land lies. This Day the Seabreezes began to be very
moderate again, and we made the best of our way along Shore, only in the Night
Edging off a little for fear of Sholes. Ever since we left Sharks-Bay we had
had fair clear Weather, and so for a great while still.

The 27th Day, we had 20 Fathom Water all Night, yet we could not see Land till
1 in the Afternoon from our Topmast-head. By 3 we could just discern Land from
our Quarter Deck: We had then 16 Fathom. The Wind was at N. and we steered E.
by N. which is but one point in on the Land: Yet we decreased our Water very
fast; for at 4 we had but 9 Fathom; the next Cast but 7, which frighted us; and
we then tackt instantly and stood off: But in a short time the Wind coming at
N. W. and W. N. W. we tackt again, and steered N. N. E. and then deepned our
Water again, and had all Night from 15 to 20 Fathom.

The 28th Day we had between 20 and 40 Fathom. We saw no Land this Day, but saw
a great many Snakes; and some Whales. We saw also some Boobies, and
Noddy-birds; and in the Night caught one of these last. It was of another Shape
and Color than any I had seen before. It had a small long Bill, as all of them
have, flat Feet like Ducks Feet; its Tail forked like a Swallow, but longer and
broader, and the Fork deeper than that of the Swallow, with very long Wings:
The Top or Crown of the Head of this Noddy was Coal-black, having also small
black Streaks round about and close to the Eyes; and round these Streaks on
each side, a pretty broad white Circle. The Breast, Belly, and under part of
the Wings of this Noddy were white: And the Back and upper part of its Wings of
a saint black or smoke Color. See a Picture of this, and of the Common one,
Birds, Fig. 5, 6. Noddies are seen in most Places between the Tropicks, as well
in the East Indies, and on the Coast of Brazil, as in the West Indies. They
rest a Shore a Nights, and therefore we never see them far at Sea, not above 20
or 30 Leagues, unless driven off in a Storm. When they come about a Ship they
commonly perch in the Night, and will sit still till they are taken by the
Seamen. They Build on Cliffs against the Sea, or Rocks, as I have said Vol. I.
p. 53.

The 30th Day being in Lat. 18 degrees. 21 min. we made the Land again, and saw
many great Smoaks near the Shore; and having fair Weather and moderate Breezes,
I steered in toward it. At 4 in the Afternoon I Anchored in 8 Fathom Water,
clear Sand, about 3 Leagues and a half from the Shore. I presently sent my Boat
to Sound nearer in, and they found 10 Fathom about a Mile farther in: and from
thence still farther in the Water decreased gradually to 9, 8, 7. and at 2 Mile
distance to 6 Fathom. This Evening we saw an Eclipse of the Moon, but it was
abating before the Moon appeared to us; for the Horizon was very hazy, so that
we could not see the Moon till she had been half an hour above the Horizon: and
at two hours, 22 min. after Sunset, by the reckoning of our Glasses, the
Eclipse was quite gone, which was not of many Digits. The Moon's Center was
then 33 degrees. 40 min. high.

The 31st of August betimes in the Morning I went ashore with 10 or 11 Men to
search for Water. We went armed with Muskets and Cutlasses for our Defense,
expecting to see People there; and carried also Shovels and Pickaxes to dig
Wells. When we came near the Shore we saw 3 tall black naked Men on the sandy
Bay ahead of us: But as we rowed in, they went away. When we were landed I sent
the Boat with two Men in her to ly a little from the Shore at an Anchor, to
prevent being seized; while the rest of us went after the 3 black Men, who were
now got on the top of a small Hill about a quarter of a Mile from us, with 8 or
9 Men more in their Company. They seeing us coming, ran away. When we came on
the top of the Hill where they first stood, we saw a plain Savannah, about half
a mile from us, farther in from the Sea. There were several Things like
Hay-cocks, standing in the Savannah; which at a distance we thought were
Houses, looking just like the Hottentot's Houses at the Cap^ of G. Hope: but we
found them to be s^ many Rocks. We searched about these for Water, but could
find none, nor an^ Houses; nor People, for they were a^ Then we returned again
to the Place where we landed, and there we dug for Water.

While we were at work there came 9 or 10 of the Natives to a small Hill a
little way from us, and stood there menacing and threatening of us, and making a
great Noise. At last one of them came toward us, and the rest followed at a
distance. I went out to meet him, and came within 50 yards of him, making to
him all the Signs of Peace and Friendship I could; but then he ran away,
neither would they any of them stay for us to come nigh them; for we tried two
or three times. At last I took two Men with me, and went in the Afternoon along
by the Seaside, purposely to catch one of them, if I could, of whom I might
learn where they got their fresh Water. There were 10 or 12 of the Natives a
little way off, who seeing us three going away from the rest of our Men,
followed us at a distance. I thought they would follow us: but there being for
a while a Sand-bank between us and them, that they could not then see us, we
made a halt, and hid our selves in a bending of the Sand-bank. They knew we
must be thereabouts, and being 3 or 4 times our Number, thought to seize us. So
they dispersed themselves, some going to the Seashore, and others beating
about the Sand-hills. We knew by what Rencounter we had had with them in the
Morning that we could easily outrun them: so a nimble young Man that was with
me, seeing some of them near, ran toward them; and they for some time, ran
away besore him. But he soon overtaking them, they faced about and fought him.
He had a Cutlass, and they had Wooden Lances: with which, being many of them,
they were too hard for him. When he first ran toward them I chased two more
that were by the Shore: but fearing how it might be with my young Man, I turned
back quickly, and went up to the top of a Sand-hill, whence I saw him near me,
closely engaged with them. Upon their seeing me, one of them threw a Lance at
me, that narrowly misst me. I discharged my Gun to scare them, but avoided
shooting any of them: till finding the young Man in great danger from them, and
my self in some; and that though the Gun had a little frighted them at first, yet
they had soon learnt to despise it, tossing up their Hands, and crying Pooh,
Pooh, Pooh; and coming on afresh with a great Noise, I thought it high time to
charge again, and shoot one of them, which I did. The rest, seeing him fall,
made a stand again; and my young Man took the opportunity to disengage himself,
and come off to me: my other Man also was with me, who had done nothing all
this while, having come out unarmed; and I returned back with my Men, designing
to attempt the Natives no farther, being very sorry for what had happened
already. They took up their wounded Companion: and my young Man, who had been
struck through the Cheek by one of their Lances, was afraid it had been
poisoned: but I did not think that likely. His Wound was very painful to him,
being made with a blunt Weapon: but he soon recovered of it.

Among the N. Hollanders, whom we were thus engaged with, there was one who by
his Appearance and Carriage, as well in the Morning as this Afternoon, seemed
to be the Chief of them, and a kind of Prince or Captain among them. He was a
young brisk Man, not very tall, nor so pe^sonable as some of the rest, though
more (...) and courageous: He was painted (which none of the rest were at all)
with a Circle of white Paste or Pigment (a sort ^ime, as we thought) about his
Eyes, and a white streak down his Nose from his Forehead to the tip of it. And
his Breast and some part of his Arms were also made white with the same Paint:
not for Beauty or Ornament, one would think, but as some wild Indian Warriors
are said to do, he seemed thereby to design the looking more terrible; this his
Painting adding very much to his natural Deformity; for they all of them of the
most unpleasant Looks and the worst Features of any People that ever I saw,
though I have seen great variety of Savages. These N. Hollanders were probably
the same sort of People as those I met with on this Coast in my Voyage round
the World; [See Vol. I. p. 464, etc.] for the Place I then touched at was not
above 40 or 50 Leagues to the N. E. of this: And these were much the same
blinking Creatures (here being also abundance of the same kind of Flesh-flies
teizing them) and with the same black Skins, and Hair frizled, tall and thin,
etc. as those were: But we had not the opportunity to see whether these, as the
former, wanted two of their fore-Teeth.

We saw a great many places where they had made Fires; and where there were
commonly 3 or 4 Boughs stuck up to Windward of them; for the Wind (which is the
Sea-breeze) in the daytime blows always one way with them; and the Land-breeze
is but small. By their Fire-places we should always find great heaps of
Fishshells, of several sorts; and it is probable that these poor Creatures here
lived chiefly on the Shellfish, as those I before described did on small Fish,
which they caught in Wires or Holes in the Sand at Low Water. These gathered
their Shellfish on the Rocks at Low Water; but had no Wires (that we saw)
whereby to get any other sorts of Fish: As among the former I saw not any heaps
of Shells as here, though I know they also gathered some Shellfish. The Lances
also of those were such as these had; however they being upon an Island, with
their Women and Children, and all in our Power, they did not there use them
against us, as here on the Continent, where we saw none but some of the Men
under Head, who come out purposely to observe us. We saw no Houses at either
Place; and I believe they have none, since the former People on the Island had
none, though they had all their Families with them.

Upon returning to my Men I saw that though they had dug 8 or 9 Foot deep, yet
found no Water. So I returned aboard that Evening, and the next day, being
September 1st, I sent my Boatswain ashore to dig deeper, and sent the Sain with
him to catch Fish. While I staid aboard I observed the flowing of the Tide,
which runs very swift here, so that our Nun-buoy would not bear above the Water
to be seen. It flows here (as on that part of N. Holland I described formerly,
about 5 Fathom: and here the Flood runs S. E. by S. till the last Quarter; then
it sets right in toward the Shore (which lies here S. S. W. and N. N. E.) and
the Ebb runs N. W. by N. When the Tides slackned we Fished with Hook and Line,
as we had already done in several Places on this Coast; on which in this Voyage
hitherto, we had found but little Tides: but by the Height, and Strength, and
Course of them hereabouts, it should seem that if there be such a Passage or
Straight going through Eastward to the Great South Sea, as I said one might
suspect, one would expect to find the Mouth of it somewhere between this Place
and Rosemary Island, which was the part of N. Holland I come last from.

Next Morning my Men came aboard and brought a Rundlet of brackish Water which
they got out of another Well that they dug in a Place a mile off, and about
half as far from the Shore; but this Water was not fit to drink. However we all
concluded that it would serve to boil our Oatmeal, for Burgoo, whereby we might
save the Remains of our other Water for drinking, till we should get more; and
accordingly the next day we brought aboard 4 Hogsheads of it: but while we were
at work about the Well we were sadly pestered with the Flies, which were more
troublesome to us than the Sun, though it shone clear and strong upon us all the
while very hot. All this while we saw no more of the Natives, but saw some of
the Smoaks of some of their Fires at 2 or 3 miles distance.

The Land hereabouts was much like that part of New Holland that I formerly
described [Vol. I. p. 463.] it is low, but seemingly barricado'd with a long
Chain of Sand-hills to the Sea, that let us nothing be seen of what is farther
within Land. A^ high Water the Tides rising so high as they do, the Coast shows
very low: but when it is low Water it seems to be of an indifferent height. At
low Water-Mark the Shore is all Rocky, so that then there is no Landing with a
Boat; but at high Water a Boat may come in over those Rocks to the Sandy Bay,
which runs all along on this Coast. The Land by the Sea for about 5 or 600
yards is a dry Sandy Soil, bearing only Shrubs and Bushes of diverse sorts. Some
of these had them at this time of the year, yellow Flowers or Blossoms, some
blue, and some white; most of them of a very fragrant Smell. Some had Fruit
like Peasecods; in each of which there were just ten small Peace: I opened many
of them, and found no more nor less. There are also here some of that sort of
Bean which I saw at Rosemary-Island: and another sort of small, red, hard
Pulse, growing in Cods also, with little black Eyes like Beans. I know not
their Names, but have seen them used often in the East Indies for weighing
Gold; and they make the same use of them at Guinea, as I have heard, where the
Women also make Bracelets with them to wear about their Arms. These grow on
Bushes: but here are also a Fruit like Beans growing on a creeping sort of
Shrublike Vine. There was great plenty of all these sorts of Cod-fruit growing
on the Sand-hills by the Seaside, some of them green, some ripe, and some
fallen on the Ground: but I could not perceive that any of them had been
gathered by the Natives; and might not probably be wholesome Food.

The Land farther in, that is lower than what borders on the Sea, was, so much
as we saw of it, very plain and even; partly Savannahs, and partly Woodland.
The Savannahs bear a sort of thin course Grass. The Mould is also a courser
Sand than that by the Seaside, and in some places it is Clay. Here are a great
many Rocks in the large Savannah we were in, which are 5 or 6 Foot high, and
round at top like a Hay-cock, very remarkable; some red, and some white. The
Woodland lies farther in still; where there were diverse sorts of small Trees,
scarce any thre^ Foot in circumserence; their Bodies 12 o^ 14 Foot high, with a
Head of small Knibs or Boughs. By the sides of the Creeks, especially nigh the
Sea, there grow a few small black Mangrove-Trees.

There are but few Land-Animals. I saw some Lizards; and my Men saw two or
three Beasts like hungry Wolves, lean like so many Skeletons, being nothing but
Skin and Bones: It Is probable that it was the Foot of one of those Beasts that
I mentioned as seen by us in N. Holland, [Vol. I. p. 463.] We saw a Rackoon or
two, and one small speckled Snake.

The Land-fowls that we saw here were Crows (just such as ours in England)
small Hawks, and Kites; a few of each sort: but here are plenty of small
Turtle-Doves, that are plump, fat and very good Meat. Here are 2 or 3 sorts of
smaller Birds, some as big as Larks, some less; but not many of either sort.
The Sea-Fowl are Pelicans, Boobies, Noddies, Curlews, Sea-pies, etc. and but
few of these neither.

The Sea is plentifully stocked with the largest Whales that I ever saw: but
not to compare with the vast ones of the Northern Seas. We saw also a great
many Green Turtle, but caught none; here being no Place to set a Turtle-Net in;
here being no Channel for them, and the Tides running so strong. We saw some
Sharks, and Paracoots; and with Hooks and Lines we caught some Rock-fish and
Old Wives. Of Shellfish, here were ^sters both of the common kind for Eati^,
and of the Pearl-kind: and also W^ ^onchs, Muscles, Limpits, Perriwinkles, etc.
and I gathered a few strange Shells; chiefly a sort not large, and thick-set
all about with Rays or Spikes growing in Rows.

And thus having ranged about, a considerable time, upon this Coast, without
finding any good fresh Water, or any convenient Place to clean the Ship, as I
had hoped for: And it being moreover the height of the dry Season, and my Men
growing Scorbutic for want of Refreshments, so that I had little Encouragement
to search further; I resolved to leave this Coast, and accordingly in the
beginning of September set Sail toward Timor.

AN ACCOUNT Of several PLANTS Collected in Brasil, New Holland, Timor, and New
Guinea, referring to the Figures Engraven on the Copper Plates.
TAB. 1. Fig. 1. Cotton-flower from Baya in Brasil. The Flower consists of a
great many Filaments, almost as small as Hairs, betwixt 3 and 4 Inches long, of
a Murrey-colour; on the top of them stand small ash-colored apices. The
pedicule of the Flower is enclosed at the bottom with five narrow stiff Leaves,
about six Inches long. There is one of this ^enus in Mr. Ray's Supplement,
which agrees exactly with this in every respect, only that is twice larger at
the least. It was sent from Surinam by the Name of Momoo.

Tab. 1. Fig. 2. Jasminum Brasilianum luteum, mali limoniae folio nervoso,
petalis crassis.

Tab 1. Fig. 3. Crista Pavonis Brasiliana Bardanae foliis. The Leaves are very
tender and like the top Leaves of Bardana major, both as to shape and texture:
In the Figure they are represented too stiff and too much serrated.

Tab. 1. Fig. 4. Filix Brasiliana Osmundae minori serrato folio. This Fern is
of that kind, which bears it is Seed-Vessels in Lines on the edge of the Leaves.

Tab. 2. Fig 1. Rapuntium Novae Hollandiae, flore magno coccineo. The
Perianthium composed of five long pointed Parts, the Form of the Seed-Vessel
and the smalness of the Seeds, together with the irregular shape of the Flower
and thinness of the Leaves, argue this Plant to be a Rapuntium.

Tab. 2. Fig. 2. Fucus foliis capillaceis brevissimis, vesiculis minimis
donatis. This elegant fucus is of the Erica Marina or Sargazo kind, but has
much finer parts than that. It was collected on the Coast of New Holland.

depictions of plants Tab 1. Plants found in Brasil
depictions of plants Tab. 2. Plants found in New Holland.
depictions of plants Tab. 3. Plants found in New Holland.


Tab. 2. Fig. 2. Ricinoides Novae Hollandae anguloso crasso folio. This Plant
is shrubby, has thick woolly Leaves, especially on the under side. Its Fruit is
tricoccous, hoary on the outside with a Calix divided into five parts. It
comes near Ricini fructu parvo frucosa Curassavica, folio Phylli, P. B. pr.

Tab. 2. Fig. 2. Solanum spinosum Novae Hollandiae Phylli foliis subrotundis.
This new Solanum bears a bluish Flower like the others of the same Tribe; the
Leaves are of a whitish color, thick and woolly on both sides, scarce an Inch
long and near as broad. The Thorns are very sharp and thick set, of a deep
Orange color, especially toward the Points.

Tab. 3. Fig. 1. Scabiosa (forte) Novae Hollandiae, statices foliis subtus
argenteis. The Flower stands on a Foot-stalk four Inches long, included in a
rough Calix of a yellowish color. The Leaves are not above an Inch long, very
narrow like Thrift, green on the upper and hoary on the under side, growing in
tufts. Whether this Plant be a Scabious, Thrift or ^chrysum is hard to judge
from the imperfect Flower of the dried Speeimen.

Tab. 3. Fig. 2. Alcea Novae Hollandiae (...) augustis utrinque villosis. The
Leaves (...) and under side of the Perianthium of this Plant are all woolly.
The Petala are very tender, five in number, scarce so large as the Calix: In
the middle stands a a Columella thick set with thrummy apiculae, which argue
this Plant to belong to the Malvaceous kind.

Tab. 3. Fig. 3. Of what genus this Shrub or Tree is, is uncertain, agreeing
with none yet described, as far as can be judged, by the State it is in. It has
a very beautiful Flower, of a red color as far as can be guessed by the dry
Specimen, consisting of ten large Petala, hoary on both sides, especially
underneath; the middle of the Flower is thick set with Stamin^, which are
woolly at the bottom, the length of the Petala, each of them crowned with its
Apex The Calix is divided into five round pointed parts. The Leaves are like
those of Amelanchier Lob. green a top and very woolly underneath, not running
to a point, as is common in others, but with an Indenture at the upper end.

Tab. 3. Fig. 4. Dammara ax Nova Hollandia, Sanamundae secundae Chysii foliis.
This new genus was first sent from Amboyna by Mr. Rumphius, by the Name of
Dammara, of which he transmitted two kinds; one with narrow and long stiff
Leaves, the other with shorter and broader. The first of them is mentioned in
Mr. Petiver's Centuria, p. 350. by the Name of Arbor hortensis Javanorum foliis
depictions of plants Tab 4. Plants found in New Holland and Timor
visce augustioribus aromaticis sloribus, spicatis stamineis lutescentibus;
Mus. Pet. As also in Mr. Ray's Supplement to his History of Plants now in the
Press. This is of the same genus with them, agreeing both in Flower and Fruit,
though very much differing in Leaves. The Flowers are stamineous and seem to be
of an herbaceous color, growing among the Leaves, which are short and almost
round, very stiff and ribb'd on the under side, of a dark green above, and a
pale color underneath, thick set on by pairs, answering one another
cross-ways, so that they cover the Stalk. The Fruit is as big as a Pepper-corn,
almost round, of a whitish color, dry and tough, with a Hole on the top,
containing small Seeds. Any one that sees this Plant without its Seed-Vessels,
would take it for an Erica or Sanamunda. The Leaves of this Plant are of a very
aromatic Taste.

Tab. 4. Fig. 1. Equisetum Novae Hollandiae frutesceus foliis longissimis. It Is
doubtful whether this be an Equisetum or not; the texture of the Leaves agrees
best with that genus of any, being articulated one within another at each
Joint, which is only proper to this Tribe. The longest of them are about nine
Inches.

Tab. 4. Fig. 2. Colutea Novae Hollandiae sloribus amplis coccineis, umbellatim
dispositis macula purpurea notatis. There being no Leaves to this Plant, it is
hard to say what genus it properly belongs to. The Flowers are very like to the
Colutea Barbae Jovis folio flore coccineo Breynii; of the same Scarlet color,
with a large deep purple Spot in the vexillum, but much bigger, coming all from
the same point after the manner of an Umbel. The rudiment of the pod is very
woolly, and terminates in a Filament near two Inches long.

Tab. 4. Fig. 3. Conyza Novae Hollandiae angustis Rorismarini foliis. This
Plant is very much branched and seems to be woody. The Flowers stand on very
short Pedicules, arising from the sinus of the Leaves, which are exactly like
Rosemary, only less. It tastes very bitter now dry.

Tab. 4. Fig. 4. Mohoh Insulae Timor. This is a very odd Plant, agreeing with
no described genus. The Leaf is almost round, green on the upper side and
whitish underneath, with several Fibers running from the insertion of the
Pedicule toward the circumference it is umbilicated as Cotyledon aquatica and
Faba Aegyptiae. The Flowers are white standing on single Footstalk, of the
shape of a Stramoniam, but divided into four points only, as is the Perianthium.

Tab. 5. Fig. 1. Fucus ex Nova Guines uva marina dictus, foliis variis. This
beautiful fucus is thick set with very small short tufts of Leaves, which by
the help depictions of plants Tab. 5. Plants found in ye Sea near New Guinea.
of a magnifying Glass, seem to be round and articulated, as if they were
Seed-Vessels; besides these, there are other broad Leaves, chiefly at the
extremity of the Branches, serrated on the edges. The vesiculae are round, of
the bigness expressed in the Figure.

Tab. 5. Fig. 2. Fucus ex Nova Guinea Fiuviatilis Pisanae J. B. foliis. These
Plants are so apt to vary in their Leaves, according to their different States,
that it is hard to say this is distinct from the last. It has in several Places
(not all expressed in the Figure) some of the small short Leaves, or
Seed-Vessels mentioned in the former; which makes me apt to believe it the
same, gathered in a different state; besides the broad Leaves of that and this
agree as to their Shape and Indentures.

An Account of some Fishes that are Figured in Plate 2. and 3.
See Plate 3. Fig. 5. THis is a Fish of the Tunny-kind, and agrees well enough
with the Figure in Tab. 3. of the Appendix to Mr. Willughby's History of Fishes
under the Name of Gurabuca; it differs something, in the Fins especially, from
Piso's Figure of the Guarapucu.

See Plate 3. Figure 4. This resembles the Figure of the Guaperva maxima
candata in Willughby's Ichthyol. Tab. 9, 23. and the Guaperva of Piso, but does
not answer their Figures in every particular.

See Plate 2. Figure 2. There are 2 sorts of Porpusses: The one the
long-snouted Porpuss, as the Seamen call it; and this is the Dolphin of the
Greeks. The other is the Bottle-nose Porpuss, which is generally thought to be
the Phoecena of Aristotle.

Plate 2. Figure 7. This is the Guaracapema of Piso and Marcgrave, by others
called the Dorado. It Is Figured in Willughby's Ichthyol. Tab. O. 2. under the
Name of Dolphin Belgis.


depictions of fish Plate 2.
F. 2. The Dolphin of the Ancients taken near ye Line, called by our seamen a
Porpus
F. 7. A Dolphin as it is usually called by our seamen taken in the open Sea
depictions of fish Plate 3.
F. 5. A Fish of the Tunng kind taken on ye Coast of N. Holland
F 4. A Fish called by the seamen the old wife.


THE INDEX.
A. ALlegrance, one of the Canary Islands, Page 4. its View from several
Points, ibid. Amphisbaena (Snake) described, 77 Amplitude; Difference between
the Morning and Evening Amplitude, 94 Arisah (Fruit) described 69 An Account of
several Plants collected in Brasil, New Holland, Timor, and New Guinea,
referring to the Figures Tab. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 155 An Account of some Fishes
that is Figured on Plate 2. and 3.
B. Baha de todos los Santos in Brasil, its Harbor and Town described, 49,
etc. The Product and Trade of the Country, 55 Their Shipping and Timber, 58 The
Soil and Fruit of the Country, 62, etc. The Winds and Seasons, 86 The time of
cutting Sugarcanes, 87 Its view from several Points, 48
Bill-Bird described, 74 Birds of N. Holland, 122, 123 Blake, sunk the Spanish
Galleons near Teneriffe, 5 Brasil, the View of its Coast, See Bahia. 47 Britain
(New) an Island discovered by the Author, well-inhabited, and probably
affording rich Commodities, Preface Bubbles like small Pearl swimming thick in
the Sea, 114
C. Cables made of a sort of Hair growing on Trees in Brasil, 57, 64
Callavances, a Fruit in Mayo, 23 Canary-Islands, their Product and Trade, 11
The Character of their present Governor, 11, 12 Cape of Good Hope, its View
from several Points, 48 Cashew (Fruit) described, 68 Channel (English) a
necessary Caution to those that Sail through it, 3 Chattering Crow of Brasil
described, 73 Clocking-Hens of Brasil, 74 Coco-Nut-Tree in Brasil, 64 Cotton
(Silk) its growth and description, 21, 22, 65 Crusia, a Fowl, 25 Curlew, a
Fowl, 23 Currecoo (Bird) described 75 Currents in the Sea, from 7 degrees. 50 min.
Lat. to 3 degrees. 22 min. N. 41 Curreso (Bird) 74 Custard-Apple, described 33
Cuttle-Fish, Plate 1. Fig. 3.
D. Dendees, a sort of Palm-berries in Brasil, 71 Dogs, see Water-Dogs.
Dunghill Fowls of Brasil, 76
F. Fish of N. Holland, 124, 125 Fish of the Tunny kind, and account of, 162
Fish called by the Seamen the Old Wise, an account of, 162 Flamingo, a Fowl, 23
Flying-Fish, betwixt the Canaries and C. Verd-Islands 14 Frape Boat, its use at
the Salt-Pond at Mayo, 18, etc.
G. Gallena Pintada, a Bird, described. 23, etc. Galleons (Spanish) sunk by
Admiral Blake, near Teneriff, and continue still there, 5, 6
Gerret-Dennis-Isle, its Inhabitants discribed, Preface Guano (Beast) of N.
Holland, 123 Guinea-Hens, see Gallena Pintada. Guinea (New) its Natives, etc.
Pref.
H. Hammocks; Gentlemen carried about in them at Bahia in Brasil, 59 Holland
(New) Coast described, 121, etc. 132, etc. 137. Its Natives described, 145,
etc. Views of several Parts of its Coasts and Islands from several Points, 117

J. Jago (St.) Island and Town, 29, etc. Its Inhabitants, 32 Its Product, 33,
etc. Its Animals, 35, etc. Its Road a very bad one, 36 Its View, 14
Jenetae (Bird) described, 74 Jenipah, or Jenipapah (Fruit) described, 68 Ingwa
(Fruit) described, 70
L. Laguna in Teneriff, described, 7 Lancerota, one of the Canary Islands, 4
Its View from several Points, ibid.

M. Mackeraw (Bird) described 73 Malmsey-Wine grows in the Island Teneriff, 9,
11. Mayo, one of C. Verd Islands, its View, 14 Its Description, 15 A large
Account of the making Salt there, 16, etc. Its Soil and Product, 21, etc. Its
Inhabitants, 27 Its View from several Points, 14
Mendibee (Fruit) 72 Mericasah (Fruit) described, 69 Miniola, a Fowl, 25
Monk-Fish, 141 Muekishaw (Fruit) described, 70 Mungaroo (Fruit) described, 70
Musteran-de-ova (Fruit) described, 71
N. Noddy-Bird described, 142 Northwest-Winds give Notice beforehand of their
coming, at Port Oratavia in Teneriff, and how provided against, 9, 10
O. Oratavia, a Port in Teneriff, 4, 9. Otee (Fruit) described, 70
P. Palm-Berries in Brasil, 71 Papah a Fruit described 34 Passage possibly to
the South of New Holland and New Guinea into the great South Sea Eastward, 135,
150 Pernambuc more Healthy than other Places to the Southward, 44 Petango
(Fruit) described, 70 Petrel (Bird) described 97 Petumbo (Fruit) described 70
Physic Nuts 71 Pincon (Fruit) Ibid Pintado Bird described 95, 96 Plants, an
account of them, 155 Plants Engraven on Copper, Tab. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Plants of
N. Holland, 151 Porpusses, Page 162. and Figured in Plate of Fishes, 2
Portugueze Civil to the Author, 49
R. Rabek, a Fowl, 25 Raccoon of N. Holland, 123 Remora (Fish) Plate 11. Fig.
6. Rosemary-Island in N. Holland, 138 The Plant resembling Rosemary, from which
the Author gives this Name to the Island, is Figured Tab. 4. No. 3.

S. Salt, a large Account of the Method of making it at Mayo, 16, etc.
Salt-Ponds at Mayo, kern only in the dry Season, and others in the West Indies
in the wet only, 17 Santa-Cruz in Teneriff, its Road, Town and Harbor
described 4, 5 Seamen in great Danger of Sickness, by neglecting to shift their
wet Clothes in hot Countries, 43 Their Ignorance and Obstinacy, a great
Impediment in long Voyages, 45, 85, 86, 87, 88.
Sea-Weeds, see Weeds. Shark of N. Holland described 125 Sharks-Bay in N.
Holland described, 121, 126, 127. Shear-Water (Bird) described, 93 Ship (the
Authors) foundred at Sea, Pref. Ship of 50 Guns built at Brasil, 58 Skip-jack
(Fish) described. 115 Snake, see Water-Snake, and Amphisbaena. Sour-sop (Fruit)
described, 67 Sugar, the way of refining it in Brasil with Clay, 55
T. Tasman's Draught rectified, 136 Teneriffe, 4 Its Wines and Fruits and
Animals, 9, 10 Its N. W. view, 4
Timber at Brasil as good and more durable than any in Europe, 58 Timor,
Preface Trees of N. Holland, 122 Turtle, lay their Eggs in the wet Season, 26
Why not eaten by the Spaniards, as by the English, 81
Turtle-Doves of Brasil, 74
U. Variation, where it increased in Sailing Easterly, 94 Where it decreased in
Sailing Easterly, 97 Its uncertainty, and the difficulty of taking it, 99, 100,
etc. A large Table of Variations observed in this Voyage, 102, etc.

W. Water-dog of Brasil, 79, 80 Water-Snake of Brasil, its wonderful manner of
catching its Prey, 79 Of N. Holland, 129, 134.
Weeds floating in the Sea, 14, 97, 114, 115 Whales (dead) eaten by Fowls, 94
Whales, the catching and use of them in Brasil, 57, 58 Whales of N. Holland,
131 Winds uncertain near the Line, 42
Y. Yemma (Bird) described, 73

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A New Voyage round the World. Describing particularly, the Isthmus of America,
several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cape Verd, the
Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru and Mexico; the
Isle of Guan one of the ^adrones, Mindanao and other Philippine and East India
Islands near Cambodia, China, Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc. New-Holland,
Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the Cape of good Hope, and Santa Helena. Their Soil,
Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits, Animals and Inhabitants. Customs, Religion,
Government, Trade, etc. By Capt. William Dampier. Vol. the First. Illustrated
with particular Maps and Draughts. The Fifth Edition, Corrected. Price 6. s.
Voyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. In Three Parts, viz. 1. A Supplement of the
Voyage round the World, describing the Countries of ^onquin, Achin, Malacca,
etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two Voyages to
Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-Cutting, Trade, etc. of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World, with an Account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negro's, etc. By Captain William Dampier. Illustrated with
Particular Maps and Draughts. To which is added, A General INDEX to both
Volumes. The Second Edition. Price 6. s A New Voyage and Description of the
Isthmus of America, giving an Account of the Author's abode there; the Form and
Make of the (...), (...), Hills, Rivers, etc. Wood, Soil, Weather, etc. Trees,
(...), (...), Birds, Fish, etc. The Indian Inhabitants, their Feature,
Complexion, etc. Their Manners, Customs, Employments, Marriages, ^easts,
Hunting, Computation, Language, etc. With Remarkable (...) in the South Sea,
and elsewhere. By (...). Illustrated with several Copper Plates. Price 3 s. 6
d. A Collection of Original Voyages: Containing. 1. Capt. Cowley's Voyages
Round the Globe. 2. Capt. Sharp's Journal over the Isthm^s of Darien, and
Expedition into the South Seas. Written by himself. 3. Capt. Wood's Voyages
through the Streights of Magellan. 4. Mr. Robert's Adventures among the
Corsairs of the (...), his Account of their way of Living, Description of the
Archip^go Islands, taking of S^, etc. Illustrated with several Maps and
Draughts. Published by Capt. William Hack, Price 3 s. 6 d. A Relation of two
several Voyages made into the East Indies, by Christopher Fryke, Surg. and
Christopher Schewitzer. The whole containing an Exact Account of the Customs,
Dispositions, Manners, Religion, etc. of the several Kingdoms and Dominions in
those parts of the World in General: But in a more particular manner,
describing those Countries which are under the Power and Government of the
Dutch. Octavo Price 4 s. Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade
of England. In Two Parts, viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all
Considerations about the Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and
Methods by which it may be restored. III. On the Management of the King's
Revenues. IV. Whether to Farm the Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most
for the Public Service? V. On the Public Debts and Engagements. Part I. To
which is added, A Discourse upon Improving the Revenue of the State of Athens.
Written Originally in Greek; and now made English from the Original, with some
Historical Notes. Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of
England; which more immediately Treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom.
viz. I. That Foreign Trade is beneficial to England. II. On the Protection and
Care of Trade. III. On the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. Part
II. To which is added the late Essay on the East India Trade. An Essay upon the
Probable Methods of making a People Gainers, in the Balance of Trade. Treating
of these Heads; viz. Of the People of England. Of the Land of England, and its
Product. Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner the Balance of
Trade may be thereby effected. That a Country cannot increase in Wealth and
Power, but by private Men doing their Duty to the Public, and but by a steady
Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in such as are Trusted with the Administration of
Affairs. A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions. Showing how our Ancestors
have proceeded with such Ministers as have procured to themselves Grants of the
Crown-Revenue; and that the forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to be applied
toward the Payment of the Public D^bts. Essays upon I. The Balance of Power.
II. The Right of making War, Peace and Alliances. III. Universal Monarchy. To
which (...) added, an APPENDIX containing the Records referred to in the Second
Essay. These five by the Author of, The Essays on Ways and Means. Several
Discourses, Concerning the Shortness of Humane Charity. The Perfection of the
Mercy of God. The Difference of Times with respect to Religion. The Joy which
the Righteous have in God. The Secret Blasting of Men. The Instructive
Discipline of God. The Danger of Unfaithfulness to God. The Malignity of
Popery. The Deceitfulness of Sin. The Conversion of a Sinner. Also, the Prayer
used before Sermon. Vol. I. The 2d Edit. Pr. 5 s. -- Several Discourses,
concerning the true Valuation of Man. The Necessary Repentance of a Sinner. The
Exercise and Progress of a Christian. The Frailty of Humane Nature. The Justice
of one toward another. The Nature of Salvation by Christ, etc Being Twenty
Sermons. Vol. II. Both by the Reverend and Learned Benjamin Whichcote, sometime
Minister of St. Lawrence Jury, London. Examined and Corrected by his own Notes;
and Published by John Jeffery, D. D. Archdeacon of Norwich, Price 5 s. Three
Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation, and Repentance. Containing
Instructions for a Holy Life: With earnest Exhortations, especially to young
Persons, drawn from the Considerations of the Severity of the Discipline of the
Primitive Church. By Samuel Clarke, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father
in God John Lord Bishop of Norwich: Price 3 s. A Paraphrase on the Gospels of
St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke and St. John. In Two Volumes. Written by Samuel
Clarke, A. M. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of
Norwich. 8 vo. ^acobi Rohaulti Physica. Latin vertit, recensuit, and
uberioribus jam Annotationibus, ex illustrissimi Isaaici Newtoni Philosophia
maximam partem hausti^, amplificavit and ornavit Samuel Clarke, A M. Admodum
Reverendo in Christo patri, Joanni Episcopo Norvicensi, a Sacris Domestici.
Accedunt etiam in hac Secunda Editionae, novae aliquot Tabulae aeri incisae. 8
vo. Confessio, five Declaratio, Sententiae Pastorum, qui in Faederato Relgio
remonstrantes vocantur, super praecipuis Articulis Religionis Christianae. 12
ves. price 1 s. 6 d. Devotions, viz. Confessions, Petitions, Intercessions, and
Thanksgivings for every Day of the Week; and also Before, At, and After the
Sacrament: With Occasional Prayers for all Persons whatsoever. By Thomas
Bennet, M. A. Rector of St. James's in Colchester, and Fellow of St. John's
College in Cambridge. The God-Father's Advice to his Son. Showing the
Necessity of. Performing the Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of neglecting it
With general Instructions to young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and
prepare them for their Confirmation. Very necessary for Parents, etc. to give
their Children, or others committed to their Care. By John Birke^, Vicar of
Milford and Hordle in Hampshire. The Second Edition, with a Preface, Price 3 d.
100 for 20 s. The Government of the Passions, according to the Rules of Reason
and Religion. viz. Love, Hatred, Desire, Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger,
Delight and Sorrow. Twelves. Some Reflections on that part of a Book called
Amyntor: Or, The Defense of Milton's Life, which relates to the Writings of the
Primitive Fathers and the Canon of the New Testament. In a Letter to a Friend.
Octavo. A Treatise of Morality. In Two Parts. Written in French by F.
Malbranch, Author of The Search after Truth. And Translated into English by
James Shipton, M. A. The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French
Armies 56 Years. Translated by Charles Cotton Esquire Folio. Processus integri in
Morbis fere omnibus Curandis, a Duo. Tho. Sydenham conscripti Duodecimo. Dr.
Sydenham's Practice of Physic, Faithfully Translated into English with large
Annotations, Animadversions, and Practical Observations on the same, By W.
Salmon, M. D. Twelves. The Penitent, or Entertainments for Lent. Written in
French by R. F. N. Caussin, and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth
Edition. To which are added several Sculptures. A New Method of Curing all
Sorts of Fevers, without taking any thing by the Mouth. Being a New
Prescription for giving the Bark in Clyster. Whereby all the Inconveniences of
administering it in any other Form are avoided; and a more speedy, certain Cure
is obtained. Writ by A. Helvet, M. D. The Second Edition. Mr. Wingate's
Arithmetic: Containing a plain and familiar Method for attaining the Knowledge
and Practice of Common Arithmetic. The Tenth Edition, very much enlarged. By
John Ki^ey, late Teacher of the Mathematics. The History of the Inquisition,
as it is exercised at Goa. Written in French, by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon,
who labored five Years under those Severities. With an Account of his
Deliverance, Done into English by the learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to
his Grace the late Archbishop of Canterbury. The Artificial Clock-Maker. A
Treatise of Watch and Clockwork. Wherein the Art of Calculating Numbers for
most sorts of Movements is explained, to the Capacity of the Unlearned. Also,
the History of Watch and Clock-work, both Ancient and Modern. With other Useful
Matters never before Published. The Second Edition Enlarged. To which is added
a Supplement, containing. 1. The Anatomy of a Watch and Clock. 2. Monsieur
Romer's Satellite-Instrument, with Observations concerning the Calculation of
the Eclipses of Jupiter's Satellites, and to find the Longitude by them. 3. A
nice way to correct Pendulum Watches. 4. M. Flamsteed's Equation Tables. 5. To
find a Meridian-Line, for the Governing of Watches, and other Uses. 6. To make
a Telescope to keep a Watch by the Fixed Stars. By W. D. M. A. price 1 s. 6 d.
Arcana Imperii detecta: Or, diverse select Cases in Government; more
particularly, Of the Obeying the unjust Commands of a Prince. Of the
Renunciation of a Right to a Crown. Of the Proscription of a limited Prince
and his Heirs. Of the Trying, Condemning and Execution of a Crowned Head. Of
the Marriage of a Prince and Princess. Of the Detecting of Conspiracies against
a Government. Of Subjects Revolting from a Tyranical Prince. Of Excluding
Foreigners from Public Employments. Of Constituting Extraordinary Magistrates
upon Extraordinary Occasions. Of Subjects Anticipating the Execution of Laws.
Of Toleration of Religion. Of Peace and War, etc. With the Debates, Arguments
and Resolutions of the greatest Statesmen, in several Ages and Governments
thereupon. The Royal Dictionary, in Two Parts. I. French and English. II.
English and French. The French taken out of the Dictionaries of Richelet,
Furetiere, Tachart, the Great Dictionary of the French-Academy, and the Remarks
of Vaugelas; Menage, and Bouhours. And the English Collected chiefly out of the
best Dictionaries, and the Works of the greatest Masters of the English Tongue;
such as Archbishop Tillotson, Bishop Sprat, Sir Roger L' Estrange, Mr. Dryden,
Sir William Temple, etc. For the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By
Mr. Boyer. Quarto. -- Idem in Octavo. Bennet of Schism Price 2 s. 6 d. --
Defense of it pr. 1 s. History of England. Life of K. James pr. 5 s. Life of K.
William pr. 6 s. Cambridge Concordance. Folio, Collier's Essays. Octavo.
Milners Reflections on L' Clerk, Octavo pr. 3 s. 6 d. Salmon's Dispensatory.
Octavo. Seneca's Morals. Octavo. Newcomb's Sermons. Sherlock's Sermons. Octavo.
Sharp's Sermons Octavo. Scot's Sermons. 2 Vol. Octavo. -- Christian Life, in 5
Vol. Octavo. A View of the Posture of Affairs in Europe both in Church and
State. I. The Ancient Pretensions of the two Families of Austria and Bourbon,
to the Spanish Monarchy. II. The Balance of the Power of Europe. settled by
Charles V. and how it came to be broke. III. A View of the Courts of Europe,
and their present Disposition and State relating to War. IV. Of the State of
the Church of Rome, and the Decay of the Protestant Interest in Europe. Written
by a Gentleman by way of Letter. The Surgeons Assistant. In which is plainly
discovered the True Origin of most Disease. Treating particularly of the
Plague, French Pox, Leprosy. etc. Of the Biting of mad Dogs, and other
Venomous Creatures, Also A Complete Treatise of Cancers and Gangreens. With an
Enquiry whether they have any Alliance with Contagious Diseases. Their most
Easy and Speedy Method of Cure. Wi^h diverse Approved Receipts. By John ^rowne,
Sworn Surgeon in Ordinary to hi^ late most Excellent Majesty King William III.
and late Senior Surgeon of St. Thomas's Hospital in Southwark. pr. 2 s. 6 d
map of author's voyage from Timor round Nova Brittannia [Papua New Guinea] a
View of the Course of Capt. WILL. DAMPIERS Voyage from Timor Round NOVA
BRITTANNIA etcc.



