AN HISTORY OF ENGLAND, IN A SERIES of LETTERS FROM A NOBLEMAN to his SON.

VOL. I.

Nec minimum meruere decus, vestigia Graeca
Ausi deserere, and celebrare domestica facta.
HOR. LONDON, Printed for J. NEWBERY, at the Bible and Sun, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCCLXIV.

TO THE PUBLISHER.
SIR,
AS I perceive by the tenor of your publications, that you chiefly aim at the
improvement of youth, if the following Letters are thought any-way conducive to
that purpose, you have my permission to print them.

The first fifty-one letters ending with these words -- avenged them of their
enemies -- were written by a Nobleman to his son, at the university. The rest
are added, as you will easily perceive, by a much inferior hand; for they were
drawn up by me. This I should not have attempted, but that the design would
otherwise have been defective. With regard to my letrers, therefore, little
else can be said, but that I have endeavored, as much as was in my power, to
imitate the original. As to his Lordship's, I think it may be asserted, that
they are written with more judgment, spirit, and accuracy than any which have
yet appeared upon this subject. I am conscious, indeed, that they have been,
for some time, handed about in manuscript; but, it is presumed that this will
not make a publication of them less acceptable, even to those who are possessed
of a written copy.

I have observed in the schools about town, that, when masters set their
scholars to read the history of England, they seem at a loss in their choice of
an historian. The more voluminous works of this kind are quite unsuited to a
juvenile capacity; the shorter abridgments are chiefly a crowded collection of
facts, totally dry and unentertaining. These letters may, probably, supply the
defect; and I desire that the volumes may be sent, at my expense, to each of
the schools mentioned in the enclosed paper.

I am, SIR, Yours etc.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, IN A SERIES of LETTERS.
LETTER I.
Dear Charles,
THE accounts I receive from Mr. your tutor, at Oxford, of your conduct and
capacity, give me equal pleasure, both as a father and as a man. I own myself
happy, in thinking that society will one day reap the advantage of your
improved abilities; but I confess myself vain when I reflect on the care I have
taken, and the honor I shall perhaps obtain from assisting their cultivation.
Yes, my Charles, self-interest thus mixes with almost every virtue; my paternal
vanity is, perhaps, greater than my regards for society in the present
instance; but you should consider that the bad pride themselves in their folly,
but good minds alone are vain of their virtues.

I need scarcely repeat what I have so often observed, that your assiduity for
a few years, in the early period of life, will give ease and happiness to the
succeeding: a life spent in regularity and study, in college, will not only
furnish the mind with proper materials, but fit it, by habit, for future
felicity. Mathematics will teach you to think with closeness and precision, and
the ancient poets will enlarge the imagination; from these two helps, and not
from the subtleties of logic or metaphysical speculation, the mind is at once
strengthened and improved; logic or metaphysics may give the theory of
reasoning, but it is poetry and mathematics, though seemingly opposite, that
practically improve us in every rational enquiry.

These were the studies I recommended as principally conducive to your
improvement, and your letters alone are sufficient instances of your complying
with my advice. I confess I fear giving any future instructions on such topics
to one who seems better conversant with them than his instructor, and must
leave a subject, where my superiority at least may be contested.

But after all, my child, these studies are at best but ornaments of the mind,
designed rather to polish or to fit it for higher improvements, than as
materials to be employed in guiding our conduct as individuals, or members of
society. There is a field that, in some measure, still lies untrodden before
you, and from that alone true wisdom and real improvement can be expected, I
mean history: from history, in a great measure, every advantage that improves
the gentleman, or confirms the patriot, can be hoped for; it is that which must
qualify you for becoming a proper member of the community, for filling that
station, in which you may hereafter be placed, with honor; and for giving, as
well as deriving, new luster from that illustrious assembly, to which, upon my
decease, you have a right to be called.

Yet, still, nothing can be more useless than history, in the manner in which
it is generally studied, where the memory is loaded with little more than
dates, names, and events. Simply to repeat the transaction is thought
sufficient for every purpose, and the youth, who is applauded for his readiness
in this way, fancies himself a perfect historian. But the true use of history
does not consist in being able to settle a genealogy, in knowing the events of
an obscure reign, or the true epoch of a contested birth; this knowledge of
facts hardly deserves the name of science: true wisdom consists in tracing
effects from their causes. To understand history is to understand man, who is
the subject. To study history is to weigh the motives, the opinions, the
passions of mankind, in order to avoid a similitude of error in ourselves, or
profit by the wisdom of their example.

To study history in this manner may be begun at any age. Children can never be
too soon treated as men. Those masters, who allege the incapacity of tender
youth, only tacitly reproach their own: these who are incapable of teaching
young minds to reason, pretend that it is impossible. The truth is, they are
fonder of making their pupils talk well than think well, and much the greater
number are better qualified to give praise to a ready memory than a sound
judgment. The generality of mankind consider a multitude of facts as the real
food of the mind, not as subjects proper to afford it exercise. From hence it
proceeds, that history, instead of teaching us to know ourselves, often only
serves to raise our vanity, by the applause of the ignorant; or, what is more
dangerous, by the self-delusion of untried vanity.

Assuming ignorance is, of all situations, the most ridiculous: for, in the
same proportion as the real man of wisdom is preferable to the unlettered
rustic, so much is the rustic superior to him, who without learning imagines
himself learned. Better that such a man had never read, for then he might be
conscious of his weakness; but the half-learned man, relying upon his strength,
seldom perceives his wants till he finds his deception past a cure.

Your labors in history have hitherto been rather confined to the words, than
the facts, of your historical guides. You have read Xenophon or Livy, rather
with a view of learning the dead languages in which they are written, than of
profiting by the instructions which they afford; the time is now come to
discontinue the study of words for things, for exercising your judgment, and
giving more room to reason than the fancy.

Above all things, I would advise you to consult the original historians in
every relation. Abridgers, compilers, commentators, and critics, are in general
only fit to fill the mind with unnecessary anecdotes, or lead its researches
astray. In the immensity of various relations, your care must be to select such
as deserve to be known, because they serve to instruct: the end of your labor
should not be to know in what year fools or savages committed their
extravagances, but by what methods they emerged from barbarity. The same
necessity there is for knowing the actions of the worthy part of princes, also
compels us to endeavor to forget those of the ignorant and vulgar herd of
kings, who seemed only to slumber in a seat they were accidentally called to
fill. In short, not the history of kings, but of man, should be your principal
concern, and such an history is only to be acquired by consulting those
originals who painted the times they lived in. Their successors, who pretended
to methodize their histories, have almost universally deprived them of all
their spirit, and given us rather a dry catalogue of names, than afforded an
opportunity for improving reflection.

History, in general, is precious or insignificant; not from the brilliancy of
the events, the singularity of the adventures, or the greatness of the
personages concerned, but from the skill, penetration, and judgment of the
observer. Tacitus frequently complains of his want of materials, of the
littleness of his incidents, of the weakness and villainy of his actors; yet,
even from such indifferent subjects, he has wrought out the most pleafing and
the most instructive history that ever was written; it will therefore be
entirely the work of your own judgment to convert the generality of historians
to your benefit; they are, at present, but rude materials, and require a fine
discernment to separate the useful from the unnecessary, and analyze their
different principles.

Yet, mistake me not, I would not have history to consist of dry speculations
upon facts, told with phlegm, and pursued without interest and passion; nor
would I have your reason fatigued continually in critical research; all I
require is, that the historian would give as much exercise to the judgment as
the imagination: it is as much his duty to act the philosopher, or politician,
in his narratives, as to collect materials for narration. Without a
philosophical skill in discerning, his very narrative must be frequently false,
fabulous, and contradictory: without political sagacity, his characters must be
ill drawn, and vice and virtue be distributed without discernment or candor.

What historian can render virtue so amiable as Xenophon? Who can interest the
reader so much as Livy? Salust is an instance of the most delicate exactness,
and Tacitus of the most solid reflection: from a perfect acquaintance with
these, the youthful student can acquire more knowledge of mankind, a more
perfect acquaintance with antiquity, and a more just manner of thinking and
expression, than, perhaps; from any others of any age or country. Other ancient
historians may be read to advance your study in ancient learning, but these
should be the groundwork of all your researches. Without a previous
acquaintance with these, you enter upon other writers improperly prepared;
until these have placed you in a proper train of moralizing the incidents,
other historians may, perhaps, injure, but will not improve you. Let me
therefore, at present, my dear Charles, entreat you to bestow the proper care
upon those treasures of antiquity, and by your letters, every post, communicate
to your father, your friend, the result of your reflections upon them. I am at a
loss, whether I shall find more satisfaction in hearing your remarks, or
communicating my own? However, in which soever of them I shall be employed, it
will make my highest amusement; amusement is all that I can now expect in this
life, for ambition has long forsaken me; and, perhaps, my child, after all,
that what your noble ancestor observed is most true: When all is done, human
life is, at the greatest and the best, but like a froward child, that must be
played with and humoured a little to keep it quiet till it falls asleep, and
then the care is over. I am, my dear boy, your most tender friend and
affectionate father,

* * * * * * *

LETTER II.
Dear Charles,
IENTIRELY acquiesce in your sentiments, that universal history is a subject
too extensive for human comprehension, and that he who would really reap its
advantages must be contented to bound his views. Satisfied with being
superficially acquainted with the transactions of many countries, he should
place his attention only on a few. Your remarks on the Greek and Roman
republics far surpass my expectations; you have justly characterized them as
the finest instances of political society, that could be founded on the basis
of a false religion. Where religion is imperfect, political society, and all
laws enacted for its improvement, must be imperfect also; religion is but
philosophy refined, and no man could ever boast an excellence in politics,
whose mind had not been previously opened and enlarged by the institutions of
theology, an error in religion ever producing defects in legislation.

Forgive me, dear Charles, if I once more congratulate myself upon the pleasure
I expect from your future eminence; you are now tinctured with universal
history, and are thoroughly conversant with that of Greece and Rome; but there
is another department of history still remaining, and that much more important
than any I have yet mentioned, I mean the HISTORY OF ENGLAND. The history of
this country is the proper study of an Englishman: however, it peculiarly
concerns those who may, like you, probably one day have such an important
character to support in its administration; and whose name, perhaps, may find a
place in the historic page. All who are inamoured of the liberty and the
happiness which they, peculiarly enjoy, in this happy region, must surely be
desirous of knowing the methods by which such advantages were acquired; the
progressive steps from barbarity to social refinement, from society to the
highest pitch of well constituted freedom. All Europe stands in astonisnment at
the wisdom of our constitution, and it would argue the highest degree of
insensibility in a native of this country, and one too who from his birth
enjoys peculiar privileges, to be ignorant of what others so much admire.

I shall not insist upon a principal use, to which some apply the English
history, I mean that of making it the topic of common conversation; yet, even
from such a motive, though in itself trifling, no well-bred man can plead
ignorance: its greatest advantage, however, is, that a knowledge of the past
enables the attentive mind to understand the present: our laws, customs,
liberties; abuse of liberty can scarcely be understood without tracing them to
their source, and history is the only channel by which we can arrive at what we
so eagerly pursue.

But were I to compare the history of our own country, in point of amusement,
with that of others, I know of none, either ancient or modern, that can vie
with it in this respect; in other histories, remote and extensive connexions
interrupt the reader's interest, and destroy the simplicity of the plan: the
history of Greece may be easily divided into seven different histories, and
into so many it has actually been: the history of Rome, from the time it begins
to be authentic, is little else than an account of the then known world; but,
in England, separated, by its situation, from the continent, the reader may
consider the whole narrative, with all its viciffitudes, in one point of view;
it unites the philosopher's Hutcheson.
definition of beauty, by being variously uniform.

The materials for an history of our own country are therefore excellent, but I
can direct to few who have improved them with a proper degree of assiduity or
skill. The historians, who have treated of this subject, have in general
written for a party, many with an open avowal of virulence and abuse. Some, who
have had talents for this undertaking, were unable to afford themselves
sufficient leisure to polish their work into the degree of requisite
perfection; while others, who have labored with sufficient assiduity, have
been woefully deficient in point of sagacity, or proper skill in the choice of
those facts they thought proper to relate. Whatever has been known, and not
what was worth knowing, has been faithfully transcribed, so that the present
accounts of the country resemble the ancient face of the soil; here an
uncultivated forest, there a desolate wild, and, in a very few places, a spot
of earth adorned by art, and smiling with all the luxuriance of nature. To make
history like the soil truly useful, the obstacles to improvement must be torn
away, new assistances must be acquired from art, nor can the work be deemed
properly finished, till the whole puts on simplicity, uniformity, and elegance:
as the case is at present, we must read a library, to acquire a knowledge of
English history; and, after all, be content to forget more than we remember.

The history of England may be divided, properly enough, into three periods;
with regard to their duration, indeed, very different, but almost of equal
importance. The first is from the commencement of our knowledge of the country
to its conquest by the Norman; the second, from the time of William the
Conqueror to the alteration of the constitution, by the beheading King Charles
I; the last contains the remaining period of English history. It will at once
appear, that such a division is extremely unequal: the first department may be
said to extend to a period of more than a thousand years; the second contains
not less than seven hundred, while the remaining does not take up two.
Chronologists, indeed, would divide it in a very different manner; however, I
am rather inclined to this division, more by the peculiar use which may be made
of each period, than the mere regularity of time. To consider the first part,
with accuracy, belongs properly to the philosopher; the second is the business
of him who would understand our constitution, and is the proper study of a
legislator; and the last of such as would be acquainted with the connexions and
relations in which we stand with regard to our neighbors of the continent, and
our foreign and domestic trade, namely to the merchant and politician.

There is scarce any other passion, but that of curiosity, excited by a
knowledge of the early part of our history. We may go through the account of
that distant era, with the same impartiality with which we consider the
original inhabitants of any other country, as the customs of our British
ancestors have no connection with our own. But then, to some minds, it must be a
pleasing disquisition to observe the human animal, by degrees, divesting
himself of his native ferocity, and acquiring the arts of happiness and peace;
to trace the steps, by which he leaves his precarious meal, acquired by the
chase, for a more certain, but a more laborious, repast, acquired by
cultivation.

After the conquest, the rude outlines of our present constitution began to be
formed. Before the Norman invasion, there might be some customs resembling
those at present in practice; but the only reason of their continuance was,
because they had before been practiced in common among the invaders. At this
period, therefore, an Englishman becomes interested in the narrative; he
perceives the rise and the reasons for several laws, which now serve to
restrain his own conduct, or preserve his property. The rights of our monarchs,
the claims of foreign potentates, the ineffectual struggles for liberty, and
the gradual encroachments of ambition, should highly interest him, as he in
some measure owes to these transactions the happiness he enjoys.

But the last period is what is chiefly incumbent upon almost every man to be
particularly conversant in. Every person, residing here, has a share in the
liberties of this kingdom; and the generality of the people are ultimately
invested with the legislation. It is therefore each man's duty to know that
constitution, which, by his birthright, he is called to govern; a freeholder,
in a free kingdom, should certainly be instructed in the original of that
agreement, by which he holds so precious a tenure.

These are motives that equally influence almost every rank of people, but how
much more forcibly should they operate upon you, whose honors, whose trusts,
and possessions, are likely to be so considerable. Others may have their
liberties to support; you must sustain your liberty, your property, and the
dignity of your station. I shall therefore, without farther preface, in some
future correspondence, communicate the result of my enquiries on this subject;
a subject which, I own, has employed all the leisure I had to spare from, I
will not say more-important, but more necessary duties. I shall endeavor, at
once, to supply the facts, and the necessary consequences that may be deduced
from them. I shall separate all that can contribute nothing, either for
amusement or use, and. leave such to dull compilers, or systematic writers of
history, whose only boast it is to leave nothing out. A more thorough knowledge
of the subject can not be communicated, without pain, nor acquired without
study; perhaps too minute a skill in this, or any one subject, might disqualify
the mind for other branches of science, equally demanding your care. Of
whatever use it may be, I hope you will consider it as an instance of my
regard, and, though it should fail to improve, yet I hope it may remain a
sufficient testimony, how much I am,

Dear Charles, etc.
LETTER III.
Dear Charles,
THERE seems to be a natural tendency, in every nation, to run its antiquity as
far back as possible, and when once they have arrived at the regions of
fiction, no bounds are set to the wonders of every narration. Were we to take
our character of the ancient inhabitants of this island, from the legends,
monuments, or traditions, which have been left by those inhabitants themselves,
we might be apt to imagine that arts, even in that early period, were
cultivated, and sciences known to some degree of perfection. The Druids, if we
believe some fragments of their own, understood astronomy and medicine, and
gave lessions in morality and metaphysics. But what credit can be given to the
accounts of a barbarous people, told by themselves? The knowledge and learning,
indeed, of their priests, might be great, if compared with the almost brutal
simplicity and ignorance of the rest of the people; but it could not deserve
the name of science, if put in competition with what was known and practiced by
their polite cotemporaries of Greece and Rome.

From the accounts of those sensible writers, and not from the fictitious
absurdities of the Druids themselves, we are to estimate this ancient people of
Britain. All that we find related by credible witnesses and sufficient
authority, before the Romans entered this island, is, that the country was
filled with incredible numbers of people, and their fields stored with great
plenty of animals, savage and domestic. Their houses were meanly built, and
scattered, as if accidentally, over the country, without observance, distance,
or order. The only motives of their choice were the peculiar fertility of some
happy spot, or the convenience of wood and water. They lived upon milk, and
flesh procured by the chase, for corn was scarcely known among them. What
clothes they wore were skins of beasts, but a great part of their bodies was
left always exposed to the injuries of the weather; all that was naked being
painted with blue. This custom of painting was universal among them, either in
order to strike terror into their enemies, or to defend the pores of the naked
skin from the vicissitudes of the season.

Their towns, if a collection of huts could deserve that name, were mostly
built upon the coasts, in such places as strangers generally resorted to for
the sake of commerce. The commodities, exported, were chiefly hides and tin,
and, probably, other spontaneous productions of the soil, which required no art
in the preparation.

Their government, like that of the ancient Gauls, consisted of several petty
principalities, which seem to be the original governments of mankind, and
deduced from the natural right of paternal dominion: but whether these little
principalities descended by succession, or were elected by the consent of the
people, is not recorded. Upon great or uncommon dangers, indeed, the chief
commander of all their forces was chosen by common consent, in a general
assembly, as Caesar relates of Cassibelaunus, upon his invasion. The same was
done upon their revolts against the Roman colonies, under Caractacus and their
Queen Boadicea; for, among them, women were admitted to their principalities,
and general commands, by the right of succession, merit, or nobility.

Such were the customs of the ancient Britons, and the same may serve for a
description of every other barbarous nation, of which we have any knowledge.
Savage man, is an animal in almost every country the same; and all the
difference between nations results from customs introduced by luxury, or
cultivated by refinement. What the inhabitant of Britain was at that time, the
inhabitant of South America, or Cafraria, may be at this day. But there was one
custom, among the ancient inhabitants of this island, which seems peculiar to
themselves, and is not to be found in the accounts of any other ancient or
modern nation. The custom I mean, was a community of wives, among certain
numbers, and by common consent. Every man married indeed but one woman, who was
always after, and alone, esteemed his wife: but, it was usual for five or six,
ten, twelve, or more, either brothers or friends, as they could agree, to have
all their wives in common. But this, though calculated for their mutual
happiness, in fact proved their greatest disturbance; and we have some
instances, in which this community of wives produced dissensions, jealousies,
and death. Every woman's children, however, were the property of him who had
married her; but all claimed a share in the care and defense of the whole
society, since no man knew which were his own.

To estimate the wisdom of the people, we must examine the manners of their
teachers. If the laity were so very barbarous, the Druids, their instructors,
must have but few pretenses to superior refinement. Yet, I know not how, we
have different and almost contradictory accounts of this extraordinary
fraternity. They have been represented, by some, as persons of learning, which
had been derived to them by long tradition. Their skill consisted in the
observation of the heavens, and, upon the influence of its appearance, they
gave their countrymen omens of failure or success. They taught a morality,
which principally consisted in justice and fortitude. Their lives were simple
and innocent, in woods, caverns, and hollow trees; their food acorns or
berries, and their drink water. They were respected and admired, not only for
knowing more than other men, but for despising what all others valued and
pursued; by their virtue and temperance, they reproved and corrected those
vices in others, from which they were themselves happily free; and made use of
no other arms, than the reverence due to integrity, to enforce obedience to
their own commands. From such a conduct as this, they derived so much
authority, that they were not only priests, but judges also, throughout the
nation. No laws were instituted without their approbation; no person punished
with bonds, or death, but by their condemnation.

But, on the other hand, we learn, that all their knowledge was imposture, and
their simplicity only a savage passion for solitude. Their language was
barbarous, and their manners still more rude. These were such as called aloud
for some more enlightened instructors, to conquer and to direct them. The
Druids, seemingly formed for the people among whom they governed, sacrificed
human victims, which they burned in large wicker idols, which were made so
capacious, as to contain a multitude of persons, who were, in this manner, at
once consumed in the flames. The female Druids plunged their knives in the
breasts of the prisoners taken in war, and prophesied from the manner in which
the blood happened to stream from the wound. Several of their altars, consisted
of four broad stones, three of which were set edgewise, and the fourth
horizontally on the top, and are still to be seen.

In accounts, so seemingly contradictory, we are entirely to give assent to
neither. That they pretended to astrology is certain; this, and not their
piety, probably gave them such influence among their countrymen. To judge of
what the Britons then were, as I have already hinted, we must look at what
savage nations are at present: We perceive, what authority a pretense to
astrology, in barbarous countries, confers; the astrologer being generally
considered, in almost all the Eastern kingdoms, as the second, if not the first
man of the state. That the Druids deceived the people with a false religion
cannot be denied, but, yet, I can never think that they were impostors: they
first deceived themselves into a belief and veneration of what they taught, and
then made use of every motive to persuade the people. The ignorant and
erroneous, in the commerce of this life, are many; the villains and impostors
are found more rarely. As for human sacrifices, few probably were destroyed
upon this horrid occasion, but prisoners taken in war, and such have ever been
sacrificed, by savage nations, rather from a principle of revenge, than
religion. It is not peculiar to the religion of the Druids alone, but was
primarily the barbarous practice of those very nations who then exclaimed
against it most loudly.

In short, my dear Charles, the religion of the Druids was no more than that of
every barbarous nation, with whose ceremonies we have any acquaintance. This
was the religion, not only practiced in Britain, but which prevailed,
originally, over the greatest part of the world. The original inhabitants of
Europe, as a learned antiquary Mountfaucon.
has finely proved, were the same: all speaking one language, obeying the same
deities, and governed by similar laws. Successive invasions, from different
parts of Asra, brought new changes; and, as the colonies went westward, the
Greek, the Roman, and Teutonic languages and customs were super-induced over
the ancient Celtic. All those countries, most accessible to strangers, or most
subject to invasions, were first changed; those which lay surrounded by
mountains, or were in some measure retired by their situation, such as Wales,
the Highlands of Scotland, Ireland, Biscay, Crim Tartary, etc. all preserved
their primitive manners. It is even found, that these countries still adhere to
many of the ancient Druidical customs, as far as the alteration of religion
will admit. We have, as yet, an opportunity of viewing many of their ancient,
and, in some measure, venerable superstitions, still in Ireland: these are,
however, wearing out by degrees, and another century will entirely efface every
vestige of barbarous antiquity. I am,

Dear Charles, etc.
LETTER IV.
IT is, in some measure, happy for a barbarous people to be conquered by a
country more polite than themselves. Whatever evils the ambition of heroes
generally produces, it is attended with one advantage, that of disseminating
arts, and making humanity more extensive. The Britons, savage and rude as they
were, in some measure, called for more polite instructors, and the Romans, of
all the conquerors history can produce, were at once the most polite, the most
generous, and humane.

A country, divided like Britain into a variety of small principalities, must
necessarily have been separated into various, and often opposite, interests.
Its princes must have been frequently at war, merely for the sake of plunder,
to keep their troops in exercise, or to gratify vanity and ambition. We may
easily, therefore, form an idea of the miseries of a rude people, who had
nothing but fear to keep them from war with each other, and who could build no
longer on a lasting peace, than while they avoided giving an opportunity of
plunder to their enemies.

To complete the picture of the calamities of this people, all the trading and
maritime towns, next the continent, were in possession of foreign invaders long
before the Romans entered the island. These were a people who had been received
from motives of hospitality, and who, under the character of exiles in
distress, having got footing and shelter amongst the natives, afterward made
war upon them, as enemies. This, added to their frequent tumults and massacres
among each other, rendered them, not only internally unhappy, but an easy prey
to every invader. Besides, they were ill supplied with arms, and those they had
were only such as were no longer in use among the refined nations of the
continent. They fought in chariots armed with scythes, applied to the wheels.
These were terrible without execution, and made rather to astonish the rude and
ignorant, than to break such ranks, as were not to be daunted by the mere
appearance of danger. Their defensive armor only consisted of a wicker shield;
and they approached an enemy shouting, clashing their arms, and sounding their
trumpets, as if they had a design rather to terrify than destroy. Their
chariots generally attacked the enemy's cavalry, and from these they would
frequently leap, and fight on foot, till, being fatigued or overpowered, they
would resume their seats and make the best retreat possible. Unpolished
nations, though they have more fierceness in the onset, never act with that
cool presevering resolution, which almost ever ensures victory. This can be
acquired, only where discipline and subordination have long prevailed; and a
nation, however brave, levied in haste, will probably never make a figure
against veteran troops, hardened by contention, or elated by long success. This
was the nature of the inhabitants, but the face of the country rendered them
still more open to every invader. It was plain and open, without towns,
fortresses, or any place of retreat to secure them from an enemy, except what
their forests might happen to afford; in a word, they were destitute of all
means of defense, but what their native courage was able to supply, or a love
of liberty might inspire.

Such were the people and customs of Britain, when the Romans first invaded
their island, under the ensigns of Julius Caesar, the greatest commander that
ever led an army. When I consider this great man, who had already been the
conqueror of Gaul; when I reflect on his courage, his conduct, and
perseverance; when I take into my view the troops he headed, inured to
discipline, and fighting in a manner with which barbarous nations were entirely
unacquainted; when I consider these circumstances, and compare them with those
of the Britons in the same period, I feel a more than usual share of surprise
at the bravery and conduct with which these poor barbarians opposed him.

It was an established maxim, in the politics of Rome, to deem all auxiliaries
as principals, and to allow none to assist the enemies of the state with
impunity. This was the pretense Caesar laid hold of to justify his invasion of
England, which was not only looked upon as an ally, but likewise as an asylum
to the Gaulish nations, which were at that time enemies of Rome. This might,
probably, be the ground of his invasion, but the pleasure of conquest was his
real motive. To extend the Roman empire, though already it was become too
extensive to be governed, was at that time thought the most glorious
atchievment of humanity. The rest of Europe was, in some measure, subdued, and
nothing left but countries desolate by forests and marshes, and neither
tempting, from their appearance, nor affording any hopes of plunder, from their
poverty. Heroism was, at that time, the boast of ambition, nor have men, till
very lately, been taught to consider conquerors with an eye of contempt or
detestaticn. Caesar was resolved on being a hero, and was more fond of triumph
than justice.

His forces were composed of Germans, Batavians, and Gauls, and the flower of
his veteran Roman legions. He set sail from Gaul about midnight, and arrived on
the British coast about ^en in the afternoon, fifty-five years before the
Christian era. The Britons, with their naked troops, made a brave opposition
against this veteran army: the encounters between them were fierce, and many,
the losses were mutual, and the success various. Cassibelaunus was chosen
general in chief of the British forces, but even a foreign invader was not
sufficient to keep the petty princes, which composed the barbarous army,
united. Dissension soon entered amongst them, and some, jealous of the
sincerity of their general, or envying his greatness, fled over to Caesar,
submitted to the Romans, and claimed their protection. Others followed this
base example, till Cassibelaunus, weakened by so many desertions, resolved upon
making what terms he was able, while he had yet an opportunity. He sends to
Caesar, acknowledges the Romanpower, agrees upon a certain tribute, and
delivers hostages. Britain, from the beginning, has been remarkable for
internal dissension, and dissension ever strengthens or invites the invader.

The Romans were pleased with the name of a new conquest, and glad of ending an
adventure with honor, which at first promised only difficulties and danger.
But the extended forest, and the trackless wild, was not a quarry for men
intent on spoil, and raised to greater expectations. Having, therefore, rather
discovered than subdued the southern parts of the island, they returned into
Gaul with their whole forces, and once more left the Britons to their customs,
religion, and laws. By two expeditions which Caesar made into this island, he
rather increased the glory than the dominions of Rome, and gave Britain the
honor of being the last triumph of that mighty republic, which had before
reduced the most powerful kingdoms of the habitable globe.

Whatever the tribute was, which they had contracted annually to pay, we have
many reasons, from history, to believe, they paid it but very negligently. I
mention this, as an instance of the little faith which can be expected from an
extorted submission, while there is no longer a power to enforce obedience.
During the reign of Augustus, that Emperor had formed a design of visiting
Britain, but was diverted from it by an unexpected revolt of the Pannonians.
Some years after, he again resumed his design, but, being met in his way by the
British ambassadors, promising the accustomed tribute, and making the usual
submissions, he a second time desisted. The year following, finding them
unfaithful to their promise, he prepared, a third time, for the invasion of
this island, but was prevented from putting his design into execution, by their
ambassadors, who averted his fury by their adulations and humility. The most
savage countries understand flattery almost as well as the most polite, since,
to be sufficiently servile is, perhaps, the whole of the art, and the truest
method of pleasing.

Tiberius followed the maxims of Augustus, and, wisely judging the Roman empire
already too extensive, made no attempt upon this island. Some Roman soldiers
being wrecked on the English coast, the inhabitants not only assisted them with
the greatest humanity, but sent them, in safety, back to their general. In
consequence of such friendly dispositions, there was a constant intercourse
between the two nations; the principal English nobility resorted to Rome, and
some received their education there.

By these means the Britons began sensibly to improve. The first art, which a
savage people is generally taught by their politer neighbors, is that of war.
Though not wholly addicted to the Roman manner of fighting, the Britons, however,
adopted several of their improvements, both in their arms, and their
arrangement in the field. Their ferocity to strangers was now also lessened,
and they first began to coin money, the oldest British coin being that of
Comius, who learned a part of the Roman politeness by a residence in Caesar's
camp. They still, however, continued to live as herdsmen and hunters, and
adhered to their usual superstitions, a manifest instance of the country being,
as yet, but thinly inhabited. When we read, in Caesar, of the numbers of this
people, and the vast armies they brought into the field, I am apt to doubt his
veracity. Such armies could scarcely be levied, even now; and yet, nothing is
more certain, than that Britain is at least ten times more populous now than it
was at that time. A nation of herdsmen and hunters can never be very populous;
their subsistence takes up a large tract of country, while the husbandman
converts every part of nature to human use, and produces the greatest quantity
of subsistence from circumscribed possession. The Roman historian has increased
their numbers, only to increase the luster of his glory in subduing them. I am,
etc.

* * * * * * *

LETTER V.
Dear Charles,
THE second expedition into Britain was made by Claudius, under the conduct of
Plautius, and pursued by Ostorius, and other Roman commanders, with the usual
success. It is true, there were many Britons who preferred their hardy
simplicity to imported elegance, and, rather than offer their necks to the
Roman yoke, presented their breasts to the sword. But, by degrees, their
fierceness was subdued, or wholly destroyed; the southern coast, with all the
adjacent inland country, was secured by the conquerors, who took possession by
fortifying camps, building fortresses, and planting colonies. The rest of the
country seemed to look on, patiently waiting till it became their turn to be
expelled from their precarious habitations, or to receive their imperious
masters.

Prosperity, in general, breeds insolence; the corruption of the Praetors and
officers, that were appointed to govern this harrassed people, once more roused
them into resentment. Caractacus, General and King of the northern Britons,
with inferior numbers, not only made a brave defense, but often seemed to claim
a doubtful victory. A drawn battle might be considered as a triumph, to a
people only used to a defeat. He continued nine years to hold out, and
threatened fatal dangers to the Roman colonies. At length, however, in a
decisive battle, the Britons were totally defeated, and Caractacus taken
prisoner. His exclamation, when led in triumph through Rome, is too remarkable
to be passed over in silence. Observing the opulence, splendour, and luxury of
that great city, Alas! cried he, how is it possible, that people, possessed of
such finery at home, could envy me an humble cottage in Britain?

Yet, one expiring effort more was made by the Britons, to recover their
liberty in the times of Nero. Paulinus, the general of the Romans, going with
the greatest part of his forces, to subdue the isle of Anglesey, where the
superstitions of the Druids were still practiced with all their horrid
circumstances; the Britons, presuming upon his absence, made a general
insurrection under Boadicea, Queen of the Iceni, whom the Romans had treated
with shocking indignities, condemning her, for some slight offense, to be
whipped, and her daughters to be ravished by the soldiery: in revenge,
therefore, at the head of a numerous army, she fell upon the Romans wherever
they were defenseless, took their castles, destroyed the chief seats of their
power at London and Verulam, and, such was the slaughter, that seventy thousand
fell by this revolt. Paulinus, however, soon returned with his army,
encountered the British forces headed by their Queen, overthrew their powers,
and pursued his victory with a slaughter of eighty thousand men, while the
conquered Queen poisoned herself in despair. Here ended the liberties of
Britain. All that now remained were satisfied to exchange freedom for life:
this was their last struggle; they now lost, not only the hopes, but even the
desire of vindicating the privileges of nature

From this time the Romans seemed more desirous of securing what they
possessed, than of making new conquests; they separated the Roman province, by
a wall, from the Picts, their barbarous and restless neighbors; and attempted
to humanize the fierceness of those who acknowledged their power. The Roman
laws and customs, habits and arms, language and manners, baths and feasts,
studies and learning, were introduced and became general. A conduct so prudent,
which had been first begun by Agricola, was pursued by his successors with so
much success, that the Romans had little trouble afterward in Britain, except
in the defense of their northern frontier.

Had Rome continued peaceable mistress of the world, the Britons, now almost
perfectly civilized, might have found means of being happy. But, upon the
divisions in the Roman empire, which was ruled by faction, and governed by an
insolent soldiery, torn by sedition at home, and subject to invasion abroad,
the British legions were, at several times, called over into Gaul, and, with
them, great numbers of the bravest of the British youth. Thus, we see every
method pursued, to weaken and render this once hardy people effeminate. The
arts of luxury were introduced to soften their minds; they were denied the use
of arms, which might still uphold their native bravery; the flower of their
youth were, at intervals, drained away, and those that remained were bred up in
servitude and subjection. All those who had a passion for liberty, were long
since destroyed, and none were suffered to live, but such as had betrayed their
country in the beginning, or had been too cowardly to resist any unjust
invasion. It is no wonder, therefore, that, as the Roman forces decreased in
Britain, the Picts became more bold in their incursions. These, probably were
the descendants of such Britons as once bravely exchanged their country for
freedom, and crossing the narrow sea, which the Romans could not guard, in
little boats of wicker covered with leather, they filled the country, wherever
they came, with spoil, slaughter, and desolation: when repulsed, by superior
numbers, they usually retired, loaded with spoils, and watched for the next
opportunity of invasion, when the Romans were drawn away into the remoter parts
of the island.

These enterprises were often repeated, and as often repressed, till, in the
reign of Valentinian the younger, the empire of Rome began to tremble for its
capital. Myriads of barbarous nations, under the names of Goths and Vandals,
invaded the dominion of this mistress of the world, with terror, perseverance,
and rapidity. All the Roman legions were now, therefore, drawn from Britain,
and all the Britons, who were fit for military service, were brought away to
relieve the Emperor, who was pursued by the Goths into Piedmont, and there
besieged in Aquilea, a town he attempted to defend.

The Romans, now taking their last leave of this province, left the Britons to
their own government, and the choice of their own Kings. For the exercise of
their arms, and for repairing their ramparts, they gave them the best
instructions that such terrible times would permit. Nothing can be more
affecting than the picture of Britain at that period; though the Roman soldiery
were drawn away, their families and descendants were still spread over the
whole country, and left without a single person, of conduct or courage, to
defend them. The Britons, who were left, began to enter into fresh dissentions
for superiority: the enemy continued to pour in greater numbers than ever, from
their native forests and mountains: famine, with all its horrid attendants, of
disease, robbery, and sedition, increased the misery of the times: their vices,
as Gildas, a cotemporary writer, observes, kept pace with their calamities, the
whole forming one detestable groupe of cowardice, cruelty, and distress.

In this terrible situation it was, that they implored the assistance of the
Romans for relief; their letter upon this occasion still remains upon record:
To Aetius, thrice Consul. The groans of the Britons. Driven by our barbarous
enemy to the sea, and from thence back upon the barbarians, we have only left
us the choice of a grave: either to be killed by the one, or to be drowned by
the other. The Romans, however, were unable to help themselves, much less
capable of giving succor to so remote, and, at present, such unserviceable
allies.

Yet, amidst such calamities, this people seemed to have still a peculiar
happiness in store, for they had, in general, embraced Christianity. At what
time the Gospel was first preached in this island is not known, nor is it
material to know: it is certain, that England converted its Pagan conquerors to
the lights of revelation; and, though this people received laws from others,
they adorned them with the religion of truth.

Arts, arms, and elegance, must take their rise, by slow degrees, in every
country, and can never be, at once, introduced into it with success. All the
pains, bestowed in British education, only served to render this people more
miserable; dressed them up as victims for every invader, and plunged them in
all the misery of knowing happiness without being able to enjoy refinement. The
people of a country, just reclaimed from barbarity, in some measure resemble
the soil. The cultivation of a few years may be sufficient to clear away the
obstacles to agriculture, but it requires several ages, before the land
acquires a proper degree of fertility. Thus, all the blood and treasure, which
the Romans lost in the conquest of Britain, in the (...) only served to
depopulate the country, and prepare it for a repletion from new invaders. The
Roman poli^s succeeded in quelling British courage, but the inhabitants,
deprived of that, seemed destitute of every virtue.

I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
Dear Charles,
I Remember but few instances in history, where the conquerors did not excel
the people conquered, in every virtue. Savage barbarity, of effeminate luxury,
have almost ever been imputed to those countries which were obliged to admit a
foreign invader. There is a period, between natural rudeness and excessive
refinement, which seems peculiarly adapted for conquest and war, and fits
mankind for every virtuous and great achievement. In this state of
half-refinement, the Saxons were at the time in which the Britons were thus
distressed. This virtuous and warlike people had conquered wherever they came,
and to them the wretched remains of this forlorn people had recourse for
protection.

As the conquest of this island is generally imputed to the Saxons as a piece
of treachery, and an invasion of those rights they were only called to protect,
I shall give the invitation they received from the Britons, as it has been
left us by Wittichindus, a cotemporary historian of credit; and from hence it
may be judged, what little right the Britons had afterward to complain: "The
poor and distressed Britons, almost worn out by hostile invasions, and
harrassed by continual incursions, are humble suppliants to you, most valiant
Saxons, for succor. We are possessed of a wide, extended, and a fertile
country; this we yield wholly to be at your devotion and command. Beneath the
wing of your valor, we seek for safety, and shall willingly undergo whatever
services you may hereafter be pleased to impose."

The Saxons were one branch of those Gothic nations, which, swarming from the
northern hive, came to give laws and liberty to the rest of Europe. A branch of
these, under the name of Suevi, had, some time before Caesar's invasion of
Gaul, subdued and possessed an extensive empire in Germany. These, for their
strength and valor, were grown formidable to all the German nations. The Suevi
were reckoned, by their neighbors, a people for whom the very immortal Gods
were not a match in war. They were after divided into several nations, and each
became famous for subduing the country which it invaded. France, Germany, and
England, were among the number of their conquests.

The Saxons were far more polished than the ancient inhabitants of Britain,
though their acquirements were much inferior to the boasted refinements of Rome.
They dressed with some degree of elegance, a luxury which was unknown to the
Britons: the women used linen garments, trimmed and striped with purple; their
hair was bound in wreaths, or fell in curls upon their shoulders; their arms
were bare, and their bosoms uncovered. Fashions which, in some measure, seem
peculiar to the ladies of Britain to this day. Their governments were entirely
elective, and nearly republican; their commanders were chosen by merit, and
dismissed from duty when their authority was no longer needful. The custom of
trying by twelve men is of Saxon original; slavery, and base submissioin, was
unknown among them, and they preferred death to a shameful existence: We (...),
by Marcellinus, that a body of them being taken prisoners by Symmachus, the
Roman, he designed to exhibit them, in the amphitheatre, as gladiators, for the
entertainment of the citizens of Rome. The morning, however, on which they were
expected to perform, they were every one found dead in his prison, each choosing
rather a voluntary death, than to be the ignominious instruments of brutal
satisfaction to their conquerors. The chastity of this people is equally
remarkable, and to be without children was to be without praise: but, in war,
they chiefly excelled; they had, in some measure, learned discipline from the
Romans, whom they had often conquered: it was their maxim to esteem fortune as
a doubtful advantage, but courage as a certain good. A nation, however,
entirely addicted to war, must, consequently, be addicted to cruelty; and those
terrors, which a man is taught not to fear himself, he is seldom afraid of
inflicting on society. The Saxons are represented as a cruel nation, but their
enemies alone have drawn the picture.

Vortigern, who had been elected King of the distressed Britons, easily induced
these conquerors to lend him assistance. They came over into Britain in great
numbers, commanded by Hengist and Horsa, of the race of Odin. They marched
against the Picts, and, in conjunction with the British arms, defeated them in
several encounters, obliging them to retreat into the most northern parts of
the province. The Saxons, thus finding themselves evidently the most powerful
people upon the island, seemed resolved to reward themselves with those parts
of it which were most to their liking. They first obtained consent from the
Britons to send over for more forces, under a pretense of guarding their
frontier. These seated themselves in the northern provinces, and repressed the
incursions of the Picts and Scots with great bravery and success. Those nations
were, therefore, obliged to bound their territories with the rough and
mountainous countries that lie between the two seas, and such have, ever since,
continued the boundaries of England and Scotland.

The province thus secured from the common enemy, dissensions began to arise
between the Britons and their new allies. The Saxons valued too highly the
assistance they had given, and the Britons, perhaps, under-rated what they had
received. In a contest of this nature, it is natural to imagine, that the
stronger nation alwas imposes laws on the weaker. The Saxons, allured by the
fertile soil and the soft climate, continued to invite greater numbers from the
continent, and now turned their arms upon the Britons, who vainly attempted to
oppose them. This contention was still more inflamed by the difference of their
opinion in matters of religion, the Saxons being all Pagans, and the Britons
professing Christianity. At such a time as this a Christian hero was wanted to
vindicate the rights of Christianity, and probably, merely for this reason,
fiction has supplied us with a Christian hero King Arthur, the British
champion, is said to have worsted the Saxons in twelve different engagements;
yet, notwithstanding all his victories, and whatever his prowess might have
performed, it did not serve to rescue his country from its new possessors. The
Saxons pursued their designs with courage and fierceness; new swarms of their
countrymen came continually over, till, at length, in about a century and an
half, they had subdued the whole body of the province, and established in it
seven different kingdoms, which were, by the writers of those times, styled the
Saxon Heptarchy.

The Britons, driven from their ancient possessions, to escape the fury of the
conquerors, retired to the mountainous parts of Wales and Cornwall, countries
barren and desolate, but, in some measure, surrounded by the sea, and, toward
the land, difficult of access. Some great colonies of them, wholly abandoning
their native country, sailed over to the neighboring shores of France, where,
possessing new seats, they gave a new denomination to that peninsula which
still preserves the name and memory of Britain there, a name no longer
continued at home.

All the possessions of the Britons now fell into the power of the conquerors,
who began to lose their natural fierceness, and soften into the luxuries of
those they had invaded. Though conquerors ever bring their own customs among
the people they subdue, they, at the same time, assume some customs from those
they have conquered. The Saxons now lost all that spirit of freedom their
nation had been long famous for, and, in imitation of the Britons themselves,
among whom slavery was permitted since the times of the Romans; they ma 'e the
people of Britain slaves. These wretches were used in tilling the ground,
feeding cattle, and other servile works; farming out lands at a certain yearly
stipend, but always held at the will and pleasure of the landlord. The children
of this miserable people belonged to the soil, like the rest of the stock or
cattle upon it; and thus began villenage in England, an horrid custom, borrowed
from the Romans originally, and derived now to the Saxon, by vicious imitation.

The Saxons, now no longer fearing domestic foes, relaxed into luxury and vice,
and, finding no other enemies to subdue, began to fight with each other. The
Princes of the seven kingdoms they had erected, began mutually to emulate each
other's power, and, for the space of above two hundred years, all the misery
that ambition, treachery, or war, could bring upon a kingdom, was the
consequence of their animosity. The dissensions of petty Princes are ever more
distressful to a people, than the wars of extensive empires. The historians of
this period are as barbarous as the transactions they describe; but it is
sufficient to know, that, after many various events and revolutions between the
several races of the heptarchy, Ecbert, descended from the West Saxon Kings,
partly by conquest, and partly by inheritance, became the first sole Monarch of
England. This was the name which the country now assumed, to distinguish it
from the principality of Wales, possessed by the ancient Britons, and from that
part of the island north of the Tweed, possessed by the Picts and Scots, called
Scotland.

No customs, truly British or Roman, were now to be seen: the language of the
country, which had been either Latin or Celtic, was discontinued, and the Saxon
or English only was spoken. The land, before divided into colonies or
governments, was now cantoned into shires, with Saxon appellations to
distinguish them. Their habits in peace, and arms in war, their titles of
honor, laws, and methods of trial, were all continued as originally practiced
by the Suevi; but their commonwealths were now no more; these were changed for
despotic and hereditary monarchies: and their exemplary chastity, and their
abhorrence of slavery, were quite forgotten. The conquerors were corrupted by
prosperity: they became Christians, indeed, by the preaching of Austin the
Monk, but this little improved their manners; twelve hundred British Monks, who
would not acknowledge Austin for a saint, are said to have been slaughtered by
order of these new converted Christians, in a field near Caerleon.

Christianity, when erroneously taught, is even more injurious to society than
Paganism. In all the sacrifices made to the British idols, or the Saxon god
Woden, I have not read of such a multitude of victims offered together. The
devotion of this people, however, was equal to their ignorance. Their Kings
frequently abdicated the crown for the cowl; their Queens thought it
meritorious, though joined in wedlock, to continue in virginity; and some, for
this erroneous practice, after their death were canonized as saints.

At this period, namely, the seventh century, the arts and sciences, which had
been before only known in Greece and Rome, were disseminated over Europe, where
they sufficed, indeed, to raise the people above natural and savage barbarity,
but then they lost their own splendour by the transplantation. The English, at
the time I am now speaking of, might be considered as polite, if compared to
the naked Britons at the invasion of Caesar. The houses, furniture, clothes,
meetings, and all the luxuries of sense, were almost as great then as they are
at present; they were only incapable of sentimental pleasure: all the learning
of the times was consigned to the clergy, and little could be expected from
their efforts, since their principal tenet was to discard the lights of reason.
An eclipse was, even by their historians, talked of as a dangerous omen of
threatened distresses: and magic was not only believed possible, but, what is
more strange, there were some who even fancied they understood magic. In short,
this whole period was tissued over with ignorance, cruelty, and superstition;
and the kingdom seemed united under one Monarch, only the more readily to admit
a new invader.

I am, etc.

LETTER VII.
IT might have reasonably been expected, that a fortunate prince as Ecbert had
always been, at the head of so large an united kingdom, after the expulsion of
the Picts, Scots, and Britons, should not only have enjoyed the fruits of
peace, but even have left tranquillity and happiness to his most distant
posterity. Yet, such is the instability of human affairs, and the weakness of
man's best conjecture, that Ecbert was scarcely settled in his throne, when the
whole kingdom was alarmed by the approach of an unexpected enemy, fierce,
barbarous, and brave. About this time a mighty swarm of those nations which had
possessed the countries bordering the Baltic, began, under the names of Danes
and Normans, to infest the western coasts of Europe, filling the coasts
wherever they came with slaughter and devastation. It is remarkable enough,
that the people whom they spoiled were no other than colonies of their own
countrymen, who had emigrated some centuries before, and plundered those very
countries, where they were now themselves plundered in turn. The Normans fell
upon the northern coasts of France. The Danes chiefly levelled their fury at
England, and, entering the Thames with an incredible number of ships, carried
away all that could neither be defended nor withdrawn from the suddenness of
the invasion.

The weak opposition the Danes met with from the English, only served to invite
them to renew their depredations, and make fresh attempts the succeeding
season. The bravest blood of the English had been already exhausted in civil
war, under the dissensions of the Saxon heptarchy; and, when those wars were
terminated, pilgrimages, penances, cloisters, and superstitions, served to
enfeeble the remainder. Thus the Saxons were become as unequal to make
opposition against the Danes, as the Britons were to oppose the Saxons
heretofore. They therefore bought off their invaders with money, a remarkable
instance how much they had degenerated from their warlike ancestors. The money
which was thus extorted, only increased the avarice and the strength of the
enemy. It was also raised by the Kings, from exactions on the people: this
caused new discontent, and served to hasten the fall of their thrones, which
already began to totter.

This century, however, did not pass without various success, and doubtful
fortune, between the two contending nations. No less than twelve battles are
said to have been fought in one year. The Danes divided their forces into
several camps, removed them from one part of the country to another, as they
were forced by necessity, invited by hopes of spoil, or induced by the weakness
and divisions of the enemy. They fortified posts and passages, built castles
for the defense of their borders, and the whole country was, in some measure,
covered with their redoubts, the vestiges of which remain to this day. This
manner of fortifying the country, and the difference of religion, seem to be
the only customs in which the Danes differed from the Saxons they had invaded.
They were both originally from the same country, and their manners consequently
the same.

The similitude of language, laws, and manners, soon produced an intercourse
between both nations, and, though they still were enemies, the Danes gradually
began to mingle among the people of England, and submit to the laws and kings
of the country they had partly subdued. But what concord could be expected
between Christians, as the English then were, and Pagans, for such the Danes
still continued? Wherefore, though the English, in some measure, admitted the
Danes, yet, still, they hated them: this produced frequent contests, which most
frequently laid the country in blood.

In this period of cruelty, jealousy, and desolation, a man seemed raised up to
his bleeding country, to defend its rights, improve the age in which he lived,
and even to adorn humanity. Alfred the Great was the fourth son of Ethelwolfe,
King of England, and had received the earlier part of his education under the
inspection of Pope Leo, in Rome, which was at that time the chief seat of arts
and learning in Europe. Upon the death of his elder brother, Ethelred, he was
called to the English throne, of which he was only nominally put in possession,
the country being overrun by the Danes, who governed with cruelty and pride.

His reign began with wars, and he was forced into the field immediately upon
his coronation. His first battles were fought with merited success, but, at
length, being overpowered by a Danish combination, the unfortunate Alfred was
obliged to seek safety by flight. In this manner being abandoned by the world,
without succor, and fearing an enemy in every face, the royal fugitive was
resolved not to forsake his country, as was usual with his predecessors. He
retired to the cottage of a cowherd, in a solitary part of the county of
Somerset, at the confluence of the rivers Parret and The One: here he lived six
months, as a servant, and, as we are told, was sometimes reproved for his
indolence, by his mistress, the cowherd's wife. The Earl of Devonshire was
alone privy to the place of his retreat; and happening to overthrow a body of
the Danes, acquainted Alfred with the news of his success.

Alfred now, therefore, began to consider how to turn the present consternation
of the enemy to his own advantage. He apprized his friends with the place of
his retreat, and instructed them to be ready, with what troops they could
raise, upon a minute's warning. But still, none was found who would undertake
to give intelligence of the forces, or posture of the enemy. Not knowing,
therefore, who to confide in, he undertook this dangerous task himself: in the
simple dress of a shepherd, with an harp in his hand, he entered the Danish
camp, had admission to the principal generals, and was allowed to excel upon
that instrument. He soon perceived that they were divided among themselves; he
seizes the favorable moment, flies to the Earl of Devonshire, heads his
troops, forces their camp, and gains a complete victory.

Alfred knew the arts of negotiation as well as those of war; he had sufficient
address to cause himself to be acknowledged King by the Danes, as well as his
own natural subjects. London still remained to be subdued: he besieged it, took
and fortified it in a manner which was then thought impregnable. He fitted out
a fleet, kept the Danes in his dominions under proper subjection, and repressed
the invasions of others from abroad. His next care was to polish that country,
by the arts of peace, which he had subdued by the arts of war. He is said to
have drawn up a body of laws, but those which remain to this day, under his
name, seem to be no more than laws already practifed in the country by his
Saxon ancestors, and to which, probably, he gave his sanction. The trial by
juries, mulcts and fines for offenses, by some ascribed to him, are of a much
more ancient date than his reign. It is sufficient to observe, that the penal
laws of our ancestors were mild and humane. As a nation becomes more polite,
the penal laws become more numerous and severe, till, at length, growing
intolerable to the poor, against whom they are principally levelled, they throw
off the yoke of legal bondage, either by admitting a despotic prince, or by
taking the government into their own hands, by military invasion. I remember
few great characters, in history, that had not a regard for the sciences.
Alfred is said to have founded the university of Oxford, and supplied it with
books from Rome. The spirit of superstition had quite suppressed all the
efforts of philosophy at that period: he is said to have lamented, that no
priest, in all his dominions, understood Latin: as for him, he knew it, and was
also well versed in the geometry of those barbarous ages. He was an excellent
historian, made some translations from the Latin which still subsist and it is
even said, that he composed some excellent poems in the Saxon language. Those
hours which he could take from business he gave to study. He was a complete
oeconomist, and this gave him an opportunity of being liberal: His care even
extended to the manner in which the people built their houses. Before his time,
the generality of the nation made use of timber, mostly, in building: Alfred
having raised his palaces with brick, the nobility, by degrees, began to
imitate his example.

From his time, though the reigns immediately succeeding are marked with
ignorance, superstition, and cruelty, yet, in general, history puts on a form
less severe: the whole nation seems to emerge into a greater degree of
politeness than it had before enjoyed. The coins of this period are better
struck than those of preceding Princes. The marine, in his time, seems first to
have given rise to our claims to the ocean. In short, from this period, English
history may properly be said to commence, and our constitution to take its
rise. We are connected with the events previous to Alfred's reign, only by
motives of curiosity: but, with those that follow him, by the more prevailing
inducements of interest.

This great man died in the year 900, in the 52d year of his age, after a reign
of more than twenty-eight years; the first part spent in war and distress, the
latter in peace and prosperity.

I am, etc.

LETTER VIII.
Dear Child,
HISTORIANS and critics are fond of representing the period which succeeded
Alfred, as entirely barbarous: yet, there are many traces of both erudition and
politeness, in those very ages which have been particularly called obscure. In
the reign of his successor, Edward, we find gallantry, which is one of the best
marks of politeness in any country, not entirely unknown: his amors with
Egwina, who, though by birth a shepherd's daughter, received an education
becoming a princess, and, at length, subdued the heart of Edward, is a
remarkable instance of the power the fair sex then enjoyed. In this reign too,
the university of Cambridge was founded. The famous Scotus flourished at this
time, a man whose learning appears amazing, even to an age which prides itself
upon its erudition.

In the reign of Athelstan, who succeeded Edward, the Bible was translated into
Saxon, a work which at once evinces a just opinion, with regard to religion and
the learning of that age. Alliances also on the continent were formed by this
Monarch; it is said he was equally feared by his neighbors, and loved by the
greatest Princes of Europe. We find little remarkable in the reign of Edmund I,
but that the first capital punishment was instituted by him. He had remarked,
that fines and pecuniary punishments were too gentle methods of treating those
who were convicted of robberies, who generally were men who had nothing to
lose; he therefore ordered, that, in gangs of robbers, the oldest of them
should be condemned to the gallows. This was reckoned a very severe law at the
time it was instituted: What would our ancestors say, upon seeing the penal
laws now used by their posterity!

The death of this Monarch is too remarkable to be passed without notice. His
virtues, abilities, wealth, and temperance, promised a long and happy reign:
when, on a certain day, as he was solemnizing a festival in Gloucestershire, he
saw a malefactor, whose name was Leolf, (who had been banished the kingdom for
his crimes) sitting at one of the tables in the hall where the King was at
dinner. Enraged at such insolence, he commanded him to be apprehended; but,
perceiving him drawing his dagger, in order to defend himself, the King started
up in a rage, and, catching him by the hair, dragged him out of the hall. In
the mean time Leolf had now drawn out the dagger, and, lifting his arm, with a
furious blow stabbed the Monarch to the heart, who fell down on the bosom of
his murderer.

The Danes, during these three reigns, were kept within proper bounds; they
frequently revolted, were subdued, and treated with lenity by the conquerors.
The Monks now began to have the direction of affairs, and, consequently, to
enfeeble the state.

Edred succeeded Edmund, and began his reign with some victories over the
Scotch and Danes, which the Monks were skilful enough to attribute to the
miraculous interposition of Heaven. Among the number, Dunstan, Abbot of
Glastonbury, had peculiar influence over the mind of the credulous Monarch,
and, at length, became the director of the affairs of the kingdom. By this
means the Monks acquired such power, as served to retard the vigor of every
future operation against the Danes. However, what they took from the real
strength of their country they returned in appellations of honor and respect.
Edred was styled, Monarch of Albion, and King of Great Britain, and this at a
period when his monarchy was upon the very verge o^ ruin.

The sons of Edred were set aside, and Edwy, his elder brother's son, was
placed on the throne. At this time the crown appears to have been elective, and
those elections entirely influenced by the clergy. The Secular priesthood seems
to have placed the crown upon this Monarch's head, in opposition to the Monks,
who were then rising into esteem among the people. Thus were the English
divided by religious disputes, and involved in all the fury of civil war, while
the Danes were every hour growing in strength, and sending over fresh forces.
The Seculars were possessed of the riches of the country, but the Monks, who
opposed them, were in possession of the power of working miracles. Crucifixes,
altars, and even horses, were heard to harangue in defense of the Monks, and
inveigh against the Secular clergy: but particularly Dunstan the Monk had no
small power over the hosts of heaven; his illuminations were frequent, his
temptations strong, but he always resisted with bravery. The Devil, say the
Monks, and that seriously too, once tempted him in the shape of a fine woman;
but he soon sent him off, by catching him by the nose, and leading him about
for public derision. Such stories were then propagated, and, what is still more
extraordinary, were believed. I am the more surprised at the credulity of the
times, as the people certainly were not destitute of classical learning, and
some skill in the polite arts. We have a Latin speech or two still preserved,
which were spoken by their Monarchs at that period, replete with elegance,
perspicuity, and good sense.

However that may be, the Monks, by the assistance of miracles, prevailed: Edwy
was dethroned, and his brother Edgar placed in his room. Historians represent
England, under this reign, as completely happy; and, it is certain, the kingdom
still seemed to enjoy the fruits of Alfred's wisdom: for, of all the obscure
ages, from the entire decadence of taste, till its revival in the fifteenth
century, this might be termed the Augustan. The English fleets are described as
amounting to above four thousand ships; Kings came to Edgar's court, and
returned without molestation or fear. Music, painting, and poetry, were then
held as necessary accomplishments to a refined education, as they are now. But
his gallantries are peculiarly the subject of the historians of that time, and
are still the theme of romance. He is said, first, to have debauched a nun,
then to have attempted the chastity of a nobleman's daughter; but the amor,
which is famous to this day, is his adventure with the beautiful Elfrida.

Edgar had long heard of the beauty of a young lady, whose name was Elfrida,
daughter to the Earl of Devonshire: however, not willing to credit fame in this
particular he sent Ethelwolfe, his favorite, to see if Elfrida was indeed that
incomparable woman report had spoken her. Ethelwolfe had no sooner arrived at
the Earl of Devonshire's, and cast his eyes upon that nobleman's beautiful
daughter, but he became desperately enamoured of her himself: such was the
violence of his passion, that, forgetting his master, he demanded the beautiful
Elfrida for his own wife. His request was granted; the favorite of a King was
not likely to find a refusal, and they were married in private. Returning soon
after to court, he assured the King, that Elfrida was much inferior to the
representations that had been made of her, and he was amazed how the world
could talk so much of her charms. The King was satisfied, and no longer felt
any curiosity. Ethelwolfe, therefore, after some time, perceiving the King
perfectly indifferent with regard to the lady, represented to his Majesty, one
day, that, though the fortune of the Earl of Devonshire's daughter would be a
trifle to a Monarch, yet it would be an immense sum to a needy subject, and,
therefore, he humbly prayed leave to pay his addresses to her, as being the
greatest heiress in the kingdom. A request, so seemingly reasonable, was
readily complied with. Ethelwolfe returned to his wife, and their nuptials were
solemnized in public. He had the precaution, however, of not permitting her to
appear at court, before a King so susceptible of love, and she so capable of
inspiring passion. Notwithstanding all these precautions, it was impossible to
keep his treachery long concealed. Favorites are never without private
enemies, who desire an opportunity of rising upon their ruin. Edgar was
informed of all, but, dissembling his resentment, he took an occasion to visit
that part of the country where this miracle of beauty was detained. Accompanied
by his favorite, when he was near the place, he told him, he had a curiosity
to see his wife, of whom he had formerly heard so much. Ethelwolfe,
thunderstruck at the proposal, did all in his power, but in vain, to dissuade
him; all he could obtain was leave to go before, on pretense of preparing her
for the King's reception. On his arrival, he fell at his wife's fee, confessing
what he had done to be possessed of her charms; conjured her to conceal, as
much as possible, her beauty from the King, who was but too susceptible of
passion. Elfrida promised compliance, but, prompted either by vanity, or
revenge, she adorned her person with the most exquisite art, and called up all
her beauty upon this occasion. The event answered her expectations: the King no
sooner saw, but he loved her, and was instantly resolved to obtain her. The
better to effect his design, he concealed his sensations from the husband, and
took his leave with a seeming indifference. Soon after Ethelwolfe was sent to
Northumberland, upon pretense of urgent affairs, but he never performed the
journey; he was found murdered in a wood, by the King's command, who took
Elfrida to court, where their nuptials were celebrated with the usual solemnity.

I have been the more explicit in this story, as, in the first place, it serves
to show, that ladies were admitted to court in this early period; it also
demonstrates, that men and women were never kept separate in England, as in
Spain and other countries; it still evinces, that, however polite they might be
at the time I am speaking of, there was still a savage air, that mixed in every
action, and sufficiently distinguished those ages of barbarism from the
civilized ages of Greece and Rome. But, to stamp the age with still greater
rudeness, Edgar, who was thus guilty of murder, sacrilege, and adultery, was
placed among the number of saints, by the Monks who have written his history.

The defects of Edgar's government fell upon his successors; the power of the
Monks increased, and that of the state was diminished in proportion. Every
provision for the safety of the kingdom began to decline; and the remissness of
the English made way for new incursions of the Danes, who exacted exorbitant
tributes from the Kings, and plundered the subjects at discretion. Edward the
Martyr, who had not the least title to so glorious an appellation, was crowned
King by the single authority of Dunstan, and, consequently, increased Monkish
power: he was murdered by order of Elfrida, who seems to have the highest
contrast, in her own person, of the greatest external charms, and the most
odious internal deformity.

Ethelred II, finding himself unable to oppose the Danes, compounded with them
for his own safety. But, soon after, being strengthened by an alliance with the
Duke of Normandy, he laid a detestable scheme for massacring all the Danes in
the kingdom. This plot was carried on with such secrecy, that it was executed
in one day, and all the Danes in England were destroyed without mercy. A
massacre, so cruel and perfidious, instead of ending the long miseries of this
wretched country, only made way for new and greater calamities than before.

Swayne, King of Denmark, exasperated by the slaughter of his countrymen, and,
among the rest, of his own sister, who was beheaded in Ethelred's presence,
soon after landed in England, and filled the whole kingdom with the marks of an
horrid vengeance, obliging Ethelred to fly to Normandy for relief. The English,
unable to oppose, yet unwilling to submit, for a short time groaned under the
Danish yoke, and again, upon an opportunity given, called their banished
Monarch back to his throne. Ethelred returned, but, being a weak, as well as a
cruel Prince, he lost the hearts of his subjects, and, with their love, all his
authority. He never, therefore, could recover strength enough to oppose the
forces and numbers of the Danes, to whom many of the English nobles, as well as
commonalty, had, in his absence, submitted.

Swayne was the first Danish Monarch who swayed the English scepter, but he
died before he could be said to come to a peaceable enjoyment of what he had so
hardly toiled for. His son Canute, however, achieved what the father had
begun: Edmund Ironside, elected by the English, who was his rival in
government, and who succeeded Ethelred in this disputed sovereignty, continued,
for a short time, to oppose the progress of the Danish conquests with success;
but, Canute gaining a bloody victory over the forces of this Monarch, he was
obliged, first, to a division of the kingdom, and his untimely death, soon
after, gave Canute quiet and undisturbed possession of the whole.

This fierce Monarch cut off some of the Royal Saxon line, and forced others
into exile. He was at once King of England, Denmark, and Norway; and, from the
extent of his dominion, perhaps, rather than from the greatness of his mind, he
received, from historians, the title of Canute the Great. The end of his life,
however, was very different from the beginning: the first part of it was marked
with invasion, rapine, and cruelty; but the latter equally remarkable for
justice, humanity, and religion. Upon a certain occasion, being desirous of
showing his flatterers how l^ttle he deserved the exaggerated praise with which
they loaded him, he ordered a chair to be brought, and, seating himself on the
seashore, where the tide was about to flow, he addressed the sea in this
manner: O sea, thou art under my dominion, and the land which I sit upon is
mine; I charge thee, approach no further, nor dare to wet the feet of thy
Sovereign: the tide, however, advancing as usual, he turned to his courtiers,
and observed, that the titles of Lord and Master only belonged to him whom both
earth and seas were ready to obey.

Harold Harefoot and Hardicanute, his Danish successors, were unworthy of him;
the first is remarkable for no virtue, and the latter is distinguished,
principally, for his cruelty and avarice. This last, dying suddenly, at a
feast, left the Danish race of Kings so hated, by their exactions and
impositions on the people, that Edward, surnamed the Confessor, of the Saxon
race, found, both from Danes and Saxons, an easy accession to the crown.

Thus expired, not only the dominion, but all attempts or invasions of the
Danes for the future. Though their ravages had continued for above two hundred
years, yet they left no change of laws, customs, language, or religion. The
many castles they had built, and the many families they left behind them,
served alone to discover the places of their establishment. After the accession
of Edward the Confessor to the crown, the English and Danes, as if wearied with
mutual slaughter, united to support his government, and, peaceably living
amongst each other, formed ever after but one people.

The reign of Edward the Confessor was long and happy. He had lived long in
Normandy, and, in some measure, adopted the language and learning of that
country. His wars were successful, both in Scotland and Wales, though managed
by his leaders, and without his personal attendance. The easiness of his
disposition, however, together with his credulity and superstition, paved the
way for another invasion of his country, as if the English were destined to be
governed only by foreign masters.

The Earl Godwin, by whose interest Edward had come to the crown, exerted all
his influence to establish his own son, Harold, as his successor. This too
powerful subject pretended to be much displeased at the favor shown, by the
King, to the Norman nobility, who came over, in numbers, to the English court.
These discontents at length produced an insurrection. Edward, now grown old,
and indolent by nature, undertook to oppose those disorders, rather by
negotiations than arms. Treating with rebels is a certain method of increasing
their power: by this means Harold gained, by degrees, the authority he
contended for, and had power sufficient to settle the succession upon himself.

While Edward was thus leaving his earthly kingdom to contention and misery, he
was, in the mean time, busily employed in gaining, as he imagined, an heavenly
one. It was not sufficient for him to aspire to all the virtues necessary for
carrying him to heaven; he desired to be reckoned a saint of the first order.
He pretended to several revelations, was possessed of the gift of prophecy, and
was the first who touched for those scrophulous disorders, which, from hence,
have been denominated the King's Evil. But what gained him a distinguished
place among the saints, was his continence, his refraining from the woman to
whom he was actually married. It is said he espoused the beautiful Editha,
purely to exercise his virtues, by withstanding a continual temptation. This,
as we may suppose, left her to sterility, and thus his leaving no issue was the
cause of numberless miseries which fell upon the kingdom soon after.

Edward, as I observed, had no children. He seemed, however, desirous of
leaving the crown to his nephew Edgar Atheling; but, distrusting his weakness
to defend this title, and knowing the strength of Harold, his opponent, he left
the succession undecided. It is probable, however, this weak Monarch was no way
sollicitous who succeeded in a government which he seemed himself to despise.

I am, etc.

LETTER IX.
UPON the death of Edward, Harold now alleged that he was appointed, by will,
his successor. This was no more than what the people of England had expected
long before; his pretensions were believed by some, and allowed by all. He had
some right to a crown, hitherto elective, from his private virtues; and he
confirmed his rights by the most irresistible argument, his power. Thus this
Monarch came to the throne by the most equitable of all titles, I mean, the
consent of the people.

His exaltation seemed only to be the commencement of his calamities. His first
trouble was from his own brother, who, being the elder, obtained assistance
from Norway to set up a title to the English crown. Harold immediately levied a
numerous army, and marched to meet the Norwegians, who, with a vast force, had
overrun all the northern parts of the kingdom, and had committed incredible
devastation. Both armies soon joined battle; the Norwegians, for some time,
bravely defended a bridge which lay between them, but, at length, the valor of
the English surmounted every obstacle. Harold passed the bridge, renewed the
assault, and, after an obstinate resistance, entirely routed the invaders.
There had never before been seen in England an engagement between two such
numerous armies, each having no less than threescore thousand men. The news of
this victory diffused the greatest joy over the whole kingdom; but their
raptures were soon suppressed by an information, that William of Normandy,
surnamed the Conqueror, had landed at Hastings, with a vast body of disciplined
veterans, and laid claim to the English crown.

This Prince was the natural son of Robert Duke of Normandy: his mother's name
was Arlette, a beautiful maid of Falaize, with whom Robert fell in love, as she
stood gazing at her door whilst he passed through the town. William, who was
the offspring of this amor, owed his greatness to his birth, and his fortunes
to his personal merit. His body was vigorous, his mind capacious, and his
courage not to be intimidated. His father, Robert, growing old, and, as was
usual with Princes of that age, superstitious, resolved upon a visit to the
Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem. The nobility used every argument to dissuade him,
but the persisted in his design. He showed them William, whom, though
illegitimate, he tenderly loved, recommending him to their care and loyalty. He
then exacted their homage and fealty to this Prince, not yet above ten years
old; and then put him under the tutelage of the French King, in whom he placed
the highest confidence.

Robert, soon after going into Asia, and dying, left his son rather inheritor
of his wishes than his crown. Our young soldier found himself at once exposed
to many dangers, from his youth and inexperience, from the reproach of his
birth, a suspected guardian, a disputed title, and a distracted state. However,
he surmounted all with uncommon fortitude and bravery, nor, till he had
established peace, order, and tranquillity, in his own kingdom, did he turn his
ambitious views abroad.

It has been already seen, that Edward the Confessor, in flying from his
enemies, resided for a long time at the court of Robert, Duke of Normandy; and
upon this William founded his claim. Whether gratitude might engage this exiled
Prince to make William, his benefactor's son, any promises of the kingdom of
England, after his decease, is, at this distance of time, uncertain: William,
however, upon the death of Edward, immediately made his pretensions, and, upon
the former promise of Edward, founded all the justice of his demaud. To this he
added, that Harold had himself assured him of his interest in the succession,
when forced upon the Norman coast; and he therefore sent to remind him of
fulfilling his engagements.

Harold admitted of neither of these claims, and resolved to defend, by his
valor, what he had acquired by his intrigues. He was at the head of a large
army, lately victorious, and now confident. He observed, that he had been
elected by those who only had the power of placing Kings on the throne, namely,
by the people; and that he could not resign his crown without a breach of that
trust reposed in him by his constituents. He added to these reasons one of
still greater weight, he was possessed of power, and knew how to defend his
property.

William, who had landed his army at Hastings in Sussex, about the beginning of
October, at first made no appearance of invading an hostile country, but rather
of incamping in his own. But he was soon roused from his inactivity by the
approach of Harold, who returned from the defeat of the Norwegians, with all
the forces he had employed in that expedition, and all he could invite, or
collect, in the country through which he passed. These were, in general, brave,
active, and valiant troops, in high spirits, strongly attached to their King,
and eager to engage. The army of William, on the other hand, consisted of the
flower of all the continent: the troops of Bretagne, Brabant, Bologne,
Flanders, Poictou, Maine, Orleans, France, and his own, were united under his
command. He had long been familiar with conquest, and his troops were confident
of his military capacity. England, never before, nor ever since, saw two such
armies drawn up to dispute its crown. The day before the battle William sent an
offer to Harold, to decide the quarrel between them by single combat, and thus
spare the blood of their people; but Harold refused, and said he would leave it
to God to determine. Both armies, therefore, that night pitched in sight of
each other, expecting the next terrible day with solicitude: the English
passed the night in songs and feasting, the Normans in devotion and prayer.

The next morning, at seven, as soon as day appeared, both armies drew up in
array against each other. Harold appeared, leading on the center of the English
army, on foot, that his men might be more encouraged by seeing their King
exposed to equal danger with themselves. William fought on horseback, and
commanded the body of reserve. The Normans began the fight with their
cross-bows; these at first galled and surprised the English, and, as their
ranks were close, the arrows did great execution: but, when they came to close
fight, the Normans were hewn down by the English bills, which, of all weapons,
inflicted the most terrible and ghastly wounds. William, endeavoring to pierce
their ranks, assaulted them so often, and with such bravery, that he had three
horses killed in the attempt. Perceiving that they still continued
impenetrable, he now pretended to fly; this drew the English from their ranks,
and he was instantly ready to take advantage of their disorder. Upon a signal
given, the Normans returned to the charge with greater fury than before, broke
the English troops, and pursued them to a rising ground. Harold now flew from
rank to rank, though he had toiled all day, from morning till now near
night-fall, in the front of his Kentish men; yet still he continued, with
unabated vigor, to renew the fight, and exhort his men by his voice and
example. The day now again seemed to turn against the victors, and the Normans
fell in great numbers. The fierceness and obstinacy of this memorable battle
was often renewed by the courage of the leaders, wherever that of the soldiers
began to slacken. Fortune, at length, determined a victory, that valor was
unable to decide: Harold, making a furious onset at the head of his troops, was
shot into the brains by an arrow. All the courage of the English expired with
their brave, but unfortunate, leader. He fell with his sword in his hand,
fighting for his country, amidst the heaps of slain, so that the royal corpse
could hardly, after the battle, be distinguished among the dead.

This was the end of the Saxon monarchy in England, which had continued for
more than six hundred years. Before the times of Alfred the Kings seemed
totally immersed in ignorance; and, after him, taken up with combating
superstition, or blindly obeying its dictates. As for the crown, it was rather
bequeathed by its possessor to whom he thought proper, than transmitted by
hereditary and natural succession. As for the laws and customs of this race,
they brought in many of their own, and adopted several of the ancient Btitons
and Romans, which they found in the country upon their invasion. They assumed
the name of Kings, nay, some took the Greek appellation of Basileus, titles
unknown in the country from whence they came. Their Earls were called Dukes, or
Duces, a name borrowed from the Romans, and signifying Captains. The lower
classes of people were bought and sold with the farms they cultivated; a custom
first introduced by the conquerors of the world, and which subsists in some
countries, where the Roman laws continue, to this day. Their canon laws also at
that time were often mixed with their civil laws, and were equally coercive;
but these canon laws had their origin from Rome, and the Priests and Monks, who
drew them up, generally had their education there. We must not, therefore,
ascribe all the laws and customs, which at that time prevailed over England, to
a Saxon original, since they were, in some cases, derived from the Britons and
Romans. But now all those customs and laws, of whatever original, were cast
down into one common mass, and cemented by those of Norman institution. The
whole face of obligation was changed, and new masters and new forms observed.
The laws were improved, but the taste of the people for polite learning, arts,
and philosophy, for more than four hundred years to come, were still to
continue the same. It is, indeed, surprising, that in such a variety of events,
such innovations in manners, and such changes in government, true politeness
never came to be cultivated. Perhaps the reason may be, that the people
suffered themselves to be instructed only by the clergy, and the clergy have a
certain standard of politeness which they never go beyond, and at which they
were arrived at the time we are speaking of. A Monk of the tenth century, and a
Monk of the eighteenth century, are equally enlightened with science, and
equally fit to promote the arts of happiness. I am,

Dear Charles, Yours most affectionately, etc.

LETTER X.
Dear Charles,
YOU now enter upon that part of the English history, which gives birth to our
present happy constitution. Those laws, which are so much esteemed by the rest
of Europe; those liberties, which are so dear to us at home, begin to dawn at
this period. The English, hitherto almost unknown to the rest of the world,
began, after this revolution, to make a considerable figure in Europe. The
variety of dispositions of several foreign countries, being imported here,
blended into one common national character, and produced sentiments of courage,
freedom, irresolution, and pride.

Immediately after the victory at Hastings, in which, it is said, sixty
thousand English were slain, the Conqueror marched toward London. He carried
before him a standard which had been blessed by the Pope, and to this all the
clergy quickly resorted. The Bishops and Magistrates of the metropolis came out
to meet him, and offer him a crown which they no longer had in their power to
refuse. William was glad of thus peaceably being put in possession of a throne,
which several of his predecessors had not gained but by repeated victories; he
complied with the terms which were offered him, and, among these terms, it is
to be presumed, the Church's interests were not forgotten. Though William had
it in his power to force the people into a compliance with his views, yet he
chose to have their election of him considered as a voluntary gift of their
own. He knew himself to be their conqueror; he desired to be thought their
lawful King.

Thus was William possessed of an idea of his own power to enforce obedience;
and the English of their own generosity, in having freely presented him with a
crown. Impressed with such opposite sentiments, the one was inclined to oppress
a people, whom he, in fact, thought incapable of resistance; and they, on the
other hand, were inclined to revolt against one, whom they fancied to have had
received, from their own hands, all authority. Numberless, therefore, were the
insurrections of the English against their new Monarch; and every suppressed
rebellion only gave fresh instances of the Conqueror's mildness and humanity.
The English were unwilling to pay any taxes, toward enriching those they now
began to look upon as conquerors; and William was under the most solemn
engagements of providing for those adventurers who had left their native
country to place him on the throne.

Hitherto William had acted like one who was rather the father than the invader
of the country, when news was brought him, that a body of Northumbrian English,
assisted by the Danes, had set upon the Norman garrison in York castle, and put
every man to the sword. After repeated rebellions, which he had quelled before,
and such frequent pardons, which were the consequence, he now found that
nothing but rigor would do for the future. He marched therefore to meet the
enemy, bought off the Danes for a sum of money, and took a signal revenge upon
the Northumbrians, unable to oppose him.

From this time he seems to have regarded England rather as a conquest than a
justly acquired dominion. His diffidence of the English became more conspicuous
every day, and his partiality to the Normans more galling. All places of trust
and confidence were taken from the one and given to the other: from this time
he thought only of establishing himself on the throne, without nicely examining
whether the means were consonant to justice and humanity.

If historians, who seem partial in other respects, are to be credited, England
was then in a most deplorable situation. The Normans committed continual
insults on the conquered people, and they seldom found any redress from their
governors; in both cases, therefore, they generally revenged themselves by
private murders, and a day seldom passed but the bodies of assassinated Normans
were found in the woods and highways, without any possibility of bringing the
perpetrators to justice. But what is represented as the peculiar grievance of
the times, was, that the English were deprived of arms, and were forbid having
any lights in their houses after eight o'clock in the evening. At this hour a
bell was rung to warn them to put out their fire and candle; and this, which
was called the Curfew, was very grating to the ears of the people.

Insurrections are ever the consequence of oppression, in a brave nation;
William was sensible of this, and generally attempted to moderate the cruel
counsels of his countrymen by a gentle treatment of the offenders. Edgar
Atheling, who had the best successive right to the crown, was amongst the
number of those who experienced his lenity and faith. This Prince had gone over
to the Scotch, and had persuaded their King to join him, with an army, in
asserting his right to the English crown. William met their forces in the
northern parts of England, and, instead of a battle, proposed a negotiation.
Peace was established between the two nations, and Edgar was included in the
treaty. He continued, from that time, to live, as a private man, in opulence
and security, and passed the rest of his life, perhaps, more happily than if he
had continued in the career of his ambition.

William, having nothing at present to fear from war, turned all his thoughts
to the arts of peace. He was not yet sufficiently arbitrary to change all the
laws, now in being, for those of his own country: he only made several
innovations, and ordered all law pleas, in the several courts, to be made in
the Norman language. These precautions, instead of making the Norman language
the study of all, confined the law to the peculiar study of a few. The English
language still continued to be spoken; and, such was the esteem it was held in,
even so early, that it began to be spoken at the court of Scotland, and in
several adjacent countries; and never was the French less engrafted upon our
language, than at this very time when they were our masters.

William now thought proper to deprive Bishops of all judgment in civil cases,
which they had enjoyed during the whole Saxon succession, from their conversion
to Christianity. He restrained the clergy to the exercise of their
ecclesiastical power alone. He endeavored to abolish trials by Ordeal and Camp
Fight. The Ordeal trial, which had been a remainder of Pagan superstition, and
still was held in veneration by the Saxons, was either by fire or water. It was
used in criminal cases, where the suspicions were strong, but the proofs not
evident. In that of fire, the person accused was brought into an open plain,
and several ploughshares, heated red hot, were placed at equal intervals before
him: over these he was to walk blindfold, and, if he escaped unhurt, he was
acquitted of the charge. In the other trial of water, the accused was thrown
into the water: if he sunk, he was declared innocent; but, if he swam, guilty.

The trial of Camp Fight was another instance of the deplorable barbarity of
the times. This was performed by single combat, in lists, appointed for that
purpose, between the accuser and the accused: he that, in such a case, came off
victorious, was deemed innocent; and he who was conquered, if he survived his
antagonist's resentment in the field, was sure to suffer, as a malefactor, some
time after. Both these trials this King abolished as unchristian and unjust,
and reduced all causes to the judgment of twelve men, of a rank nearly equal to
that of the prisoner. This number was called a Jury, and this was a method of
trial common to the Saxons and Normans long before, but confirmed by him with
all the sanction of royalty.

Having continued thirteen years in England, he now thought of re-visiting his
native dominions: but, no sooner was his back turned, when a new conspiracy was
set on foot. This was more terrible, as it was carried on by the joint counsels
of Normans as well as English: several Lords, of both nations, already
possessed of opulence, were desirous of independence also; and pretended many
grievances, or imagined themselves aggrieved. The Earl Walthof, who had been
formerly pardoned for a like offense, entered secretly into a correspondence
with Swayne, King of Denmark, and Drone, King of Ireland. Their measures were
conceived with caution, and pursued with secrecy; but some delays, intervening,
were fatal to counsels which were entrusted, necessarily, to many: the plot was
discovered some days before the Danes arrived; the heads of the conspiracy were
taken, and Fitz-Auber, a noble Norman, and Walthof, were beheaded upon this
occasion. Whether this act of rigor was executed by the King's command, sent
over from Normandy, or by Odon, his brother, left behind, and naturally
inclined to severity, is not apparent. However, these two were the only
noblemen executed in England during the reign of William the Conqueror,
notwithstanding so many revolts on their side, and so much power in him to
punish.

Though good fortune seemed to attend this Monarch thus far on his reign, here
the curtain may be drawn for the rest. His decline was marked with domestic
quarrels, which could neither end in glory nor in gain; his endeavors were
opposed by his own subjects, for whom he had labored with such perseverance.
He had four sons, Robert, Richard, William, and Henry, besides several
daughters. The most poignant of his distresses must, therefore, come from that
quarter, where he least expected an attack, and was least guarded to oppose.
His eldest son, Robert, encouraged by the King of France, pretended a right to
possess Normandy, even during the life of his father. William could place
confidence in none but the English, to bring this unnatural son to his duty;
and, drawing an army of Englishmen together, he passed over into Normandy, to
put a stop to the progress of so unexpected an insurrection. It is remarkable
enough, that the same commander, who formerly led over an army of Normans to
conquer England, now returned with an army of English to subdue Normandy. To
reduce his son, however, was found a much more difficult task than William had
at first expected. Robert seemed to inherit, though not his father's virtues,
at least his conduct and intrepidity. He led on his troops with courage, and
laid his ambuscades with secrecy: In one of these, after he had killed part of
a troop of English, and put the rest to flight, he boldly advanced against the
main body, where William commanded in person. By a strange fatality of
circumstances, the father and son were opposed, without knowing each other.
William was now grown old, and unable to perform those extraordinary feats, for
which he was once so famous. The son charged with such fury, that his aged
father fell to the ground with the blow: death would inevitably have been the
consequence, and the son's arm was just lifted to strike his father, had not
William called out, and Robert immediately recollected his father's voice. At
once, stung with a consciousness of his crime, and his duty, he leaped from his
horse, and raised the fallen Monarch from the ground; then, prostrating himself
in his presence, he asked pardon for his offenses, and promised, for the
future, an adherence to his duty. The King, moved by the impulse of nature,
took once more his long lost son to his arms, and the armies, spectators of
this moving scene, participated in their joy and reconciliation.

But this submission of Robert was of no long continuance; he once had tasted
the sweets of power, and knew not how to submit to subordination: again,
therefore, he revolted, and again was pardoned by his indulgent father. But the
French, who inspired him to these acts of disobedience, and were at best
insidious allies, particularly felt the vehemence of William's displeasure.
After he had adjusted the government of England, to which he was returned some
time before, he again led over a brave army of Englishmen into Normandy, intent
to make the storm fall upon those who were primarily the disturbers of his
tranquillity. The King of France rightly considered, that this armament could
only be designed against himself, and attempted to divert it by a truce, which
was agreed on, but a jest of the French King's served to renew hostilities.
William had been confined to his bed by an indisposition, which, added to his
natural corpulency, threatened the most dangerous consequences. This was a
situation which it was cruelty to ridicule; however, the Frenchman, with a
levity natural to his nation, observed, that the King of England was lying-in
of a big belly. This raised William's indignation to such a pitch, that he
immediately took the field, where, leaping a ditch, the pomel of the saddle
bruised his belly, and gave him a rupture. This, added to his former bad habit
of body, brought on a mortification, of which he died.

The characters of Princes are best seen in their actions, nor is it necessary
to give an outline at the end of what the historian has painted more strongly
in his narration. There is scarce a great quality which this Monarch does not
seem eminently to have possessed; and, considering the morality of the times,
scarce a good one in which he was entirely deficient. The only objections of
any weight, are his avarice and his depopulating a part of this country, in
order to make a forest to hunt in for his amusement. The avarice of Kings, at
that time, was different from what it is now. Kings acquired money then for the
uses of the public; Kings acquire fortunes now only for themselves: the wars of
the state were then supplied by treasures of the crown; the wars of the state
at present are supplied by finances appropriated to that purpose by the people.
His making so extensive a forest can be vindicated only from the barbarity of
the times; a method rather of making his guilt general, than of wiping it away.
Upon the whole, however, England seemed to improve by the conquest, and lost
neither its name nor its language. It increased in strength and naval power;
its laws became more numerous and rational; the manner of living, among the
natives, more elegant and expensive, and the superstition of the clergy less
gross and absurd.

I am, etc.

LETTER XI.
Dear Charles,
FEW nations have gone through more revolutions; few governments have appeared
more unsteady, or fluctuated more, between prerogative and privilege, than this
of Great Britain. The English have been surprised, betrayed, forced into
situations little preferable to downright slavery; but those convulsions,
though they have disordered the frame, yet could not destroy the principles of
a free constitution.

We have seen the Norman alter the whole model of government, but he was unable
to extinguish the Saxon spirit of freedom, which formed its groundwork: on the
contrary, the Normans, and other strangers who settled here, were soon seized
with a spirit of liberty themselves, instead of being able to communicate their
native principles of slavery.

William left three sons: Robert, to whom he bequeathed his Dukedom of
Normandy; William Rufus, who had the newly acquired kingdom of England; and
Henry, who was put in possession of the greatest part of his personal treasures.

William Rufus, upon coming to the crown, had two very powerful parties to
oppose and to humble. The nobility, who still aspired to the same degree of
freedom which they possessed under the Saxon Kings; and the clergy, who desired
to erect themselves into a distinct government, independent of Secular power.
One or the other of these claims, gave rise to the insurrections and
discontents of this reign. Nothing can be more easy than to imagine, how ill a
people, who thought themselves free, must brook a Monarch who looked upon them
as his property, by a succession originally founded in conquest.

Odo, his own uncle, was the first to dispute his title; but he was soon taken
prisoner, and, some time after, contrived means of flying into Normandy, where
he found protection and honor from Duke Robert. This was a sufficient pretext
for William to make war upon his brother: it was carried on with vigor and
success. Henry, the third brother, was also involved in this war, separately,
and upon his own account, having taken up arms for not being paid those
treasures bequeathed him by his father. Thus were there three different armies,
each exasperated against the other, and each led on by one of those disunited
brothers. Such an unnatural contest, as my easily be conceived, served only to
weaken themselves, and strengthen their enemies. The Scotch and Welsh,
therefore, took this opportunity to make several incursions upon the English,
while William was thus pursuing conquests that could end neither in advantage
nor fame. To increase the confusion, the clergy loudly complained of
encroachments upon their privileges: the people murmured at every increase of
their taxes; Robert de Mowbray was actually taken prisoner, while he commanded
a fortress that had shaken off the royal authority. What effects these
discontents, which were increased also by the King's avarice, intemperance, and
prodigality, might have produced, is uncertain, the most melancholy were
expected; but now the attention of all Europe was called off to one of the most
remarkable events that history can produce, I mean the arming for the first
Crusade.

Peter, surnamed the Hermit, who had beheld, with indignation, the cruel manner
in which the Infidels, who were in possession of the Holy Sepulcher, treated
the Christians who went on pilgrimages thither, returned to Europe, resolved to
inspire the Princes of Christendom with a zeal for its recovery. Bareheaded and
barefoot, he traveled from court to court, preaching, as he went, and
inflaming the zeal of every rank of people. Pope Urban II. preached the Crusade
himself at the council of Clermont, and numberless persons, of all degrees and
nations, ardently embraced the cause, and put on the red cross, the badge of
their profession. Among this number was Robert, Duke of Normandy: he was brave,
zealous, fond of glory, and still more fond of change. In order to supply money
to defray the necessary charges of so expensive an undertaking, he offered to
mortgage his dukedom with his brother, for a stipulated sum. William eagerly
embraced the proposal: he was no way sollicitous about raising the money agreed
on, for he knew the riches of his clergy: heedless, therefore, of their
murmurs, he rigorously levied the whole, making use of the most pious pretenses
to cover his extortion. Thus, sending his brother to the Holy Land, he took
peaceable possession of his dukedom.

In this manner was Normandy again united to the English crown, and from this
union afterward arose those wars with France, which for whole centuries
continued to depopulate both nations, without conducing in the end to the
enriching of either.

William was not a little pleased with this unexpected acquisition; and, as one
success only produces a desire of more, he began to conceive more extensive
schemes of ambition. Poictou and Guienne were offered to be mortgaged for the
same reasons as Normandy. William immediately raised the necessary sum, but
death interrupted the payment. Happening to hunt in that forest, from whence
his father had banished the husbandman and legal possessor, he was accidentally
shot through the heart, with an arrow, by one Tyrrel: he died in the forty-fourth
year of his age, reigned twelve, and left a dominion which he had contributed
to extend, to impoverish, and inslave.

There were now two competitors for the crown: Robert, who was engaged in the
Holy war; and Henry, the youngest brother, who remained at home. The right of
succession was evidently in favor of the first, but the latter was upon the
spot: nothing can be a more evident instance how little hereditary succession
was minded at that time, than that Henry's title prevailed, and that he was
elected by the joint acclamations of the people. Whenever there is a disputed
throne, the people generally regain their liberty: Henry, knowing the weakness
of his pretensions to the crown, was resolved to strengthen his power, by
gaining the affections of his people. He, therefore, once more confirmed the
ancient Saxon laws, and indulged the clergy in all their former privileges.

Upon Robert's return from the Holy Land. where he refused to be crowned King
of Jerusalem, he found himself deprived, in his absence, a kingdom which he
considered as his birthright. His attempts, however, to recover it were
without success. This Prince seemed only born to be the sport of fortune: his
bravery, his generosity, and a thousand other good qualities, of which he was
possessed, served to render him the dupe of every deceiver, and the instrument
of imposing villainy. At one time, we behold him prosecuting his pretensions
with spirit; at another, giving up his just claims with vicious generosity.
Thus, after a life spent in toil, fatigue, and ambition, he found himself, at
last, utterly deprived, not only of his patrimonial dukedom, but of his
fortune, his freedom, and friends. Normandy he saw fall to the conqueror: to
add to his misfortunes, he at last languished, for twenty-six years of his
life, a prisoner in Cardiff castle in Wales, where he died in captivity. To
want prudence is, in some measure, to want virtue.

Henry, having acquired possession of Normandy, might now be said to be master
of a theater where many a succeeding tragedy was to be performed; and soon his
neighbor of France began to show his jealousy of so powerful a rival. These
wars now began which were to be so fatal to distant posterity. The ravages of
the French were at first neglected, and Henry remained a quiet spectator in
England, as if unprovoked at their insolence: but foon he showed, that his
unwillingness to engage was by no means the effect of fear. He passed into
Normandy with a powerful army, and offered the enemy battle: the challenge was
soon accepted, and a furious combat ensued. During the fight, a French
cavalier, named Crispin, personally attacked the King of England, and struck
him twice on the head, with such force, that all his armor streamed with an
effusion from the wound. The King, however, no way intimidated, continued the
single combat with resolution, and, summoning all his strength, discharged such
a blow at his adversary, as threw him from his horse, and he became the
prisoner of his Majesty's own hand. This decided the victory in favor of the
English, who pursued the French with great slaughter, which hastened the peace,
that was concluded soon after.

Fortune now seemed to smile upon Henry, and promise a long succession of
felicity: he was in peaceable possession of two powerful states, and had a
Prince for undisputed heir, now arrived at his sixteenth year of age, a youth
of great hopes. All his enemies were humbled, and many actually in his own
power. Matilda, his daughter, was married to the Emperor Henry IV, and he had
the hearts of the greatest number of his subjects, particularly the English.
All his prospects, however, were at once clouded by an unforeseen misfortune,
an accident which tinctured his remaining life with misery. Henry, returning
victorious from abroad, brought with him a numerous retinue of the chief
nobility. In one of the vessels of the fleet, his son, and several young
noblemen, his companions, went together to render the passage more agreeable.
The young Prince, desirous to be first ashore, promised the seamen a reward, if
they came in foremost. This emulation was fatal to them all; the pilot ran the
ship upon a rock, and immediately she was dashed to pieces. The Prince,
however, was put into the boat and would have escaped, were he not called back
by the cries of Matilda, his sister. He was now out of danger himself, but
could not leave her to perish: he prevailed upon the sailors to row back to
take her in: the approach of the boat giving others an opportunity to attempt
saving their lives, several leaped in also, so that the boat was overloaded,
and all, except one, went to the bottom. When Henry was informed of the
catastrophe of his only son, he covered his face, and never laughed after.

The rest of his life seems a mere blank, his restless spirit of ambition had
nothing now to toil for. His daughter, Matilda, however, becoming a widow, he
married her a second time to Geoffry of Plantagenet, and, when brought to-bed
of a son, named Henry, he caused the nobility to give an oath of succession, in
her favor. The great men of those times were ready to swear whatever the
Monarch commanded, but observed it no longer than while they were obliged to
obey. He did not long survive this attempt to confirm the succession; he died,
as it is said, of a surfeit, caused by eating lampreys, in the sixty-eighth
year of his age, having reigned thirty-six.

It is strange, that historians impute it as a fault to several English
Monarchs of those times, that they came to the crown without hereditary claims
to support their title: this is one of the faults alleged against Henry, but
it is none, if we consider the usual spirit of other successions.

During the reign of Henry, the barons and the clergy were growing into power:
each was a petty tyrant over those who held under him. In order, therefore, to
confirm privileges so lately acquired, they joined in electing a King, who
might owe to them, and not to any previous claim, his prerogative and scepter.
With such intentions they pitched upon Stephen, nephew to the deceased King;
and, as for their oaths to Matilda, the Bishops gave them an absolution. They
could not, indeed, have made a properer choice than him whom they elected; but
their conduct proceeded only from a concern for themselves, and not for the
people. Stephen was ready enough to consent to all their exorbitant demands; he
acknowledged the crown as their gift, not his just inheritance; and confirmed
all the immunities, privileges, and claims of the clergy.

The kingdom now began to wear the face of an aristocracy, in which the barons
and clergy might be said to command. They built castles, fortified and
garrisoned them with their own troops, from whence, when offended, they would
bid their Monarch defiance. Of all miseries that ever affected kingdoms, an
uncontrouled power among the great is certainly the most afflictive. The
tyranny of a single Monarch only falls upon the narrow circle around him; the
arbitrary will of a number of delegates falls most heavily upon the lower ranks
of people, who have no redress. In short, the barons clamoured for their own
privileges, the clergy for their own liberty, but the people were slaves.

Stephen was sensible of this, and, in order to diminish their power, possessed
himself, by force, of some of their castles, which were incompatible with the
safety of the kingdom.

Thus we may discern three different contending powers at this time: the King
and his followers, the barons and their adherents, and the clergy, assisted by
the generality of the people: to these was soon added a fourth, Matilda, who
claimed the crown in pursuance of Henry's command. This haughty woman, who had
been wife to an Emperor, and still seemed to retain a consciousness of her
dignity, landed from Normandy, accompanied only by a few followers, and openly
laid claim to the crown. Mean time, Stephen, being informed of her arrival,
flew to besiege Arundel, a castle belonging to the Queen Dowager, where Matilda
had taken up her residence. This fortress did not seem to promise a long
defense, and would have been soon taken, had it not been represented to him,
that, as this was a castle belonging to the Queen Dowager, it would be an
infringement of the respect due to her to attempt taking it by force. There was
a spirit of generosity prevalent in the times I treat of, which was unknown to
their degenerate posterity. Stephen permitted Matilda to come out, and conveyed
her, in safety, to Bristol, another fortress equally strong with that from
whence he permitted her to retire.

It is a deplorable consideration, that our virtues, often instead of being
attended with happy consequences here, are found fatal to such as adhere to
them without deviation. Matilda, owing her freedom merely to the generosity of
the King, made no other use of it but to levy an army against him, and this
army, at length, proved victorious. During the continuance of this civil war,
the whole kingdom was divided; pillage and desolation were the consequence,
whoever happened to be conqueror.

It was at length, however, determined, by a decisive victory obtained over the
King. The troops he led, were, in general, foreign mercenaries, and commanded
by tumultous barons, more accustomed to command than to conquer. His horse gave
way, and his infantry, being destitute of their assistance, soon followed their
example, and deserted their King. All the race of the Norman conqueror were
brave: Stephen, unknowing how to fly, was left alone, and fought on foot in the
midst of the field of battle, assaulted by multitudes, and resisting all their
efforts with astonishing valor. Had his horse then railied, he might have come
off victorious. He was now hemmed in on every side, but, with his battle-ax,
made way for some time: that breaking, he then drew out his sword, and dealt
his blows round the circle in which he was enclosed. At length, after
performing more than could naturally be expected from a single arm, his sword
flying in pieces, he was obliged to surrender himself a prisoner. In this
manner he was conducted, by the conqueror, from the field, and ignominiously
laid in irons.

Matilda now was proclaimed Queen, and, for some time, her power was
acknowledged by the generality of the nation. But, as she disdained to accept
the shadow of royalty, which was all the barons and clergy intended to grant,
she disgusted them by her pride, and soon made those repent who had raised her
from their levity. The Bishop of Winchester seems, at this time, to have been
possessed of unbounded power. He had been chiefly instrumental in raising her
to the throne; he now, therefore, levied an army, to convince her, that it was
no less in his power to deprive her of a kingdom, than to put her in possession
of it. He was successful in his designs: Matilda was obliged to quit England
once more, and Stephen was taken from chains, and once more placed upon the
throne.

Again put in possession of this uneasy seat, he seemed only exalted to give
new instances of his refusing the exorbitant demands of the barons and the
clergy. He endeavored to get the crown to devolve upon his son, but this was
not complied with by the Bishops. It is said, though it has scarcely the
appearance of truth, that he confined them in one house, and there threatened
to detain them till they complied with his will. This was an extraordinary
method of obtaining their consent, and seems inconsistent with his usual
wisdom: his precautions, accordingly, proved unsuccessful, and the Archbishop
found means to escape his guards, and fly into Normandy, in order to bring over
a new King, and to raise a new insurrection.

In consequence of this Bishops intrigues, Henry, son to the Empress Matilda,
and who had been long acknowledged for Duke of Normandy, soon landed with a
formidable army. The barons, ever restless and regardless of their obligations,
were again divided upon this occasion, and a terrible civil war threatened the
kingdom afresh, when, happily for the people, a truce was proposed between the
opposite powers: this paved the way to a more lasting peace. It was agreed,
that Stephen should enjoy the crown of England during his life, and that Henry
should be acknowledged as his successor. In this manner a civil war was
terminated, which had, for some years, laid England in blood. The nation once
more began to respire from their calamities, and Stephen's death soon put his
rival in possession of a crown, which, to the former, had afforded only
disappointment, fatigue, and danger.

I am, etc.

LETTER XII.
Dear Charles,
YOU have hitherto seen the barons and clergy becoming powerful in proportion
to the weakness of the Monarch's title to the crown, and enriching themselves
with the spoils of depressed Majesty. Henry Plantagenet had now every right,
both from hereditary succession, and universal assent, that could fix a Monarch
on his throne: conscious, therefore, of his strength, he began to resume those
privileges which had been extorted from his predecessor's weakness.

He first commenced by demolishing those castles which the barons and clergy
built, and which only served as sanctuaries to guilt, treason, and debauchery:
he dismissed the foreign troops which had been mercenaries to his predecessor;
and, perceiving the poverty of the crown, resumed all those lands which
properly belonged to it; and enacted some laws, by which the people, in some
measure, became independent of their barons, by whom they were claimed as
appurtenances to their estates and manors.

He gave charters to several towns, by which the citizens claimed their freedom
and privileges, independent of any superior but himself. These charters may
properly be called the groundwork of English liberty: the struggles heretofore
were, whether a monarchy, or an aristocracy, should prevail? whether the King,
or the nobility only? But, by this grant, the lowest orders of people began to
have a just value for themselves, and to claim the prerogatives of humanity.
Thus was the foeudal government, first impaired; liberty began to be diffused
more equally upon every rank of people, and the Kings became capable of levying
armies independent of their vassals.

But, though he in some measure diminished the power of the barons, by
enlarging that of the people, yet still there was a third power, namely, the
clergy, which daily grew stronger, and united by one bond, pursuing the same
design, were making large strides to independence. He undertook to humble them
also; he perceived the clergy were resolved, not only to be exempt from the
usual taxes of the state, but even its punishments. They had extorted an
immunity from all but ecclesiastical censures, in the preceding reign, and
continued to maintain that grant in the present. It may easily be supposed,
that a law, which thus screened their guilt, served but to increase it:
accordingly, more than an hundred murders, upon proof, were committed by the
clergy, of which not one was punished, even with degradation. What is still
more astonishing, the Bishops gloried in their horrid indulgence. Among the
number of murderers who were pardoned, was a clergyman of the diocese of Sarum:
the complaint was brought before the Archbishop's court, and the circumstances
of his guilt appeared most atrocious. However, the only punishment decreed was,
that the murderer should be deprived of his benefice, and confined to a
monastery. The King, struck with horror at such injustice, reproached the
Archbishop, who, on the other hand, asserted, that an ecclesiastic could not be
punished with death, and that the King had no right to intermeddle in the
affairs of the church. This Archbishop was the noted Thomas a Becket, who had
been advanced, by the King, to this high station from the meanest obscurity: he
was a man of strong passions, great pride, and great zeal, which had been, in
the early part of life, smothered in deep dissimulation and apparent humility.
He was, at this time, possessed at once of the chancellorship, of the
archbishopric of Canterbury, and was legate to the Holy See. These were great
trusts; but, what rendered him still more powerful, he either thought himself a
saint, or affected to be thought so; he wore sackcloth next his skin, and his
equipage and diet were mean and simple. So much power, pride, and seeming
humility, united, were formidable; and such Henry found them.

The King proposed, in a council of the nobles, that the Bishops should not be
permitted to go to Rome; that no subject should appeal to the Holy See; that no
officer of the crown should be ex-communicated, or suspended, without the
Sovereign's permission; and lastly (which was the great article he aimed at)
that the clergy should be subject to the temporal judges, as well as the rest
of his subjects. Such just propositions were agreed upon by all present, even
Becket hesitated not to sign his name: they were referred next to the Pope, for
his approbation; the Pope disapproved of them all. Upon this, therefore, Becket
declared his repentance, for having complied with the King in signing the
Constitutions of Clarendon, as they were called; and, in order to carry on the
farce, suspended himself, as unworthy to perform his functions till the Pope
should be pleased to absolve him.

This pardon he quickly obtained, and now he set no bounds to his obstinacy and
ambition. Some historians describe Becket as a saint, and some as a designing
hypocrite; neither are, probably, just in their opinions. He pursued, with
inflexibility, what was in fact wrong, but what education, and the manners of
the times, had taught him to believe was right: his errors were rather of
judgment than of will; the world abounds with men who are erroneous, there are
but few villains.

The King was resolved to humble a man himself, who had, by his own authority,
been lifted into power, and accused him of embezzling the public money, while
Chancellor. While the judges were consulting, Becket insolently entered the
council, with a crosier in his hand, to intimidate his judges: but,
notwithstanding this boldness, he was condemned as a traitor, although he found
means of avoiding punishment, by escaping into Flanders.

The Popes had long been growing formidable to the Kings of England. Alexander
III. immediately espoused Becket's quarrel, and brought the King to consent to
a conference, which came to nothing; another succeeded, but with as little
success; a third was proposed, and accepted. The King, wearied out with the
repeated threats of the Pope, and the excommunications of his clergy, consented
to almost every thing the haughty prelate demanded. But when all the articles
were settled, and Becket was to give the King the kiss of peace, he took it
into his head to say, that it was for God's honor: the King insisted that this
expression should be retracted; Becket insisted upon using it: this renewed the
debate, and the conference ended once more without effect.

At length, however, after an interval of some years, they were reconciled, and
the Archbishop made his entry into London, amidst the acclamations of the
populace. His pride was now increased by success, and he went from town to town
in a sort of triumphal cavalcade. But he was scarcely re-instated in his power,
when he began to exert it to its utmost extent: he solemnly excommunicated two
lords who had opposed him, and published the Pope's letters, for the suspension
of several bishops who had shown themselves his enemies. The King, who was in
Normandy, soon received information of this prelate's pride and popularity, and
soon after the suspended Bishops came over to lay before him their complaints:
throwing themselves at his feet, they implored his protection, and inveighed
against their oppressor. Henry was now quite exasperated by their complaints,
and continually uneasy from the repeated instances of Becket's insolence, was
heard to say, Is there none to revenge their Monarch's cause upon this
audacious priest? These words seemed to arm the most resolute of his
attendants, and four knights, whose names were Hugh Norvil, William Tracy, Hugh
Brito, and Richard Fitzurse, hastened to Canterbury, and, entering the
cathedral, where Becket was officiating, with a few attendants, they beat out
his brains, with clubs, at the foot of the altar.

His death confirmed those privileges to the clergy, which his opposition could
not do. His resolution, during life, and his resignation, when dying, gained
the hearts of the people. He was looked upon as a martyr, and the clergy took
care to confirm his sanctity by miracles. When the people are resolved to see
miracles, they are seldom disappointed: it was not sufficient that his shrine
had a power of restoring dead men to life, it restored also cows, dogs, and
horses. It was reported, and believed, that he rose from his coffin before he
was buried, to light the tapers designed for his funeral; and, when the funeral
ceremony was over, that he stretched forth his hand to bless the people. Thus
Becket became a saint, and Henry was suspected of being the author of his
assassination.

In order to divert the attention of the public from suspicions of this nature,
Henry undertook the conquest of Ireland; a project formed some years before,
but deferred on account of his long protracted quarrel. The more readily to
gain the Pope's approbation of his undertaking, (for nothing could then be
achieved without the sanction of Rome) he cleared himself, by oath, of being
any way privy to the assassination, and made a solemn vow to go barefoot to
Becket's tomb, there to receive the discipline of the church.

Thus furnished with Pope Adrian's bull, which granted him a kingdom that was
not his to give, he subdued Ireland with a rapidity equal to his most sanguine
hopes: but it was no hard matter to conquer a country which was at that time
barbarous, and divided under different chiefs, and each pursuing different
views and interests.

But the happiness this Monarch received from this accession of power, was soon
allayed by a conspiracy in his own family. Among the few vices of this Monarch,
unlimited gallantry was one. His Queen was disagreeable, and he was faithless:
but, though an admirer of all the sex, he singled out, with particular
affection, Rosamond Clifford, a lady of matchless beauty. Historians and poets
talk of the fair Rosamond in the warmest strains of rapture; if what they say
be true, never did England produce so much beauty united with so much grace
before. He kept her concealed in a labyrinth at Woodstock park, and, in her
company, passed his hours of vacancy and pleasure. But the Queen at length came
to a knowledge of this amor, and, pursuing her happy rival to her retreat,
guided, say some, by a clew of silk, she obliged her to take poison.

As this was an offense which the Queen could not be forgiven, she was resolved
not to forgive. Her sons were soon brought to share her resentments, and a
conspiracy was formed, abetted by all the malcontents of the kingdom. To this
unnatural combination Henry opposed his usual prudence and resolution: he
seemed on every side assaulted, but everywhere came off victorious. Ascribing,
however, the opposition of his own children to the indignation of offended
Heaven, he was resolved, by an exemplary penance, to conciliate its favor.

Now was the time in which the clergy were to come off victorious; this was the
season in which they were to reap the labors of their martyred defender; and
by one weak action the King was now to cancel what a great part of his life he
had been employed in bringing to ripeness. Being come within sight of
Canterbury, he walked barefoot to Becket's tomb, in extreme pain; there he was
scourged by the Monks, and spent the whole night upon the pavement. The Monks
were thus reinstated again in all their claims, and the people involved in
greater superstition than before.

This penance, however, no way served to reconcile him to his family; he even
cursed their ingratitude, and, wearied with domestic contention, resolved, at
last, to undertake a crusade: his son Richard, however, still pursuing the
dictates of ambition rather than of nature, deprived him of all power to put
this design into execution. Passion and disappointment, therefore, began to
make visible depredations on his constitution, and mark him for the grave: he
fell sick at Chinon in Normandy, and, finding his end approach, he caused
himself to be carried into the church, before the altar, where he expired, with
scarce a single attendant to deplore his fall.

I am, etc.

LETTER XIII.
Dear Charles,
WHEN I compare the English, at this period, with the neighboring nations, I
cannot avoid remarking in them a peculiar degree of courage, generosity, and
politeness. They had, during the Saxon Kings, sunk into bigotry and effeminacy;
but a mixture of the Norman fierceness improved their characters, and rendered
them at once valiant yet forgiving.

You have seen Henry, as well as all his Norman predecessors, improve those
good qualities in his subjects, not less by influence than example. You have
seen him attempting to increase the freedom of the people by corporation
charters, and to diminish the power of the barons by weakening the foeudal
government, by which the peasants and husbandmen were slaves. In these designs
he succeeded, but he failed in his endeavors of lessening the power of the
clergy. The kingdom at his decease, therefore, assumed a different appearance
from what it wore before his accession. The people now began to have some,
though but a small share of, power: the barons had still vast authority, though
less than formerly; while the clergy might be considered as a body entirely
distinct from the rest of the community, governed by their own laws, and
professing subjection only to the Pope.

In this fituation were affairs, when Richard, the son of Henry, came, by
succession, to the government, in which his reign made no material alteration.
The priests being the most powerful body of men, it is not surprising to find
the King seconding their schemes, which perhaps he found it impossible to
oppose. Religion was then the pretext for every sinister action, obedience to
the church the only rule of merit, and, to oppose the enemies of Christianity,
preached up as an antidote for every former transgression. The kingdom of
Palestine had been, for some time, the theater of war, and had drained Europe
of its most chosen troops, which fell like leaves in autumn, either by
pestilence, famine, or the sword. In this quarrel the clergy found means to
embark the King, by awakening his ambition, and strengthening his natural
superstitions. A romantic desire for strange adventures, and an immoderate zeal
for the external parts of Christianity, were the ruling passion of the times,
and they easily became the ruling passion of Richard.

Impressed with a desire of rescuing the Holy Land from the Infidels, he left
England; and with a numerous army passed through France, took Cyprus from a
Christian Prince, landed in Palestine, overcame Saladine, with a slaughter of
forty thousand Saracens; took several cities from the Infidels, and gained much
reputation for conduct and personal bravery, yet, after all, acquired no real
advantages for himself, or the cause in which he was engaged. Having concluded
a truce for three years with Saladine, he set fail for his return; but, his
ships being dispersed by a tempest, he was obliged to land upon the coasts of
Italy, where, pursuing his way homeward by land, he was arrested by the Duke of
Austria, and put into the power of the Emperor, who cruelly and ungenerously
detained him a prisoner, upon the slightest and most trivial pretenses.

In the mean time England had been left under the government of two prelates,
the Bishop of Durham, and Longchamp, Bishop of Ely. The clergy, sole possessors
and rulers of the kingdom, might have given what laws they thought proper; but
there is a fatality in the affairs of men, that, when friends are destitute of
other enemies, they generally make foes of each other. The governors, now
without rivals in the temporal interest, disagreed among themselves, and thus
weakened the power of the clergy. John, brother to Richard, who long had
aspired to the crown, fomented this jealousy among the clergy, and, putting
himself at the head of the temporal lords, increased their authority by the
addition of his own. He heard of the imprisonment of his brother with secret
satisfaction, and used all his interest to continue his captivity.

The English, notwithstanding these ungenerous efforts, continued faithful to
their King: his bravery and generosity had secured the hearts of the people,
and the cause he fought for engaged the affections of the clergy. The
monasteries, therefore, strained their finances to raise a sum to procure his
release, and the churches gave up their treasures upon promise of having them
restored upon his return. By these efforts Richard at length procured his
liberty: the Emperor, either ashamed of his own baseness, or fearing the
resentment of the German Princes, agreed upon his release for a large ransom,
and England once more saw her brave Monarch return crowned with conquest, after
numberless victories, distresses, and surmounted dangers.

The generosity of this Prince was equal to his valor; he knew that his
brother John had, in his absence, attempted to supplant him in the throne; he
had an exact information of all his intrigues with the French, who had long
endeavored to blast his laurels, and interrupt his conquests; yet, upon this
Prince's submission, he generously forgave him all: I wish, cried he, taking
his brother by the hand, I wish I could as easily forget your offenses, as you
will my pardon. This condescension was not lost upon a man whose heart, though
naturally bad, was not dead to all the sentiments of humanity. From this time
John served him with fidelity, and did him noble services in his battles with
the French, which followed soon after.

While Richard was engaged upon the continent in a French war, an infurrection
was suppressed at London, which, though but slightly mentioned by historians,
should be particularly marked by such as would trace the constitution. William
Fitzosborn, commonly called Longbeard, is represented at once as a man brave
and enterprising. He had long been an advocate for the poor and meanest of the
people, and had gained the hearts of the populace, who held him in extreme
veneration. Upon inflicting a new tax, the hurthen of which was to fall
entirely on the poor, he raised an insurrection of the people, which the
Archbishop was, at first, unable to appease. The principal citizens being
called, upon this occasion, to arms, Longbeard was at length hard pressed, and
obliged to take refuge in one of the churches; but no sanctuary could screen
this self-delegated champion; he was seized, convicted, and, with nine of his
accomplices, hanged in chains. This was the first instance of the people's
struggling for privileges, as a body distinct from the barons and clergy.
Longbeard may be considered as the first victim to that untameable spirit,
which ever since has actuated this people in support of their privileges, and
prompted them to the rights of humanity.

Upon a review of the rest of this reign, we find the Monarch almost always in
the field, or intent upon schemes to supply his warlike expeditions;
disappointed of the fruits of conquest, or groaning in captivity. If, indeed,
it were just to ascribe his misfortunes to his incensed father's malediction,
we might be apt to suspect it, in some measure, as the cause. However, after a
reign of ten years, thus passed in turbulence and fruitless victory, he died of
a wound received from an arrow at the siege of Chaluz. While he was yet alive,
the soldier, by whose hand he died, was brought before him: the King sternly
demanded the reason why he sought his life? My father and my brothers, replied
the undaunted soldier, died by your hand, and Heaven has given me the
opportunity of a just and glorious revenge. The dying Monarch, no way
exasperated by this reply, observed, that the sentinel had done his duty,
ordered him a present, and forgave him. But the Flemish General was
unacquainted with such generosity: instead of complying with the King's
command, he seized the miserable wretch, and, aster Richard's death, commanded
him, in his presence, to be flead alive.

All the actions of this Prince were generous and brave. I know not what
pleasure, Rapin, that so frequently injudicious historian, can take in
lessening the virtues of the race of Norman Monarchs. Among other faults
ascribed to Richard, he accuses him of pride; yet it appears he bore the
admonitions of his inferiors with gentleness and good humor. The easiness of
his disposition, as well as the delicacy of his wit, are apparent from the
quickness of his replies. It is said, that being one day admonished, by an
obscure Monk, to part with his three daughters, by which he meant his pride,
his lust, and his avarice: he wittily made answer, that he desired nothing
more, and had already pitched upon proper husbands for their disposal;
heresolved to give his pride to the Templars, his avarice to the Monks, and, as
for his lust, the Clergy should share that among them. Such insolent advice,
from a churchman, at this day, would be attended with a very different reply. I
am,

Dear Charles, etc.
LETTER XIV.
THE wars that were now kindled up between England and France, continued to
depopulate both countries, without making, in the end, any material alteration.
John, the brother and successor of Richard, pursued them with unabating vigor.
We may regard these, and suchlike commotions, among Christian Princes, as
pestilences, which lay whole provinces waste, without making any change in
their limits, their manners or government.

John, who was surnamed Lackland, was, in fact, possessed of the most extensive
dominion of any Prince in Europe. Besides the lands left him by succession, he
had wrested Bretagne from Arthur, his nephew, whose right it was. However,
John, by thus pretending to what was not justly his, in the end lost even what
he had.

Having made himself master of Bretagne, the unfortunate Arthur also fell into
his power. He caused him to be confined in a tower, and what became of him was
never after explained to the public satisfaction. John was suspected, and not
without reason, of the death of his nephew. He made some efforts to wipe off
the odious stain, yet without effect: happily, for the instruction of future
Princes, this crime only opened a way to his future ruin; and, having begun his
reign by being the enemy of mankind in prosperity, the whole world, in the end,
seemed to turn their back upon him in his distress. The power of the nobility
of France was now exerted, with justice, against him: those assemblies of
noblemen, each of which was, at that time, the petty lawless tyrant of his
dependants, in this instance, at least, undertook to punish the guilty.
Constance, the unfortunate mother of the murdered Prince, flew for protection
to the peers, and implored redress. The King of England was summoned to appear;
he refused, and the peers of France confiscated all the lands and possessions
which were held under that crown. This confiscation was soon attended with
vigorous efforts to put it into execution; John, at once both weak and
cowardly, a tyrant when unopposed, but timorous in danger, suffered himself
tamely to be stripped of them all. He successively lost Normandy, Touraine, and
Poictou, and then fled back to England, to make himself hated and despised.

Hitherto, however, he was only contemptible to his neighbor Princes; he still
had some expectations from the esteem and affection of his natural subjects,
but he soon showed, that all his skill was only in making enemies, but that he
wanted abilities to reconcile them. The clergy had, for some time, acted as a
separate body, and had their elections of each other generally confirmed by the
Pope: the election of Archbishops had, for some time, been a continual subject
of dispute between the suffragan Bishops and the Augustine Monks, and both had
precedents to confirm their pretensions: things being in this situation, the
Archbishop of Canterbury happened to die, and the Augustine Monks, in a private
manner, made choice of Reginald, their Subprior. The Bishops exclaimed at this
as invading their privileges, and here was likely to begin a theological
contest. A politic Prince would have managed the quarrel in such a manner, as
to let the body of the clergy thus grow weaker by division; but John was not a
politic Prince; he immediately sided with the suffragan Bishops, and the Bishop
of Norwich was unanimously chosen. To decide these differences, an appeal was
made to the Pope. Innocent III, who then filled the chair, possessed an
unbounded share of power, and his talents were equal to the veneration he was
held in: he vacated both claims, and enjoined the Monks to choose Stephen
Langton, an Englishman then at the court of Rome. John knew how to oppose,
though not to negociate; he received the Pope's decree with a degree of
ungoverned fury, and returned the Pope a letter filled with abuse. Innocent, in
return, put the whole kingdom of England under an interdict, and forbad the
King's subjects longer to obey him. These ecclesiastical thunders were, at that
time, truly formidable, and the more so, as the execution of them was committed
to Philip-Augustus, King of France, an ambitious and a politic Prince. To him
the Pope gave the kingdom of England, as a perpetual inheritance, assuring him
of a remission of all his sins, if he happened to succeed in conquering it. He
granted all who embarked in this cause also the same indulgences as were
usually given to such as went upon a crusade. Philip immediately embraced the
offer; not content with depriving John of his continental dominions, he
devoured, in imagination, the kingdom of England also. By his preparations it
was evident how desirous he was to succeed in this undertaking; the ships, of
which his fleet was to consist, came together to the mouth of the Seine, whilst
the Princes, his vassals, collected their forces to the shore from all parts of
the country. His army was numerous, and the discontents of the English were
equivalent to thousands more. Philip was ready, therefore, to set sail, and
John, on his part, made an expiring effort to receive him. All-hated as he was,
the natural enmity between the French and the English, the name of a King, and
some remaining share of power, put him at the head of an army of sixty thousand
men, with which he advanced to Dover.

Europe regarded such important preparations with impatience, and the decisive
blow was soon expected. The Pope was too refined a politician for both, and
took upon himself what he pretended to have designed for Philip. This singular
negotiation was executed by Pandulph, as the Pope's legate to France and
England. He passed through France, where he beheld Philip's great armament, and
highly commended his zeal and diligence: from thence he went over to Dover,
under pretense of negotiating with the Barons, in favor of the French King,
and had a conference with John upon his arrival. He there represented the
number of the enemy, the hatred of many of his own subjects; he intimated, that
there was but one way to secure himself from impending danger, which was, to
put himself under the Pope's protection, who, as a kind and merciful father,
was still willing to receive him to his bosom.

John was too much intimidated by the apparent danger, not to embrace every
means of offered safety. He consented to the legate's remonstrances, and took
an oath to perform what the Pope should impose. Having thus sworn to perform he
knew not what, the artful Italian so well managed the Barons, and intimidated
the King, that he took the following extraordinary oath, before all the people,
kneeling upon his knees, and putting his hands between those of the Legate:

"I John, by the grace of God, King of England and Lord of Ireland, in order to
expiate my sins, from my own free will, and the advice of my Barons, give to
the church of Rome, to Pope Innocent, and his successors, the kingdom of
England, and all other prerogatives of my crown: I will hereafter hold them as
the Pope's vassal. I will be faithful to God, to the church of Rome, and to the
Pope my master, and his successors legitimately elected. I promise to pay him a
tribute of a thousand marks yearly, to wit, seven hundred for the kingdom of
England, and three hundred for Ireland."

By this mean concession John secured his crown from a foreign invasion, but
became effectually contemptible in the eyes of his people: still, however, he
was not hated by his subjects, their hatred only was wanting to sink him into
complete wretchedness. After being exposed to so many disgraceful humiliations,
he now thought, at the expense of his honor, to spend the remaining years of
his life in tranquillity. But, in proportion as he lost the esteem of the
English, he lost their affections also. The former Monarchs supported their
power by a nice opposition of the clergy and the barons; when they intended to
humble the nobility, they granted new privileges to the church; when they
desired to lessen the power of the clergy, they gave greater force to the
temporal interests. John was ignorant of the manner of conducting this
opposition: he had offended the clergy, and increased their power, without
making them his friends; he had it only left now to offend his barons, to
render himself obnoxious to every order of people. His former pusillanimity
soon gave this powerful body hopes of expecting a renewal of those powers, of
which they had been deprived in the preceding reign. They demanded, therefore,
the re-establishment of their ancient privileges, and John believed himself
authorized to refuse them. This created new dissensions: the King, with a
strange perverseness, in turn demanded their assistance for the recovery of his
lost dominions on the continent, and they refused to follow him. Their refusal
was soon followed by more open acts of hostility; they formed a confederacy,
and, at an appointed meeting, forced the King to grant all their demands, and
sign that charter by which the English are said to hold their liberties at this
day.

The barons and the clergy by this seemed the only governors of the kingdom:
the commonalty had no share in the legislature, they were passed away, with the
lands on which they were born, by their haughty possessors: they were reckoned
only as the sheep, oxen, and other moveable possessions, which were upon the
estate. The guardian of an heir was to preserve the lands entire, and, to use
the words of the Magna Charta, sine destructione et vasto hominum vel rerum,
without destruction or waste of the men or the things upon it. The King, the
Barons, and the clergy, were all, in reality, enemies to public liberty. Their
party were so many factions in the nation, subversive of the rights of mankind:
how they, in turn, helped to establish liberty, you shall see in my future
correspondence.

This charter was, in fact, giving the barons a definitive judgment upon
whatsoever they thought proper to represent as a grievance: they were to prefer
their complaints to the King, and he was, in forty days, to give them
satisfaction, or they were legally empowered to command it. This was an
infringement of the prerogative, which he complied with through fear, and, as
soon as he was at liberty, he retracted all he had agreed to: he loudly
complained of the force with which it had been exacted, and he demanded justice
from the Pope, his new master.

The Pope, who had lately excommunicated the King, now excommunicated the
barons: the barons, exasperated, did exactly what the Pope had formerly done
upon a like occasion; they offered the crown of England to France. Philip, ever
ready to profit by these commotions, accepted their offer with joy, but,
fearing the Pope's displeasure if he assumed a title to what was now considered
as a patrimony of the Holy See, prevailed upon the barons to elect his son
Lewis. To this league of the barons with France the city of London lent its
assistance. We should be careful to observe every beginning of power among the
commons of England, and this seems to be one of the most obvious instances.
This noble city was the first that freed itself from foeudal government, and
ventured to follow leaders of its own appointment: in short it may, at this
period, be looked upon as a little republic, fighting between the powers of
aristocracy, represented in the barons, and of despotism, assumed by the King.

In the mean time, the army of Lewis, which was called over to the assistance
of the barons, committed strange disorders; while, on the other hand, that of
John, which, like the former, was mostly composed of foreigners, was still more
insolent and audacious. Never was England in a more deplorable condition; she
had two armies of hungry foreigners in her bowels, ravaging the country in a
merciless manner, and threatening ruin whichsoever proved victorious. John was,
at length, deposed by his barons, and Lewis solemnly crowned at London. The new
Monarch then first thought of having the Pope's sanction to his claim. The Pope
debated in council the justice of a cause, which scarcely deserved a moment's
hesitation; while John led his harrassed army from city to city, distrusting
even his most faithful adherents. Pity then procured friends which prosperity
could not procure: and now the barons were struck with some remorse to see
their native country, by their procurement, thus laid desolate, and their King
a wanderer; but what added to their afflictions was, that their services were
hitherto slightly repaid by the new-crowned Monarch, and, from a knowledge of
his disposition, they could hope for no increase of future favors. It was even
reported among them, that his intentions were to banish them for their
disloyalty to their former sovereign, though exerted in his own favor.
Whatever their motives might be, forty barons addressed letters of submissive
suit to King John; the Pope also held the justice of his claim in suspense; a
gleam of distant prosperity seemed to brighten his affairs: but, while the
conjuncture seemed big with new events, the death of both the Pope, and of
John, decided the contest. This Monarch died in the fifty-first year of his
age, after a reign of more than seventeen years, spent in wars without success,
and exertions of power without increase of authority. I am,

Dear Charles, etc.
LETTER XV.
Dear Charles,
HAD Lewis, who was crowned King, dissembled till possessed of uncontrouled
power, he might have retained the crown. But the barons wanted a Monarch
subservient to their power, and Lewis refused a kingdom upon such conditions.
They now, therefore, turned from the French intruder to the young Monarch, from
whom they expected greater condescension.

Henry III, appointed successor to the crown by John his father, was but ten
years of age when made King, and the Earl of Pembroke was, by mutual consent,
constituted his guardian. The inconstancy of the English was now more than ever
apparent: Lewis was, in some measure, forsaken by his new subjects, and, after
a defeat, obliged to relinquish all pretensions to the kingdom. What the
barons, however, had hoped from the King's tender age, did not answer their
expectations. The Earl of Pembroke, who governed his nonage, made a powerful
interest with the clergy, and, by their means, served to balance the state.

While Henry acted under the direction of others, the power of the barons
seemed to have been kept under; he had the clergy for him, and consequently the
people, and these two were equivalent to all the nobility. But, as soon as
Henry came to take the reins into his own hands, numberless insurrections and
calamities were the result of his obstinacy, folly, and vice. Infinite were the
struggles for power between the barons and the King. Henry's luxury and
profuseness continually rendered him a petitioner to the assembly of barons for
money (for now the Kings began to ask money instead of men) and they as
constantly demanded a confirmation of those privileges which had been granted
them under the reign of his predecessor.

In order to render himself independent of them, he found a thousand ridiculous
pretenses for raising money without their assistance. He would invite himself
to the houses of his subjects, and always expected a present at the door: he
extorted from the Jews, wherever he found them, without any remorse. He even
scrupled not to defraud minors of their lawful inheritances, to which he had
been left protector; while the people had the mortification to see those sums
lavished upon undeserving favorites, foreigners without merit, strumpets,
flatterers, and all the vermin of a vicious court.

But all his exactions were not sufficient to supply his prodigality; he still
wanted money, he still was obliged to have recourse to his barons, and yet he
still desired to be absolute. The barons, on the contrary, who had long aimed
at independence, and who detested his cowardice and luxury, refused his
request. Though no Monarch was more timid in danger, none was more presumptuous
in prosperity: he threatened them, for refusing, with his severe di^pleasure,
and strengthened himself by the assistance of the Pope, in order to plunder the
kingdom.

Whilst the English were complaining of the avarice of their King, and his
profusion to foreign favorites, the Pope's legate made his triumphal entry to
rob them of what the King had not laid hands on: the interests of the clergy
and of the Pope were formerly one, but they now began to flow in divided
channels. The riches, which some years before settled in their monasteries at
home, were now drained off to enrich a distant kingdom, already too luxurious.
The clergy, therefore, justly dreaded the arrival of an extraordinary legate,
whose only aims were directed by avarice and extortion. They expostulated, but
in vain, to the King, against this unnecessary ambassador from the head of the
church: the King hoped to reap some private advantage from his arrival, and he
was but little concerned for public grievances. In every demand the King made
for himself, the legate would take care to make one for the Pope also: he even
proposed, that the Monks should sign their names to notes, where a blank was
left for the sum specified. The exactions, thus daily committed upon the
churches, compelled the Bishops to carry their complaints to the Pope himself,
but the King still vindicated the legate's conduct. At length, the prelates,
quite tired with the repeated demands of the legate, who daily had some new
pretext for getting money, resolved to meet and consider of some remedy to
prevent his rapacity. They accordingly assembled, but had scarce begun to
complain to each other of the miseries they suffered, when the legate entered
the assembly, with a demand for more money: this they considered as an
accumulation of impudence and extortion, and they gave him a blunt denial. The
legate, being disappointed, for this time left the assembly, and went to
pillage the Scotch clergy with better prospects of success.

An accident happened about this time, which serves as a strong instance of the
submission the people yielded to the power of Rome. Some business induced the
legate to take Oxford in his way: he was received with all that grandeur and
magnificence, which, from his character, he had a right to expect. As the
luxury, in which these Italian dignitaries lived, was great, several scholars
of the University, while the legate's dinner was preparing, entered his
kitchen, incited by motives of curiosity or hunger. While they here and there
admired the opulence and luxury of all they saw, a poor Irish scholar ventured
to beg relief from the cook: the cook, instead of giving an alms, threw a ladle
full of boiling water in his face; an action which so provoked a Welsh student
who was present, that, having a bow in his hand, he shot the cook dead with an
arrow. The legate, hearing the tumult, retired in a fright to the tower of the
church, where he remained till nightfall. As soon as he thought he might retire
with safety, he hastened to the King, and complained of this outrage. The King,
with his usual meanness, flew into a violent passion, and offered to give
immediate satisfaction, by putting the offenders to death. The legate, at
first, seemed to insist upon vengeance, but, at length, was appeased, by proper
submission from the University: all the scholars of that school, which had
offended him, were ordered to be stripped of their gowns, and to walk barefoot,
with halters about their necks, to the legate's house, and humbly crave pardon
and absolution. It would be no easy matter to bring the students of Oxford to
such an humiliation at present.

In this manner this brutal and capricious tyrant went on, leagued with the
Pope against his own dominions. He had now neither barons nor clergy in his
interest, and owed all his support to the authority of the papal and royal
names. The Pope continued to make reiterated demands upon the clergy, and the
King would beg from his subjects at their own houses, as if he had been asking
charity. At one time he would get money, by pretending to take the crusade; at
another he would prevail, by going to re-conquer his dominions in France; again
he would extort aid, under pretext of portioning a relation: and he would
frequently assure his parliament of barons, that, though he had hitherto
behaved unworthily, yet, upon being supplied once more, with proper assistance,
he would reform, and give universal satisfaction. Thus he drew forth various
sums, which, without shame, he bestowed upon flatterers, panders to his
pleasures; or an army of foreigners, which he kept to intimidate his native
dominions.

At length, however, the parliament, fatigued with his unperforming promises,
resolved to refuse his demands for the future: they therefore entered into an
association, and the city of London was invited to accede. At the head of this
powerful combination was the Earl of Leicester, the King's brother-in-law, who
had risen into power merely by his master's profuseness. The King, by a strange
absurdity of thinking, as he became more feeble and unpopular, increased his
demands for fresh supplies. He was worsted in France, and obliged to purchase a
shameful truce. He was conquered by the Welsh, and became contemptible to
Scotland; yet, still he continued to harrass his own subjects with his usual
extortion, as if he designed to create in them that awe with which he failed to
impress his enemies. The barons, finding him incorrigible, after an experience
of near forty years, at length shook off their allegiance, and sent the King
notice, that they renounced the fealty they owed him, and now considered him
only as the common enemy of mankind.

Both sides were now up in arms, and the country again became the theater of
civil slaughter. The first advantages in this contest were in favor of the
King: he was a coward in danger, and showed himself a tyrant in victory.
Flushed with the success with which his arms had been just crowned, he resolved
to march directly to London. He made no doubt but the city, intimidated by his
late advantages, would declare in his favor; and, had he formerly behaved with
paternal indulgence, perhaps his present hopes would not have been groundless;
but a remembrance of his former ill usage repressed their loyalty. Instead of
opening their gates to receive a conqueror, they sent forth an army to oppose
his entry. Henry stopped his forces in a panic, and returned to meet the Earl
of Leicester, who advanced with his army near Jews in the county of Sussex.

All hopes of reconciliation being now laid aside, nothing was thought of but
the decision of the sword. The Earl, advancing with his army, drew up in order
of battle near the King, who prepared, though with reluctance, to receive him:
the fight was begun by Prince Edward, the King's son, who attacked the
Londoners with great fury, and drove them off the field of battle: on the other
hand, the King's body of forces were defeated, after a short resistance, by the
Earl of Leicester. His Majesty, who commanded them in person, gave no instances
of valor, but tamely suffered himself to be taken prisoner, which soon paved
the way for the defeat of the whole army, and Prince Edward's surrendering at
discretion.

The King and the Prince being thus prisoners, the barons took all advantages
that the most refined policy could suggest. They knew how to operate upon the
King's pusillanimity, and obliged him to send letters to all the governors of
the kingdom, to renounce their obedience, and surrender his castles to the
conquerors. They who draw their sword against their King, says the proverb,
should fling the scabbard away. The barons, with this in view, were resolved
entirely to newmodel the constitution, for they now knew, that a composition
with the royal captive was impossible; and at this period we must fix the date
of English liberty. The privileges of the King, the barons, and the clergy,
were but different modes of various usurpations; the commonalty had little or
no share in the legislature, and only looked tamely on, or were led to
slaughter without hopes of sharing the rewards of victory.

The barons and clergy, however, now saw, that the government could not readily
be transferred, without some greater power than they were at present possessed
of. The dethroning a King, the resisting a Pope, were actions that they could
not defend upon the principles of the times: they called in, therefore, an aid
till now entirely unknown in the world, they called in the sanction of the
people. The authority of the barons, clergy, and the people of England, were
set to oppose the royal and papal authority. And here, my dear Charles, I
cannot but admire the strange concurrence of circumstances which brought this
first dawn of liberty into being. To effect this, it was first necessary that
England should be possessed of a contested foreign dominion; that the King
should have frequent necessities for money to preserve it; that this
necessarily should produce a dependence upon the barons and clergy, and that
this dependence should give them, in turn, a share of power. It was necessary,
that the interests of the clergy should be separated from those of the crown,
and should concur in the opposition: in short, it was necessary that the powers
on both sides should be so exactly balanced, that so small a weight as that of
the people, as it was then considered, should be thrown in to turn the scale.

A parliament was called, in which the King was obliged to give orders, that
four Knights from each county should sit, in order to represent their
respective shires, and deliberate for the general benefit of the people. This
is the first rude outline of an English House of Commons; the people had been
gaining some consideration since the diminution of the foeudal laws, and the
establishment of corporation charters, by which men were, in some measure,
rescued from the power of their masters, and permitted to improve a spirit of
freedom in towns. As arts increased, the number of these little republics (if I
may so call them) increased; and we find them, at the present period, of
consequence enough to be adopted into a partnership of the legislation. But
these privileges were granted by the barons, merely to confirm their own; and,
could they have now agreed among themselves, they might have continued in
possession of all the authority of the kingdom, and the constitution might thus
settle into a confirmed aristocracy; but they grew jealous of each other's
power; they began to fear the Earl of Leicester, who had abrogated kingly
authority, and was intent only upon establishing despotism. This produced new
struggles, and these ended once more in the restoration of the King and his
family: the Earl of Leicester was defeated and slain upon the field of battle.
Henry, who had been led about as a captive, and always exposed in the front of
that army which had dethroned him, was once more set at liberty by his
victorious son Edward; and though, to the end of life, he persevered in his
former follies, yet the people retained that share of liberty which they had
acquired in the turbulent parts of his reign. A spirit of liberty had now
diffused itself from the incorporated towns through the whole mass of people, and
ever after blazed forth at convenient seasons; afterward whoever lost they
were sure to be gainers; and, if in the contest they laid down their lives, and
suffered all the hardships of war, yet they considered those calamities as
trivial, if liberty were left improved and better secured to their posterity. I
am,

Dear Charles, etc.
LETTER XVI.
AT the death of Henry III, Edward, his son and successor, was employed in the
Holy wars, in which, though he gained nothing to the cause for which he fought,
he acquired the character of an excellent general and an intrepid soldier. As
he came to an undisputed throne, the opposite interests were proportionably
feeble. The barons were exhausted by mutual dissensions, the clergy hated the
Pope, and the people, as is evident from some insurrections at that time, were
not much satisfied with the clergy. It was natural to suppose, that a politic
and a conquering Prince would take this opportunity of giving the royal
prerogative its former splendour and authority. Wise princes, however, are
satisfied with moderate power, and Edward only labored to be terrible to his
enemies.

The Welsh had long enjoyed their own laws and customs; they were the only
remains of the ancient Britons, and had still preserved their freedoms and
their country uncontaminated from foreign invasions: incapable, however, of
resisting their enemies in the plain, their chief defense was in their
inaccessible mountains, those natural bulwarks of their country. Whenever
England was disturbed by factions at home, or its troops called off to wars
abroad, the Welsh would continually pour in their irregular troops, and lay the
open country waste with ravage and desolation. No situation can be worse, than
that of several petty principalities bordering upon each other, under different
commanders, and pursuing different interests. Sensible of this, Edward led a
powerful army against Lewellyn, their King: he had frequently before been
chastised, obliged to beg peace, but was ever ready to seize an opportunity of
making an advantageous war. Upon the approach of Edward, he took refuge upon
the inaccessible mountains of Snowden, and there maintained his post without
danger. The King of England, not discouraged by the difficulty of the
situation, was resolved to invest his army, by securing all the avenues by
which it might escape. Posted as Lewellyn was, he might certainly have
harrassed his enemies without ever himself being destroyed, had not a trifling
victory over a body of his besiegers induced him to come down and face the
enemy upon more equal terms. A small advantage gained was interpreted as the
beginning of the completion of Merlyn's prophecy, in which he was to possess
the whole kingdom without a rival. Flattered with such expectations, he
descends into the plain, without considering the inequality of his forces: the
Welsh and the English now, for the last time, drew up against each other.
Lewellyn, after having performed all that courage and desperation could
inspire, found himself, at last, fatally deceived: he was killed upon the field
of battle, and his forces utterly routed. With him expired the distinction of
his nation; it was soon after united to the kingdom of England, and made a
principality, given to the eldest son of the crown. Foreign conquests might add
to the glory, but the present added to the felicity of the kingdom. The Welsh
were now blended with their conquerors, and, in the revolution of a few ages,
all national animosity was entirely forgotten.

His native dominions being thus freed from every invader, the King soon had an
opportunity to increase his power, by the dissension of his neighbors. The
crown of Scotland, after the death of Alexander the Third, became destitute of
any apparent heir: John Bruce and Robert Baliol divided all the suffrages of
the kingdom. A civil war impended, and nothing but an umpire, appointed by
mutual consent, could determine the contest without blood^ For this purpose, by
a fatal mistake in the politics of the Scotch, Edward was chosen, accepted the
mediation with pleasure, came to Norham, and, from being chosen umpire, claimed
a superiority over the country, whose crown had been submitted to his decision,
and asserted his right to the government. To wear the appearance of justice,
however, after long deliberations, in which great care was taken to inculcate
his right to the crown of Scotland, he fixed Baliol on the throne, less as King
than as a vassal of England.

The first step taken by Edward, after placing Baliol on the throne, was
sufficient to convince the Scots of his intentions to stretch his superior
prerogative to the utmost. A merchant of Gascoigne presented a petition to him,
implying, that Alexander, late King of Scotland, was indebted to him a certain
sum, still unpaid, notwithstanding all his solicitations to the new King for
payment. Edward eagerly embraced this opportunity of exercising his new right,
and summoned the King of Scotland to appear at Westminster, to answer, in
person, to the complaint which was brought against him by the merchant. Upon
subjects equally trivial he sent six different summons, at different times, in
one year; so that the Scotch King soon perceived himself only possessed of the
name, without the authority. Willing, therefore, to shake off so troublesome a
master, Baliol revolted, and procured the Pope's absolution for the infraction
of his former oaths of homage. Edward now offered the crown to Bruce, who
accepted it with joy; and thus a strong party of the Scotch was added in
strengthening the English King to subdue their native country. Edward, at the
head of a numerous army, marched into the country: numberless were the
victories gained on one side and the other, in which the conquerors acquired
much honor, but either country lost the bravest of its subjects. But wars like
these, though minutely related by every historian, are scarce worth treasuring
in any memory, but that of an herald or antiquarian. The whole may be comprised
in the following short description: one barbarous nation meets another in some
plain, generally by mutual appointment; little art, evolution, evasion, or
subterfuge, was practiced or known; they rushed upon each other, and numbers
and tumult generally decided the victory: the revolutions of the government,
and not the description of battles fought in these reigns, serve to adorn the
page of history. At one season Scotland was brought to the lowest degree of
humiliation, and Edward had laid a plan, which probably he ever had in view, of
uniting, it as a conquest, to the crown of England. But his scheme proved
abortive, the time of that kingdom's deliverance was at hand; they found safety
in despair, and, upon the King's return to England, they once more sallied down
from their mountains upon the English army which he had left, and gained a
complete victory.

This was terrible news to Edward, who had already built upon that kingdom as
his own. He was now implacably exasperated against the Scots, and resolved to
take a signal vengeance: to this purpose, he summoned all the vassals of the
crown, without distinction, to be ready at a time and place particularly
appointed. His intention was, to march into the heart of that kingdom, and
destroy it, to use his own expression, from sea to sea. He soon saw himself at
the head of the finest army England had ever produced: the Scotch trembled at
his approach, but death stopped the course of his intended devastations.

As soon as he perceived that his disorder was to be fatal, he sent for the
Prince his son, whom he had appointed to succeed him, and, taking him by the
hand, earnestly recommended, with his dying breath, three things: he first
enjoined him not to recall Gavestone, a flatterer, who he knew would poison his
principles; he next desired, that his heart might be sent to the holy
sepulcher; and, thirdly, he recommended him to prosecute the war with the
Scotch, till he had entirely subdued them; desiring his bones might be carried
about at the head of the army, the more effectually to strike terror into an
enemy he had so often subdued.

England began to grow truly formidable under this reign, the opposition of the
barons was but feeble and ill supported; the Monarch was, in some measure,
absolute, though he was prudent enough never to exert his power: he is accused
of severity, and it is probable he might have exerted justice with too heavy an
hand; yet it should be particularly remarked, that he was the first who began
to dispense indiscriminate justice. Before him, the people who rose in
insurrections were punished in the most severe manner, by the sword or the
gibbet; while the nobility, who were almost always refractory, were treated
with a degree of lenity which encouraged future disobedience; a small fine,
which, in fact, only fell upon their poor dependants, generally wiped off their
offenses. He punished both with equal severity.

However, you ought to remark the alterations in the spirit of the times: the
English, now incorporated with their fierce Norman conquerors, were no longer
the tame consenting people they formerly appeared, and always were prepared to
elude that authority which they could not resist. With this spirit of
opposition a spirit of cruelty also seemed to enter; regardless of their own
lives, the people did not seem very sollicitous about the lives of others. The
penal laws now began to assume more rigor: in the times of William the
Conqueror, it was a law, that no man should be punished with death; but that
law was at present quite laid aside, and several crimes were rendered capital.

But what gave the reign of Edward a true value with posterity, was the degree
of power the people began to assume during this period. The clergy and the
barons he considered, in some measure, as rivals; and, to weaken their force,
he gave authority to the commons: a law was enacted, by which no tax could
be-levied without their consent. His intentions were to render himself absolute
by their assistance; and, it is but too probable, he might have become so, had
he lived to put his designs in execution; but he died at a time he was
beginning to throw off parliamentary restrictions, and left the people a share
of authority which had been given them for very different purposes than the
promotion of liberty. The most healing medicines are often extracted from
poisons: in short, whatever Edward's character was, as a man, as a King, he was
of infinite service to his country.

I am, etc.

LETTER XVII.
Dear Charles,
IT was long an opinion of the English, and grounded on observations made from
the days of King Arthur, that, between two valiant and able Princes in the
nation, there always intervened a King of less sense and courage, moins
suffisans de sens et de prouesse; that there was something in the remark you
have hitherto seen in several successions.

No Monarch could come to a crown with more advantageous omens than Edward II.
an army prepared for victory, a people united, and an undisputed succession.
But he soon gave them reasons to fear his future conduct, by the commencement
of his reign. Regardless of his father's dying admonitions, he discontinued the
war with Scotland, and recalled Gavestone, his favorite, from exile.

Gavestone was a foreigner by birth, adorned with every accomplishment of
person and mind that could create affection, but destitute of those qualities
of heart and understanding that serve to procure esteem. He was beautiful,
witty, brave, but, at the same time, vicious, effeminate, and debauched: he had
assisted in all Edward's youthful extravagancies and pleasures, had been, to
use a Latin expression, his arbiter elegantiarum, and thus had secured this
young voluptuous Monarch's affections.

A prudent King may have private friends, but should never retain a public
favorite: royal favor should shine with indiscriminate luster, and the
Monarch should ever guard against raising those he most loves to the highest
preferments. In being thus biassed by his affections, he will probably be
induced to reward talents unequal to the burden of affairs, or impatient of
the fatigues of application. Such was the case of Edward, with regard to his
new favorite; he loaded him with favors, at a time when he was giving up his
title to the sovereignty of Scotland, which had been so hardly earned by his
predecessor.

The barons, at this time, were not so entirely humbled, but that they resented
a conduct so injurious to the interests of the kingdom as well as their own.
Gavestone's pride, his being a foreigner, his insolence, soon raised a strong
party against him: an army was formed to oppose his administration; Gavestone
was taken and beheaded, without even the formality of a trial. Thus you
perceive a spirit of cruelty beginning to enter the nation; the death of
Gavestone was, probably, supported by the precedents found in the former reign.
The successors of Edward the First, copied after him in his faults alone; the
vices of conquering Monarchs and great Kings are ever most dangerous, because
they most generally produce imitation.

From this time the scaffolds were drenched with English blood; each party, as
it happened to prove victorious, brought their prisoners, as traitors, to the
block or the gibbet; never was so much blood spilt in a juridical manner in
England, as in this hideous reign. The Scotch, during these storms, endeavored
to fortify their government: they conquered the English in more than one
battle, Robert Bruce, being made King, became powerful from the divisions of
the English, who pretended to be his masters.

Edward, in the mean time, seemed only intent on prosecuting his pleasures, or
becoming formidable to his own subjects. The mutual hatred between him and the
barons seemed daily to increase, or, in other words, as he still became more
despicable in the eyes of the people, the barons, lately depressed, grew into
power. His supineness gave them an opportunity of executing all their designs,
so that at last he suffered himself to be taken a prisoner; but he was soon
after released, upon a promise of future amendment. A certain number of the
barons were admitted into his council, and he gave his word to perform nothing
without their consent and approbation: but he was only born for misfortunes.
This Monarch, of an easy nature, and who, probably, if born in a private
station, would have been considered as a worthy man, could not live without a
favorite. Into the place which Gavestone held in his affections, Hugh Spencer,
a youth of great address and many accomplishments, succeeded. This young
gentleman, no way intimidated by the misfortunes of Gavestone, in similar
circumstances, pursued his conduct in every particular; he even went beyond him
in pride, avarice, and prodigality. An universal discontent soon became
visible: all the vices of the King were imputed to young Spencer alone, and his
own were enough to sink him into ruin. The barons, therefore, once more
combined to destroy this favorite, who was, in reality, without a protector:
they therefore banished him and his father out of the kingdom, with great
threats, if ever he attempted to return. This indignity to the King seemed to
rouse him from his former lethargy; the Queen also, a bold haughty woman,
endeavored to stimulate him to revenge: she had received an affront on a
pilgrimage to Canterbury, in being denied admittance, by the governor, into the
castle of Leeds, on the way. She therefore persuaded her weak consort, that the
present conjuncture was very favorable for freeing himself from the power of
the barons, and, that punishing the governor of Leeds would intimidate them so
far, as to prevent any future opposition. Her advice was embraced with avidity;
the King raised an army without opposition; he besieged the castle of Leeds,
the governor was taken, and the Queen now had an opportunity of satiating her
revenge, by beheading him.

Success only seemed to push this weak Prince on to new violences: he besieged
the castles of several other barons, and became master of them with equal ease.
To complete his contempt for all former compacts, he recalled his young
favorite, Spencer, once more from banishment. We may easily, upon this
occasion, perceive how much the barons were declined from that degree of power
they possessed two or three reigns before. The Monarch, at present, that
oppressed them, was voluptuous, ignorant, and a coward, in the general opinion
of the people; yet, feeble as he was, the barons were scarce able to resist
him: the power of the people was now grown truly formidable, and Edward had
address enough to procure a part of them to second his pretensions. The King
now, therefore, in the meridian of power, prosecuted the most rigorous
measures: the Queen, cruel by nature, and Spencer, his favorite, actuated by
revenge, stimulated him to numberless acts of cruelty. Among others who
perished in the opposition, was Thomas, Earl of Lancaster: this nobleman had
always been signalized for his valor among the confederate Lords, and was a
peculiar opposer of the growing power of the family of the Spencers: he was
taken fighting, at the head of a body of forces which he had, in vain,
endeavored to rally. He had no great hopes to expect any favor from judges
who were his enemies, from personal motives: he was condemned to be quartered,
as a traitor; but, from a regard to his station, the King changed his
punishment to beheading. In this manner nine other Lords were executed at York,
as a terror to the kingdom; but these terrors could not secure a Monarch, who
was in himself contemptible. Whatever might have been the Earl of Lancaster's
real character, his death left it uncertain, whether he acted with views to get
himself created King, or was only the champion of public liberty. However that
be, the people in general had his memory in great veneration, and considered
him as a martyr. We may by this see what side in this quarrel was espoused by
the clergy; immediately after the Earl's death, miracles were said to be
wrought at his tomb, and every pretended miracle of this kind was productive of
a thousand enemies to the King.

The favorite Spencer and his father still gave an unbounded scope to their
revenge; not content with putting to death the heads of the opposite party,
with depriving others of their estates, and with condemning great numbers to
perpetual banishment, they were resolved to level their rage against Roger
Mortimer, now actually in their custody, and confined within the Tower. There
were few circumstances that could apparently screen him from their resentment;
he had been openly in arms, and active in the opposition; he had no character
to render his punishment unpopular, and none that he knew to intercede for him
with the King: yet he found his punishment remitted, to his astonishment,
notwithstanding all the solicitations of his enemies to the contrary. The
Queen was fallen in love with this youth, and used all her interest to procure
his pardon: an intimacy had actually commenced between them; and this
protection, with which he was publicly honored by her, drew down the
resentment of the two favorites. In this opposition of interests, Edward
seemed entirely passive; he wished to oblige both parties, and one day gave
orders to screen young Mortimer from pursuit, and the next, to secure him
wherever he could be detected: the feeble King knew not how to refuse any
request, when he loved those who made the demand.

A dissension thus between two parties, who shared the affections of the King,
must soon terminate in the dismission of either. To get the Queen removed, the
Spencers contrived to persuade her to go upon a certain negotiation to the
court of her brother, the King of France. With this proposal, though from her
enemies, the Queen readily complied; she foresaw it would give her an
uncontrouled liberty of enjoying the company of her gallant, and might give her
power of being revenged upon his oppressors. Philip the Fair, who was at that
time upon the throne of France, pursued the politics of every wise King; he
encouraged the Queen, his sister, to oppose Edward, her husband, and thus, by
dividing his enemies, he hoped to weaken them. Thus heartened, she loudly
inveighed against the favorites of the King, levied troops in France to oppose
their power, and, with this army, landed in England, where her expectations
were answered, in being joined by a powerful body of malcontents. Mortimer,
her lover, was with her at the head of these troops, at the same time that the
favorite Spencer was the heart of the opposite party.

Edward was little able to withstand his enemies: all his endeavors to raise
troops proved ineffectual; none would venture to expose themselves in the
King's defense, for they saw that an ignominious death must be the consequence
of a defeat, and ingratitude of victory. The Queen took Spencer, the father, at
Bristol: this gentleman, fourscore and ten years old, had passed a youth of
tranquillity and reputation; he had been esteemed and loved by all the kingdom,
but his fond compliance with his son's ambition involved his old age in the
turbulence of faction: he was immediately hanged up in his armor, without even
the formality of a trial. His unhappy son did not long survive him; he was
taken, with a few more, attending the King their master, in an obscure convent
in Wales. Revenge, and not justice, prompted all the punishments of this reign.
The Queen had not patience to stay, till the meeting of a parliament, to
destory her enemy; she ordered him to be produced before the insulting
populace, enjoyed herself the pleasure of seeing him led to the place of
execution, where he was hanged on a gibbet fifty feet high. Several other Lords
shared his fate, all deserving pity indeed, had they not formerly justified
this inhumanity by setting a cruel example.

The unhappy King, now abandoned, saw himself in the power of his enemies,
without a single friend to stand between him and universal reproach; he was
conducted to the capital, amidst the insults and reproaches of his subjects;
confined in the Tower, judged by the parliament, and solemnly deposed. He was
assigned a pension for his support; his son, a youth of fourteen, was crowned
King, and the Queen appointed regent during his minority.

The deposed Monarch but a short time survived his misfortunes: he was sent
from prison to prison, a wretched outcast, and the sport of his mercenary
keepers: in these journies they made him suffer all the indignities, that cruel
and ingenious villainy could devise. Among others, it is said, they shaved him
for sport, in the open fields, using water from the neighboring ditch: the
genius of the people must surely have suffered a gradual deterioration, or they
would never have permitted the venerable head of Majesty, a Monarch, whose
greatest fault was the violence of his friendships, to be used with so much
indignity. What firmness soever the deposed Prince had hitherto shown in his
misfortunes, it left him upon this occasion^ he looked upon his merciless
insulters with an a^ of fallen Majesty, and shed a torrent of tears^ the
cruelty of his death alone was ^nting to terminate a life of complete misery.
The last place of his imprisonment was Berkley castle: here he was kept totally
destitute of all the comforts, and almost all the necessaries of life. But
these miseries were not long to continue: the two keepers, entering his
apartment one night as he lay in bed, to stifle his cries, covered his face
with a pillow, and then, with a cruelty not to be paralleled, thrust an horn
pipe up his body, through which they ran a red-hot iron, and burnt his bowels:
his horrid shrieks, however, were heard at a distance from the castle, and,
though all possible care was taken to conceal it, his murder soon after was
discovered by one of the accomplices. Misfortunes, like his, must ever create
pity, and, a punishment, so disproportionate to his guilt, in some measure
soften the severity of reproach.

I am, etc.

LETTER XVIII.
Dear Charles,
I FANCY you now begin to have some faint idea of the origin of our happy
constitution; and, as I am going to lead you to a reign which gave new strength
to the people, permit me to entertain you a moment with the spirit of thinking
in the nation, at that juncture I am speaking of. By the continual admission of
foreigners, in several of the preceding reigns, the number of the commons was
surprisingly increased; and the introduction of some new manufactures, of
wearing woollen clothes, and making glass, for instance, still decreased the
retinue of the nobles, and threw greater numbers of the inhabitants into
chartered towns. The barons, however, still continued to reside at their
castles in the country, gave laws to the peasants around them, and exercised a
despotic authority over all their dependants. The clergy had, for some time,
been at variance with the Pope, and this diffension contributed to strip the
mask of sanctity from both: the division of the church was a most certain means
of rendering it contemptible, since all its strength lay only in the influence
it had over the minds of its votaries. But, there was another principle, which
had been, for some time, operating, and which, in time, promised to be a
certain means of diminishing the power of the barons and the clergy; I mean a
diminution of personal service in war. In former times, every vassal was to
appear, at the command of his lord, with horse attendants, and all the
apparatus necessary for a campaign. If the nobility, or vassals of the crown,
refused to march, the King was unable to compel them. In this manner a
combination of the nobility had it ever in their power to give laws to the
crown, because they were not only the deliberating power, but the acting power
also: but, from the increase of the people, from the more extensive use of
money instead of barter, and from the number of independent foreigners ready to
accept pay, from these causes, I say, the Kings began to levy armies without
the assistance of the nobility. Monarchs now only wanted money to be at the
head of armies as numerous and powerful as they thought proper; wherever money
was, there lay power; and, the people, by traffic and industry, beginning to
grow rich, they were necessarily admitted into some share in the legislature.
Thus we see the nobility, the clergy, and the people, different from what they
were two or three reigns before this; and the strength of the King did not
suffer a less mutation. Former Monarchs might be considered only as the first
and most powerful Baron of the land: a Baron was, in miniature, what the King
was in the great. The Monarch had scarce any real power but what he derived
from his own crown lands and vassals: when he was resolved to exert his
strength, he could only command his own tenants, and those who held immediately
under him; the barons were summoned, indeed; but, if they were displeased, they
might refuse their assistance, and all their dependants were obliged to imitate
their example; these acknowledged subjection, not to the King, but their own
master; and nothing but a civil war with the refractory nobleman could bring
him to justice. But the face of the old constitution was now beginning to be
changed; every order in the state began to have a mutual dependence on each
other; the power of the King to extend to the highest and the lowest of his
subjects, and opposite interests to concur for the benefit of all.

This change of government seemed to influence the manners of the nation; a
spirit of gallantry prevailed, which, probably, took its first rise in those
Eastern countries, which had long been famous for every luxurious refinement.
Historians represent the kingdom as immersed in debauchery and licentiousness:
that ladies, laying aside their modesty, seemed to glory in the loss of their
virtue. Nothing, say they, was more common, than to see them riding in troops
to the tournaments, dressed like cavaliers, with swords by their sides, their
horses adorned with rich trappings, and behaving with more than masculine
effrontery. Whatever Monks may observe upon this subject, this aukwardly
gallant behavior, in some measure, expressed a degree of growing elegance in
the times, and that the people were emerging from primitive barbarity.

Under Edward III, the constitution of our parliaments, and the whole frame of
our government, became reduced into a better form. A spirit of liberty breathes
in all his laws: yet, no King knew how to make himself more absolute. As the
father lost his crown and his life, in the most miserable manner, by suffering
himself to be governed by his ministers, and protecting them from the
resentments of the people; so the son very early exerted his own authority, and
freed himself from the guardianship, or rather subjection, of his mother the
Queen, and her paramour, who had long oppressed the nation, and dishonored
him, by their scandalous conduct. Mortimer was dragged from the Queen's
apartment, in the most ignominious manner, while she implored, all the while,
that they would spare the gentle Mortimer. But the young King was deaf to her
entreaties; the pity which she once refused her unhappy husband was now denied
her: the parliament condemned Mortimer to die, without being permitted to
plead, as he had served Spencer some time before. He fell by the hands of the
hangman; and Isabella was confined to the castle of Risings, with a pension of
three thousand pounds a year. Her confinement was severe, though she survived
her disgrace twenty-five years, and, abandoned to universal contempt, wept in
solitude rather her misfortunes than her vices.

Edward III. well knew, that a conquering Monarch was fittest to please a
warlike people. The Scotch had long triumphed with impunity; he therefore began
his reign by reducing them to the most distressful circumstances, and once more
brought them to acknowledge his sovereignty over their crown. But he was soon
drawn off from these conquests to objects of greater victories: a new scene
began to be opened in France, and Europe, in suspense, began to doubt whether
Edward's claims to that kingdom were secured to him by right of inheritance, or
by the rights of conquest. France, at that time, was by no means so extensive
as at present: it comprehended neither Dauphine, nor Provence, nor Franche
Comte. It was rendered still more feeble, from the nature of its government;
several powerful neighbors, who pretended to be vassals of that crown, rather
served to weaken than strengthen the monarchy.

The people of that kingdom were unhappy, from their mutual divisions; and the
King, at that time, was still more so. The three sons of Philip the Fair, in
full parliament, accused their wives of adultery; they were each condemned, and
ordered to be imprisoned for life. Lewis Huttin, the eldest son, caused his
wife to be strangled; her lovers died by a new kind of punishment, they were
flead alive.

After the death of Lewis Huttin, King of France, a question arose about the
validity of the Salic law; a law made in the early period of French Monarchy,
importing, that no woman should rule. As this is a subject of some importance
in the English history, it is necessary to expatiate here a little: they had
hitherto never inquired, in France, whether a female could succeed in the
kingdom. Laws are only made to regulate what may happen by what has happened
already, and, as an instance of this kind had never occurred, there were no
laws to direct them. Precedents, in lesser instances, were the only guides in
such a circumstance, but these precedents had varied with the occasion. The
parliament of France had often adjudged the succession to women; as Artois was
formerly given to a female in prejudice of the male heir. The succession of
Champagne had been, on some occasions, given to the daughters, and, on others,
they were held unqualified to succeed. We thus see that right changed with
power; and justice, in such a case, was either unknown or disregarded.

Lewis Huttin left an only daughter, and two brothers: the elder, Philip the
Tall, assumed the crown, in prejudice of Huttin's daughter, and attempted to
cover his usurpation by the Salic law. The younger brother, Charles the Fair,
jealous of his elder brother's fortune, opposed his pretensions, and asserted
the daughter's right to succeed. This cause was carried before the French
parliament, and decided in favor of Philip. This Monarch enjoyed the crown but
a short time, and, dying, left only daughters to succeed him: Charles the Fair,
however, was now of a different sentiment from what he had been formerly; he
now maintained the law for the exclusion of females, because it made in his
favor. He seized the crown without opposition, and enjoyed it for some time,
but, dying, left his wife with child. As there was now no apparent heir, the
next heir to the crown was to be regent, and two persons asserted their claim
upon this occasion: Edward III, laid his claim, as being, by his mother
Isabella, who was daughter of Philip the Fair, and sister to the three last
Kings of France, rightful heir to the crown. Philip Valois, on the other hand,
had seized upon it, as being the next heir by the male succession. The claims
of Philip were preferred; he was constituted regent of France, and, the Queen
being unfortunately brought to-bed of a daughter, he was unanimously elected
King. He was crowned by his subjects with universal satisfaction, had the
appellation of Philip the Fortunate given him, and to this he added those which
might merit good fortune, virtue and justice. Among other instances of his
felicity, he might reckon that of the homage paid him by Edward, his rival,
which he came to offer at Amiens: however, this homage was soon followed by a
war, and Edward disputed that crown, of which he had just before declared
himself the vassal.

A brewer at Ghent was one of those who gave the greatest assistance to Edward
in this war, and determined him to assume the title of King of France. This
citizen's name was James Ardevet, grown too powerful for a subject, and one of
those, according to Machiavel, whom Kings ought to flatter or destroy. Thus
assisted, Edward made a powerful invasion: upon landing, he was challenged by
Philip to try their fortune upon equal terms, in some appointed plain. Edward
accepted the challenge, for in every action this Prince affected the hero; but,
some obstacles intervening, the war was prosecuted in the usual manner, by
taking every advantage where it happened to offer.

In these battles there are little materials for instruction, nor can they
afford any thing more entertaining, than the history of a maroding party in one
of our modern gazettes. It is sufficient to observe, that several skirmishes
only drew on the great and decisive victory of Cressy, which every honest
Englishman boasts of to this very hour. In this memorable battle, Philip was at
the head of an hundred thousand men, and Edward only of thirty thousand. The
Black Prince, his son, as yet but a youth of fifteen, commanded the first line
of the English army. The second was conducted by the Earls of Northampton and
Arundel; and the body of reserve was headed by the King in person. He and the
Prince of Wales had that morning received the sacrament with great devotion,
and his behavior denoted the calm intrepidity of a man resolved on conquest or
death. The army being thus arranged, the King rode from rank to rank, with a
cheerful countenance; bad his soldiers remember the honor of their country,
while his eloquence animated the whole army to a degree of enthusiastic
expectation. To oppose the English, Philip had drawn up his formidable army in
three divisions also; the first commanded by John of Luxembourg, the blind King
of Bohemia; the second was led by the Count of Alencon, and, Philip, in person,
commanded the body of reserve. This was the first battle that the Black Prince
had seen, but he now appeared foremost in the very shock, and continued, for
some time, to turn the fortune of the day; but his courage would have been soon
oppressed by numbers, had not the Earl of Northampton come to his relief. The
very thickest of the battle was now gathered round him, and the valor of a boy
filled even veterans with astonishment: but their surprise at his courage could
not give way to their sears for his person; apprehensive that some misfortune
might happen to him in the end, they sent the King word to hasten to the
Prince's relief. Edward, who had all this time viewed the engagement from a
windmili, with great deliberation asked if his son was dead; and, being
answered, that he still lived and was giving astonishing instances of valor,
Then tell my Generals, cried the King, that he shall have no assistance from
me; the honor of this day shall be his, and he shall be indebted to his own
merit alone for victory. Upon this occasion thirty thousand of the French were
killed in the field of battle, and the day after they experienced another
defeat. This victory is partly ascribed to four pieces of artillery, which the
English first made use of here, and the use of which had been but lately
discovered. Edward, after two victories gained in two days, took Calais, of
which the English remained in possession two hundred and ten years.

This war, which was at once carried on in three different counties of France,
thinned the inhabitants of the invaded country, and drained that of the
invaders. But a destruction, still more terrible than that of war, contributed,
at this time, to desolate the wretched inhabitants of Europe. A pestilence more
terrible than any mentioned in former history, which had already almost
dispeopled Asia and Afric, came to settle upon the western world, with
increased malignity. The fourth part of the people were cut off by it: in
London it raged with such violence, that in one year's space there were buried,
in Charter House churchyard, above fifty thousand persons. It was in the midst
of this terrible scourge of nature, that the ambition of Edward and Philip were
contending for new conquests, and adding to the calamities of mankind. These
ravages, however, were silently repaired by commerce and industry: those arts,
which were then despised by Princes, were laying the seeds of future opulence
and increased population. These arts were traveling, gradually, from Italy,
and had begun to find harbor in England: the refinements and the pleasures of
sense every day began to improve, but intellectual refinement was yet unknown:
sensual enjoyments must ever be carried to some height, before mankind can find
leisure or taste for entertainments of a more delicate nature.

During the English victories on the continent, the Scotch, ever willing to
embrace a favorable opportunity of rapine or revenge, invaded England with a
numerous army. This unexpected invasion, at such a juncture, alarmed the
English, but, however, was not capable of disheartening them. Lionel, Edward's
son, who was left guardian of England during his father's absence, was yet but
a boy, incapable of commanding an army; but the victories on the continent even
seemed to inspire women with ardour. Philippa, Edward's Queen, took upon her to
repulse the enemy, in person: to that end, heading the troops drawn together
from all parts, with wonderful expedition, she marched directly against the
Scots, and offered them battle. The Scotch King was no less impatient to
engage: he imagined a victory would be easy against undisciplined troops, and
headed by a woman: but he was miserably deceived; he had not only the
mortification to lose the day, but to be made a prisoner by the hands of the
English.

These conquests abroad were, however, no way favorable to the cause of
liberty at home. As the King became victorious, he necessarily increased in
independence. The barons, clergy, and people, balanced each other's power; the
royal power alone was growing beyond its bounds. Yet Edward was too sensible a
Monarch to give open disgust; he was only laying a foundation of despotism for
his successor to build upon; and, had he been of equal capacity with his
father, he might have seized upon public liberty with impunity. But I have
transgressed the bounds of a letter, without coming to the conclusion of this
Prince's reign; I must therefore refer you to my next.

I am, etc.

LETTER XIX.
Dear Charles,
YOU have already seen how unjustly the people distribute titles to Kings,
before they have deserved them: you have seen the second Edward called the
Father of his country, in the beginning of his reign; and yet fall, in the end,
a miserable sacrifice to its resentment. You have seen Philip Valois, surnamed
the Fortunate, upon coming to the crown, suffering the most signal defeats, but
some time after.

John succeeded Philip in the throne of France, but had his pretensions
contested by Edward the Black Prince, who commanded the army of his father.
This young Prince's gallantry, bravery, and modesty, had won the affections of
his soldiers, and he almost became invincible at their head. John, in the mean
time, was at the head of a divided and factious nobility; the government of
France, being under this John, exactly what that of England had been under a
Prince of the same name some reigns before. They had their parliaments of
barons, despotic over their own hereditary possessions; and they obliged John
of France to sign a charter, very much resembling the Magna Charta, which had
been signed by the English Monarch. The warlike resources of France and England
were, therefore, at this time very unequal. John was at the head of a nobility
which acknowledged no subordination amongst each other: they led their
dependant slaves to the fight, and obeyed superior command only as it suited
their inclination; their King might more justly be said to command a number of
small armies under distinct leaders, than one vast machine operating with
uniformity and united force. The French barons paid their own soldiers,
punished their transgressions, and rewarded their fidelity. But very different
were the forces of England: the main body of the English army was composed of
the people, indiscriminately levied, paid by the King, and regarding him as the
source of preferment or disgrace. Instead of personal attendance, the nobility
contributed supplies in money; and there was only such a number of nobles in
the army, as might keep the spirit of honor alive, without diminishing
military subordination.

With an army thus composed, the Black Prince advanced to Poictiers, and
ravaged a country that once belonged to his ancestors. King John, at the head
of sixty thousand men, came up to give him battle: the English army was in such
a situation, that he might readily have starved it into any terms he thought
proper, but he was impatient of such a delay: both generals committed
unpardonable faults; the one in being led thus into a defile, the other in not
taking a proper advantage of the situation. But, at this age, we must not
expect Caesar's or Hannibals to conduct armies; ignorant generals were opposed
by generals still more ignorant. The battle of Poictiers, which soon followed,
very much resembled that of Cressy: the superior discipline of the English army
came off victorious, the flower of the French were cut off, and the King, being
wounded in the face, was taken prisoner. A particular, worth noting, is, that
he surrendered himself to one of his own subjects, whom he had formerly
banished, and who now fought for his enemies. Of four sons the King of France
had with him, the three eldest quickly fled, and, by their cowardice,
contributed to the defeat of the army: his fourth and youngest son, as yet but
thirteen years old, still fought by his father, stuck near him in all the
vicissitudes of the field, and, at length, was taken prisoner by his side. This
is a remarkable instance of the education Princes then gave their children.

This victory was, in a great measure, owing to the valor of the Black Prince,
but his modesty, after conquest, was still more remarkable. In the most humble
manner he remonstrated with his royal captive, who was complaining of his
misfortunes, that still he had the comfort left to reflect, that though he lost
the victory, yet his courage deserved it, and that a submissive deference to
his person should never be wanting to make him forget his captivity. In April
following, the Prince arrived in England, bringing his prisoner with him,
entering into London in a remarkable manner. The Prince, upon the left, rode a
little black horse, while the royal prisoner was mounted on a stately white
charger, remarkable for its furniture and beauty.

Two Kings, prisoners in the same court, at the same time, were considered as
glorious conquests; but all that England gained by them was only glory.
Whatever was acquired in France, with all the splendors of triumph, was
successively, and in a manner, silently lost, without even the mortification of
a defeat. The treaties that were made with the captive Kings, as may be easily
imagined, were highly to the advantage of their conquerors; but those treaties
were no longer observed than while the English had it in their power to enforce
obedience. It is true, John held to his engagements as far as was in his power;
but, by being a prisoner he lost his authority, and his misfortunes rendered
him contemptible. Upon his return from captivity, he not only found himself
without finances, but at the head of an exhausted state; soldiers without
discipline, and peasants without law. One of the chiefs of the banditti, upon
this occasion, assumed the title of The Friend of God, and the Enemy of
Mankind. A citizen of Sens, called John of Gouge, also got himself, by means of
robberies, to be acknowledged King, and caused as many calamities by his
devastations, as the real King had caused by his misfortunes. Such was the
state of France upon the arrival of John from England; yet, such was the
absurdity of this Monarch, that he immediately prepared for a crusade into the
Holy Land, before he was scarce replaced on his throne: had his exhausted
subjects been able to furnish him out for this chimerical project, it is
probable he would have gone through with it, but their miseries were such, as
to be even incapable of paying his ransom; upon which he again returned to
England, where he died in less than a year. It is said his passion for the
Countess of Salisbury was the real cause of this journey; and, indeed, his age,
he being near sixty, when men too often indulge this preposterous passion, and
the gallantry of the times seem to countenance this opinion.

If England, during these shining revolutions, gained any real advantage, it
was only that of having a spirit of elegance and honor now diffused through
every rank of people. The meanest soldier now began to follow his leader from
love, and not compulsion; he was brave from sentiment alone, and had the honor
of his country beating at his heart, even though in the humblest station. This
was the time when chivalry was at the highest, and all the successes of
England, at this period, were owing to a concurrence of circumstances not much
regarded by historians: A romantic nation was led on by a romantic King.

This spirit of chivalry, in some measure, served to soften the ferocity of the
age; it was a mixture of love, generosity, and war. You have already seen, that
the sons of Princes and the nobility, instead of being bred to arts, or
polished by the sciences, were brought into the field at an early age, and
instructed in no other arts, but those of arms.

This instruction consisted in little more than merely how to sit on
horseback, to wield the lance, to run at the ring, to flourish at a
tournament, to fall at the feet of a mistress, and attain such accomplishments
as inured their bodies to bear the fatigues of a campaign. The rules of
tactics, of incampments, of stratagems, or sortifications, were but little
minded by any.

Charles the Wise, of France, soon therefore, by a finely conducted policy,
regained whatever was lost by John, his predecessor. Edward the Black Prince,
emaciated by a lingering consumption, died at the palace of Westminster, in the
forty-sixth year of his age. England began to wear a face of discontent; the
public treasure was lavished without any advantage to the kingdom; the subjects
labored under numberless grievances; in short, the kingdom seemed now to feel,
that a nation might be at once very victorious and very unhappy. But, to
complete their miseries, Edward, their King, was now no longer what he was in
the earlier parts of his reign: he was sunk into unmanly indolence, and gave
himself up to the enjoyment of loose desire, in the arms of a favorite
concubine, called Allice Perrers. His parliament made frequent remonstrances
against this base oblivion of himself: the parliaments, at this time, were not
as formerly, factions ready to oppress public liberty, but assemblies of wise
and good men, sedulous for common welfare, and of wisdom equal to the rectitude
of their intentions; they frequently remonstrated against the King's and his
ministers conduct; they, at one time, had influence sufficient to get his
concubine removed, but he soon took her back, for the passions of age are
incurable. In her company he forgot all the burdens, duties, and fatigues of
state, and left the kingdom to be plundered by a rapacious ministry: he did not
live to survive the consequences of his bad conduct; he died at Shene in Surry,
deserted by all, even by those who had formerly grown rich by his bounty.
Richard II, son of the Black Prince, was constituted his successor, and came to
govern a discontented people, a rapacious ministry, and an impoverished state.
These were the calamities consequent upon the errors of the preceding reign.
Edward III. escaped them, but they fell heavily upon Richard, his successor.

I am, etc.

LETTER XX.
Dear Charles,
THE faults of conquerors, as I have already observed, generally fall upon
their successors. Richard II. came to the throne of his grandfather, when yet
but eleven, and found the people discontented, and poor. The gentry were, in
fact, luxurious, a spirit of profusion had entered with the spirit of
gallantry; this necessarily produced indolence and rapacity among the higher
orders of the kingdom, and their wants must necessarily produce an oppression
of the rest.

The regents, however, appointed during the King's minority, seemed no way
sollicitous to appease these murmurings. The Duke of Lancaster, better known by
the name of John of Ghaunt, in the very beginning, disgusted the people, by
robbing two Knights of a prisoner, which they had taken in war; and, at the
same time, several expeditions against the French and Scotch happened to be
carried on without success. But a new engagement, entered into by the crown, of
assisting Portugal, at a time when the government was insulted by nearer
enemies, raised the people's indignation. To support this unnecessary alliance,
a subsidy was to be levied by a poll-tax, payable by all above the age of
fifteen: this, at last, raised the people's refentment into an insurrection.

Notwithstanding the numbers, who by war, by a residence in towns, and by other
means, had become free, yet there were still multitudes in the country who had
lands in villenage, that, as yet, were only slaves to their lords from whom
they held. These men had seen the charms of liberty, from its effects upon
others; and they panted for freedom themselves. The luxury and opulence which
they saw others enjoy, but for which they toiled, became an incentive to them
to struggle for liberty also. Several of these had become opulent enough to
purchase their freedom, but, by an unjust act of parliament, those purchases
were declared of no validity. This the peasants considered as an infraction of
the laws of humanity, and such, indeed, it actually was. A parliament of lords,
and rich commoners, in this instance, feemed to have no regard for the rights
of men whom they considered as slaves, as if some orders of mankind were held
even too vile to find justice. The minds of the people were, therefore, thus
prepared for sedition, when the manner of collecting the polltax provoked them
to open revolt.

We have, in preceding reigns, perceived popular insurrections only in the
towns; we now find the spirit of seditious liberty spreading into the country.
Citizens, at first, begin to perceive their own strength, and next the same
manner of thinking is embraced by the peasant, whom the severity of the laws
had annexed to the soil. We now begin to find a knowledge of the rights of
humanity diffused even to the very lowest of the people, and exerting itself in
rude and terrible efforts for freedom.

The present insurrection began in Essex, where a report was industriously
spread, implying, that the peasants were doomed to death; that their houses
would be burned, and their farms plundered. The country people, alarmed at this
intelligence, rose in their own defense, and, their numbers continually
increasing, they advanced near London, to the number of an hundred thousand,
with banners displayed. At the head of this undisciplined concourse was one
Walter, by trade a tyler; he was one of those hardy spirits so frequently found
among the common English, ready to face any danger, and support every calamity:
in exacting the poll-tax he had refused to pay for his daughter, alleging,
that she was under the age mentioned in the act of parliament. The brutal
collector insisted upon her being a full grown woman, and, in order to
ascertain his assertions, proceeded to acts of indecency; this provoked the
father to such a degree, that he struck him dead at one blow with his hammer:
Wat Tyler was therefore considered as a champion in the cause, and appointed
spokesman to the people. It is easy to imagine the disorders committed by such
a tumultuous assembly; they burned and pillaged wherever they came, and
revenged their former miseries upon their masters, the gentry, to whom they no
longer acknowledged subjection. After having entered the Tower, and murdered
such as they regarded as enemies, they divided themselves into bodies, and took
up their quarters in different parts of the environs of the city. At length,
Richard, riding toward Smithfield, invited them to a conference, in order to
know and remove their grievances. Wat Tyler just entered Smithfield, when the
King's Knight delivered the royal message, without alighting, not imagining he
should stand upon ceremony: but this haughty demagogue, whose pride began to
rise with his exaltation, was so offended at this want of respect, that he was
going to kill him, if the King, who was himself advancing, had not ordered him
to dismount. In Wat Tyler's conference with the King, being both on horseback,
he made several proposals, which, though censured by historians as extravagant,
in reality breathe nothing but common justice. He desired that all slaves
should be set free, and that all commonages should be open to the poor as well
as the rich: whilst he made these demands, he now and then lifted up his sword,
in a menacing manner; which insolence so raised the indignation of William
Walworth, mayor of London, who attended the King, that, without considering to
what danger he exposed his master, he stunned Tyler with a blow of his mace,
and Sir Philpot, riding up, thrust his sword through his body: his followers,
seeing their leader on the ground, encouraged each other to revenge his death,
and their bows were now bent for execution, when Richard, though not quite
sixteen years of age, instead of flying, rode up to the rebels, with admirable
constancy and presence of mind, crying out with a resolute voice, What, my
lieges, will you then kill your King? Be not concerned for the loss of your
leader: I myself will now be your general, follow me into the field, and you
shall have whatever you desire.

The rebels immediately desisted; they followed the King, as if mechanically;
and the next day received a charter of freedom and a general pardon. But these
were only extorted grants, they were soon retracted, the ringleaders of the
rebellion were tried, convicted of treason, and executed without mercy. The
insurrections of the barons against their King, historians talk of with no
great degree of animosity; the insurrection of the plebeians against the
barons, in the present case, is branded with all the virulence of reproach. The
punishment of the insurgent barons, is generally styled cruelty; the punishment
of men who fought for native freedom, is called justice; but, we must be
contented with such misrepresentations of facts, till philosophers can be found
to write history.

We now see the first wrong step in Richard's conduct. He granted the rebels a
charter, by which he gave the sanction of justice to their claims, but soon
revoked this charter, which was apparently denying that justice they demanded.
By these means he dissipated, indeed, the combination for that time, but their
hatred remained, and was propagated by the severity of punishment.

By this means Richard had effectually alienated the affections of the lower
orders of people; it now only remained to make the parliament his enemies.
Being come to his seventeenth year, he began more plainly to discover his
inclinations, which had hitherto been restrained by the authority of his
governors: he had been bred up amidst flatterers, who never ventured to
control his will; he had seen the liberties taken by Edward III. over his
subjects, and he fancied he might imitate him in them; but Richard was not the
conqueror of France and Scotland; he was hated by the poor, and envied by three
guardians of great power, who secretly desired his crown: every error,
therefore, in the conduct of a King, so situated, must be attended with
dangerous and violent effects; his indolence in repressing the invafions of the
Scotch, and the machinations of France, were sufficient to give disgust to his
conduct. All his faults were exaggerated, and his behavior, even when right,
publicly reproved. Unaccustomed to control, he laid a scheme of becoming
absolute, and governing without his parliament's assistance or advice. Willing,
however, to color his arbitrary proceeding with the appearance of justice, he
asked the opinion of the Judges: their opinions have been too often found to be
influenced by interest; they gave it as their opinion, that the King was above
law. Yet perhaps they might have been directed by ancient laws, but custom had
introduced new modes of thinking, and they did not pay a just deference to her
power. This sentence the Lords opposed by declarations, and, offering various
reasons, were quickly at the head of forty thousand men to second their
arguments: but, what had still greater weight, they threatened to choose a new
King, which so operated upon the King's natural pusillanimity, that he
consented to change his favorite ministers, who had advised him to extend the
royal prerogative; he renewed his coronation oath, and the same formalities
were used as at the commencement of a new reign.

We have seen numberless of these insurrections without any apparent
consequence; the King circumscribed in one reign, and permitted to range at
liberty in another: the only secret, at that time, for a King to become
despotic, was to be ever in the field; a warlike Prince might command the
nobility, as they were obliged to follow him in his campaigns; and he might
command the people, from that fondness which the vulgar have for a conqueror.
Richard, however, was no way warlike; but, being bred up in the luxury and
pride of a court, still expected deference and obedience, which could, at that
time, be obtained only by merit in war.

Having, by the removal of his favorites, rendered himself still more feeble
than before, he now ran into profusion, and endeavored to forget his real
weakness, in extravagance and luxury. Such expenses necessarily created new
demands upon the people, and they were bold enough to refuse: this necessarily
produced new insurrections, and reiterated punishments on the part of the King.
Punishment and arbitrary proceedings generally produce but a temporary and
fatal security: Richard, however, insensible of this, imagined that now was the
time to render himself despotic, and had even influence sufficient to prevail
upon a parliament, called in the year 1397, to justify his pretensions. By this
merciless session, several of the nobility lost their lives: the Archbishop of
Canterbury was banished, the Earl of Arundel put to death, and the Earl of
Warwick sentenced to quit the kingdom.

Every thing seemed to contribute to support the King in the acquisition of his
new created power. The most forward to oppose his designs had suffered death or
banishment, and they who still remained, were bribed to acquiesce, by pensions,
grants, and places. The great officers of the crown, the governors of the towns
and counties, were all devoted to his interest: yet, all this was but a
deceitful security; this was a power founded upon interest or terror alone, and
not upon affection; the people hated him, and the generality of the nobles only
obeyed him through constraint.

In this manner did this giddy Monarch suffer himself to be deluded by vain
hopes, and every day gave some new instance of straining the royal prerogative
beyond what it could bear: but soon an opportunity offered to induce the people
to refuse a blind obedience to his unjust commands, and to convince him of his
former errors; a charge happening to be exhibited by the Duke of Hereford
against the Duke of Norfolk, for having spoken seditious words against his
Majesty, in a private conversation; for want of sufficient proof to support the
accusation, it was decreed, by the lords in parliament, that the dispute should
be decided by single combat, according to the laws of chivalry, still in
fashion. The time and the place were appointed for the determining this affair,
and the combatants met accordingly. It may not be amiss to describe the
ceremonies upon that occasion:

Hereford, the challenger, first appeared, on a white courser, gaily
caparisoned, armed at all points, with his drawn sword in his hand: when he
approached the lists, the Marshall demanded who he was, to which he answered,
"I am Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, come hither, according to my duty,
against Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, a false traitor to God, the King, the
realm, and me." Then, taking the oath that his quarrel was just and true, he
desired to enter the lists; which being granted, he sheathed his sword, pulled
down his beaver, crossed himself on the forehead, seized his lance, passed the
barrier, alighted and sat down in a chair of green velvet, placed at one end
of the lists. He had scarce taken his seat, when the King came into the field
with great pomp, attended by the peers the Count of St. Pol, who came from
France on purpose to see this famous trial; and ten thousand men at arms to
prevent tumults and disturbance. His Majesty, being seated in his chair of
state, the King at Arms proclaimed, that none but such as were appoined to
marshal the field, should presume to touch the lists, upon pain of death. Then
another herald proclaimed aloud, "Behold here Henry of Lancaster, Duke of
Hereford, who has entered the lists to perform his devoir against Thomas
Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, on pain of being counted false and recreant."The Duke
of Norfolk immediately appeared in arms, mounted upon a barbed horse, with a
coat of arms of crimson velvet, embroidered with lions of silver and mulberry
trees; and, having taken his oath before the constable and marshall, entered
the field, exclaiming aloud, "God defend the right." Alighting from his horse,
he placed himself in a chair of crimson velvet, opposite to his antagonist, at
the other end of the lists: then the Marshall, having measured their lances,
delivered one to the challenger, and sent a Knight with the other to the Duke
of Norfolk, and proclamation was made that they should prepare for the combat.
They immediately mounted their horses, th^n closed their beavers, fixed their
lances on the rests; and, the trumpets sounding a charge, the Duke of Hereford
began his career with great violence, but, before he could join his antagonist,
the King threw down his warder, and the heralds interposed. Richard ordered
their lances to be taken away, and banished the Duke of Hereford for ten years,
and the Duke of Norfolk for life. Nothing could be a stronger proof of that
unaccountable error, which ever attended this King's designs, than this
behavior: the one was condemned to exile, without being charged with any
offense; and the other, without being convicted of any crime. The whole kingdom
was displeased at the disappointment, and this determination, in those
ferocious times, even seemed to argue cowardice in the King. The Duke of
Norfolk was overwhelmed with grief and despondence, at the judgment awarded
against him; he retired to Venice, where, in a little time, he died of sorrow
and chagrin. Hereford, on the contrary, bore his fate with great resignation,
and behaved with such respectful submission, when he went to take his leave,
that the King remitted four years of his exile. From this he withdrew to Paris,
where he met with a favorable reception from the French King, and, in all
probability, would have married the only daughter of the Duke of Berry, had not
the match been interrupted by the interposition of Richard, who sent the Earl
of Salisbury, as his ambassador, to represent Hereford as a person who had been
guilty of treasonable practices, and to assure the French court, that he would
never be permitted to return to his own country. The Princes of the blood,
alarmed at this declaration, broke off the match abruptly; and, when Hereford
expostulated with them on the subject, made him acquainted with their reasons
for retracting the assent they had already given to his proposal. Such
complicated injuries could not fail to aggravate the resentment of the Duke
against Richard, which he had hitherto concealed; and these, probably, first
turned his thoughts upon acquiring the crown of England. No man could be better
qualified for a project of this nature than the Duke of Hereford: he was cool,
cautious, discerning, and resolute; he had distinguished himself by his
courage, both at home and abroad: he was the idol of the soldiery, and the
favorite of the people: he was immensely rich, and, by blood or alliance,
connected with all the noblemen in England. The greatest part of the kingdom
not only murmured, but loudly exclaimed against the sentence of banishment
which had been denounced against him, and ardently wished for an opportunity of
doing him justice.

It was not long before they were gratified in this particular: his father, the
Duke of Lancaster, dying in February, the banished Duke of Hereford ought to
have succeeded to his titles and estate, by virtue of his hereditary right, as
well as of the letters patent which he had obtained, even after his sentence at
Coventry. But Richard, notwithstanding his former grants, allured by the
greatness of the prize, by a sentence no less unjust than avaricious, seized
the deceased Duke's effects and estate, and decreed that the son's banishment
should be perpetual. The laws and liberties of the people were now in a most
deplorable state; there was scarce a man in the kingdom able, though all were
willing, to oppose the arbitrary power usurped by the King. Finding himself
above all restraint, he gave himself up to a soft and effeminate life,
regardless of the good of the public. His ministers, not to be behind their
Monarch, gave little attention to business, but saw, without any concern, the
English nation fall into the utmost contempt. In this situation the people
naturally turned their eyes upon the banished Duke, as the only person from
whom they could expect redress: he was stimulated by private injuries, and had
alliance and interest to give weight to his measures. The malcontents only
waited for the absence of the King, to put these measures into execution.

For this an occasion soon offered: the Earl of March, presumptive heir of the
crown, having been appointed the King's Lieutenant in Ireland, was slain, in a
skirmish, by the native Irish; and Richard was so incensed at this, that, with
a numerous army, he went over to revenge his death in person. The Duke of
Lancaster, (for this was the title which the Duke of Hereford assumed after his
father's death) being informed of Richard's departure from England, with three
small vessels, landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire, at first only pretending that
his sole aim was to obtain justice. The Earl of Northumberland, who had long
been a malecontent, and Henry Piercy, his son, surnamed Hotspur, immediately
joined him with some troops: after this junction, the concourse of people
coming to list under his banner was so great, that, in a few days, his army was
threescore thousand strong; so eager were the nobles and people to put
themselves under the protection of a Prince, who allured them with the prospect
of freedom.

Whilst these things were transacting in England, Richard was in Ireland in
perfect security: the contrary winds, which continued to blow above three
weeks, hindered his receiving any news of the rebellion in his native
dominions; but, when he heard of it, he immediately imprisoned the Duke of
Lancaster's brothers, whom he had taken over with him; and resolved to go
immediately into England, to fight the enemy. Yet, ever wavering in his
resolutions, he was persuaded to stay some time longer, till he could prepare
ships to transport all his forces at once. This delay completed his ruin: his
friends in England had assembled an army of forty thousand men, who, upon
finding the King did not return to head them at the time appointed, dispersed.
Richard, however, landed in England, and soon perceived his unhappy situation:
he saw himself in the midst of an enraged people, none of whom he could rely
on; forsaken by those who, in the sunshine of power, contributed to fan his
follies. Thus, not knowing whom to trust, or where to turn, he saw no other
hopes of safety, but to throw himself on the generosity of his enemy: he
therefore sent him word, that he was ready to submit to whatever terms he
thought proper to prescribe, and that he earnestly desired a conference. For
this purpose the Duke of Lancaster appointed a castle within about ten miles of
Chester, where he came, next day, with his whole army. Richard, who the day
before had been brought hither alone, descrying his rival's approach from the
walls, went down to receive him; while the Duke, after some ceremony, entered
the castle in complete armor, only his head was bare in compliment to the
fallen King. The King, approaching, received him with the salutation of, Cousin
of Lancaster, you are welcome: at which the Duke, bowing three times to the
ground, replied in these terms, My Lord the King, I am come sooner than you
appointed, because, your people say, you have for one and twenty years governed
with rigor and indiscretion, so that they are very ill satisfied with your
conduct; but, if it please God, I will help you to govern them better for the
time to come. To this declaration the King made no other answer, but, Fair
Cousin, since it pleases you, it pleases us likewise.

The King was soon taught to feel his wretched situation; he was led,
triumphantly, through every town, amidst an infinite concourse of people, who
cursed him and extolled the Duke. Long live the good Duke of Lancaster, our
deliverer, was the general cry: but, for the King, to use the emphatic words of
the poet, None cried, God bless him. After these repeated indignities, he was
confined a close prisoner in the Tower, there, if possible, to undergo still a
greater variety of studied insolence and flagrant contempt. Unhappy Richard,
thus humbled, began to lose his spirits with his power; nor was there any great
share of policy required to induce him to resign his crown. Upon this
resignation the Duke of Lancaster founded his strongest claim; but, willing to
fortify his pretensions with every appearance of justice, the parliament was
soon induced to confirm his claims. The King was solemnly deposed, and the Duke
of Lancaster elected in his stead, by the title of Henry IV. Thus began the
contest between the houses of York and Lancaster, which, for several years
after, deluged the kingdom with blood; yet, which contributed, in the end, to
give strength and consistency to the constitution.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXI.
NUMEROUS formalities are often used by Princes, only to cover impotence or
imposture. Henry the Fourth, knowing the injustice of his title to the crown,
was at least determined to give his coronation all possible solemnity. A
peculiar oil was used upon this occasion, he affected great devotion, and every
action showed with how much humility he could be an usurper.

Notwithstanding the validity of his title, whatever pains he took to secure
it, was contraverted by some, and a conspiracy was soon formed to replace
Richard on the throne. This was projected by several noblemen, and the
particulars of the scheme were committed to writing, each being provided with a
copy, signed by his confederates: among other conspirators the Duke of Aumerle
was one, and he had been one of a consultation, when it was resolved, that the
King should be assassinated at Oxford, at a tournament; but, when that
opportunity offered, he was missing among the number. It happened, at that
time, he was visiting his father, the Duke of York, and, sitting at dinner, let
fall a paper from his bosom, which his father took up and examined. The Duke,
finding the contents to be a conjuration against the King's life, flew with the
utmost expedition to Windsor, to inform his Majesty of the plot: the son,
guessing his father's intention, went by a shorter way, and obtained his pardon
before his father's arrival, who, soon after coming, produced the paper with
the conspirators names. Henry, alarmed at this intelligence, used the most
vigorous efforts to dispel the rising storm.

The conspirators had, by this time, dressed up one of Richard's servants,
named Maudlin, in royal robes, giving out, that he was the deposed King, who,
having escaped from prison, was come to implore the assistance of his subjects.
Pity is a passion for which the English have ever been remarkable; Majesty, in
distress, was sufficient to excite all their loyalty and compassion, and they
flocked in great numbers round the conspiring leaders. Their army soon became
considerable, and encamped near Cirencester, while the leaders took up their
head quarters in that city: but they were so careless, or unexperienced in war,
that they neglected to place proper guards at the gates and the avenues of the
place. This the mayor soon observed, and, assembling four hundred men in the
night, he secured the gates, so as to exclude the troops that were encamped
without the walls: and then attacked the chiefs within. The Duke of Surry and
Earl of Salisbury, two of the principal conspirators, were taken, after an
obstinate defense, and beheaded on the spot, by the mayor's order; while the
Duke of Exeter, and Earl of Gloucester, two more of the party, escaped over the
tops of the houses into the camp, with a view to storm the town at the head of
their forces; but they found the tents and baggage abandoned by the soldiers,
who, hearing the noise and tumult within, had concluded that a party of the
King's army had privately entered, and, from this persuasion, fled with the
utmost precipitation. The two Lords, perceiving it out of their power to
execute their design, parted, the better to make their escape; but they had the
misfortune to be taken, and, shortly after, lost their heads upon the scaffold.

If we compare the times, which I now attempt to give you an idea of, with
those of King John, or those of some reigns before him, we shall find a great
change, with respect to the insurgent barons. In the former period they made
frequent insurrections, were often taken in open rebellion, but as frequently
pardoned; in the period now in view, they were seldom taken without suffering
the utmost rigor of the law. This plainly shows, how much the power of the
barons was sunk in the course of a couple of centuries. This revolution of
power is, notwithstanding, natural and obvious; as the people began to share
the government with the nobles, the King was fixed upon as a third person, to
secure the balance; and both were contented to make him great, from a jealousy
of each other. Noblemen were therefore now executed, not as petty Monarchs but
offending subjects, and none but Kings were considered as exempt from penal
laws.

In all probability, the ill success of this enterprise hastened Richard's end.
One of those assassins, that are found in every court, ready to commit the most
horrid crimes for reward, came down to the place of this unfortunate Monarch's
confinement, and, with eight other followers, rushed into his apartment. The
King, concluding their design was to take away his life, resolved to sell it as
dearly as he could: he wrested a poll-ax from one of the murderers, and soon
laid four of the number dead at his feet; but he was at length overpowered, and
struck dead by the blow of a battle-ax. Thus died the unfortunate Richard, in
the thirty-third year of his age, while compassion for his sufferings and death
made more converts to his family and cause, than ever his most meritorious
actions during life had gained him.

The death of Richard was very seasonable to his successor. The King of France
had actually raised a vast armament, in order to replace the deposed Monarch;
and so much was Henry terrified at his intentions, that he ordered the Bishop
of Arundel to arm even the ecclesiastics of his province. The preparations of
France might have contributed to hasten the fall of Richard; his death was no
sooner known at the French court, than all thoughts of the invasion were laid
aside, a truce for eight and twenty years was concluded between the two crowns,
and it was agreed that Queen Isabel, who had been married to Richard, but whose
marriage had never been consummated, should return to France, her native
country.

A kingdom, like England, at that time divided in itself, and surrounded by
enemies on every side, could not expect a peace of any continuance; accordingly
the Scotch began to give new disturbances; and, when the armies of England were
marched northward, in order to oppose their invasions, the Welsh rose to
vindicate their ancient liberties. Owen Glendour, a name among the people of
that country, respected even to this day, led them on, and gained several
victories; but his successes were only calculated to procure a temporary
triumph, and no lasting advantage. Whatever honor the English lost on the side
of Wales they gained on that of Scotland: the histories of those times are
filled with the petty victories and defeats on either side, in these wars; but,
as they neither served to alter nor transfer power, they scarce deserve a place
in the chronicles of a kingdom.

While Henry was employed in those unavailing campaigns, a more dangerous strom
threatened him from his own subjects. He claimed the prisoners that were taken
from the Scotch by the Earl of Northumberland, for himself; while the Earl,
flushed with victory, and considering himself as the supporting column of
Henry's throne, resented his demand. A scheme was laid, in which the Scotch and
Welsh were to combine their forces, and assist Northumberland in elevating
Mortimer, as the true heir to the English throne. As soon, therefore, as the
confederates were prepared, the Piercies of Northumberland suddenly appeared in
arms in the North: but, the Earl himself falling ill, his brother and son
marched with his troops to join the Welsh, who were advanced as far as
Shropshire. Upon the junction of these two armies, they published a manifesto,
which complained of many real grievances, and aggravated others. Henry, who had
received no intelligence of their designs, was extremely surprised at the news
of this rebellion: but, fortunately, having an army in readiness, he marched
toward Shrewsbury to meet the rebels, who were there encamped. Upon coming up
to them, proposals for a mediation were offered, and such favorable terms
promised, that it was thought it would end in a reconciliation; but distrust on
both sides soon broke off the treaty, and the battle soon began. In this Henry
obtained a complete victory; and Hotspur, the Earl of Northumberland's son, so
renowned for former successes, was slain. Mean time the Earl of Northumberland,
being recovered, was advancing with a body of troops to reinforce the army of
the malcontents, and take upon him the command: but, hearing by the way of his
son's and brother's misfortune, he dismissed his troops, not daring to keep the
field with so few forces before a victorious army. The King, to terminate this
troublesome affair as soon as possible, promised the Earl an absolute pardon,
in case he obeyed without delay, menacing him with utter ruin, should he refuse
the proffered favor. The Earl, finding himself without resource, chose rather
to throw himself upon the King's mercy, than lead a precarious and indigent
life in exile: he therefore repaired to York, and threw himself at the King's
seet, who punctually performed his promise. Probably he thought the criminal
was already sufficiently punished in the death of his son and brother.

The extinction of one rebellion only seemed to give rise to new: the
Archbishop of York, being dissatisfied, and eager to revenge the King's death,
by whom he was promoted, entered into a confederacy, with some other lords, to
dethrone Henry. Northumberland, though pardoned, was again among the number;
they were, however, once more prematurely discovered, and most of the
conspirators died by the hands of the executioner, but Northumberland had the
good fortune to escape into Scotland.

While the kingdom was thus torn by faction, and threatened with foreign
invasions, a still more terrible calamity threatened it from the clergy. Since
Wickliffe published his opinions, about the end of the reign of Edward III, his
doctrine was so spread, that the clergy were in continual apprehensions of its
prevailing: Henry was now to catch at every assistance, in order to strengthen
his usurped power; among others, that of the clergy was not to be despised; he
therefore earnestly recommended to his parliament the care of the church's
conservation. How reluctant soever the house of commons might be to prosecute a
sect, whose only crime was error, the credit of the court, and the cabals of
the clergy, obtained, at length, an act for the burning obstinate heretics.
This statute was no sooner passed, than William Sawfre, a follower of
Wickliffe, was burned alive, by virtue of the King's writ, delivered to the
mayor of London. This was the first man in England who suffered death for the
sake of religion; but, the fires once kindled, the clergy would not suffer them
soon to be extinguished; they readily perceived, that a power of burning their
enemies would revive that temporal power which they possessed about three
centuries before: in this they were not mistaken; they again, by this means,
renewed their pristine authority, but with this difference, that as, in the
times of the Saxon heptarchy, their power was founded in the love of the
people, in the present case, it had its original wholly in their fears.

By these means Henry survived all his troubles, and the kingdom enjoyed
tranquillity. He had nothing to fear from France, distracted by its own
intestine divisions: the Welsh sued for peace, the regent of Scotland dreaded a
rupture with England, lest Henry should send home the King of Scotland, whom he
had made his prisoner, and thus terminate the regent's delegated power. Add to
this, the malcontents in England were too inconsiderable to attempt any thing
further against the government. During this calm, the King endeavored to
efface the impressions of severity, which his conduct had made upon the people,
by affecting a popularity and regard for the welfare of the subject; a never
failing method to conciliate the affection of the English in favor of their
sovereign. While he thus labored, not without success, to retrieve the
reputation he had lost, his son, the Prince of Wales, seemed bent upon
incurring public aversion: he gave a loose to all kinds of debauchery, and was
surrounded by a crew of profligate wretches, who made a practice of committing
he most illegal acts of violence. The father was extremely mortified at this
degeneracy in his eldest son, who had already exhibited repeated proofs of his
valor, conduct, and generosity; virtues which he now seemed to renounce; while
the splenetic and gloomy trembled at the prospect of his succeeding to the
throne. Nevertheless, in the midst of these excesses, the nobleness of his
heart seemed, at intervals, to emerge from the gulf in which it was plunged:
one of his dissolute companions, having been brought to trial for some
misdemeanor, was condemned, notwithstanding all the interest he could make in
his favor; and he was so exasperated at the issue of the trial, that he struck
the Judge upon the bench. This magistrate, whose name was Sir William
Gascoigne, behaved with the dignity that became his office; he forthwith
ordered the Prince to be committed to prison: when this transaction was
reported to the King, who was an excellent judge of mankind, he could not help
exclaiming, in a transport of joy, Happy is the King, who has a magistrate
endowed with courage to execute the laws upon such an offender; still more
happy in having a son willing to submit to such chastisement.

This, in fact, is one of the first great instances we read in the English
history, of a magistrate doing justice in opposition to power. The government
was now much changed from what it was in the times, even of Richard, where
Judges were but the ministers of royal caprice.

Henry did not long outlive this interview: perceiving his end approach, he
disposed his mind to the duties of devotion, and took the cross, fully
determined to consecrate the remaining part of his life in fighting the cause
of the pilgrims to Jerusalem, which was, at that time, considered as the cause
of heaven. This is not the first instance we have seen of Princes endeavoring
to strike up a bargain with Providence, and promising to perform particular
acts of devotion, upon being indulged with a longer period of existence. He
imparted his design to a great council, assembled for that purpose; and began
to make preparations for the expedition, when his disorder increased to such a
degree, that he was obliged to lay aside his intention, and think of a voyage
of by far greater importance. As his constitution decayed, his fears of losing
the crown redoubled, even to childish anxiety; he would not sleep, unless the
royal diadem was laid upon his pillow: one day, being in a violent paroxysm of
his disorder, the Prince of Wales took up the crown and carried it away; but,
soon after, the King recovering his senses, and missing the crown, he asked
what was become of it; and, understanding the Prince had carried it off,
"What," said the King to the Prince, with marks of indignation, "would you rob
me of my dignity before my death?" No, replied the Prince, "Thinking your
Majesty was dead, I took the crown as my lawful inheritance; but, now I see you
alive. I restore it with much more pleasure, and may God grant you many happy
days to enjoy it in peace." So saying, he replaced the crown upon the pillow;
and, having received his father's blessing, dutifully retired. The King was
surprised with his last fit, at his devotions before the shrine of St. Edward
the Confessor, in Westminster-abbey, from whence he was carried to the
Jerusalem chamber. When recovered from his swoon, perceiving himself in a
strange place, he desired to know if the apartment had any particular name;
being told of its appellation, he now concluded a prophecy fulfilled, which
said, that he should die in Jerusalem; and, after some good instructions to his
successor, he recommended his soul to heaven, and soon after expired, on the
twentieth day of March, in the forty-sixth year of his age, and the fourteenth
of his reign.

Henry, whatever he might have been as a man, was certainly an excellent King.
The government assumed both a form and liberty under his administration: the
distinction between the nobility and the people was rendered less considerable,
and the magistrates were less arbitrary and less venal.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXII.
THE death of Henry IV. gave his people but little affliction, among whom he
never acquired any popularity; but the rejoicings made for the succession of
his son, Henry V, were manifest and sincere. This Prince was their favorite,
notwithstanding the profligacy of his youth: in the very height of riot and
extravagance, he would, sometimes, give instances of the sublimest virtues. But
his courage seemed to be what peculiarly won their affection and esteem: at
this barbarous period, courage seemed to be regarded as the only virtue;
courage and superstition then made up the whole system of human duty, and
stamped the character of heroism.

The people of Europe were, by this time, degenerated from what they were even
two hundred years before; a continuance of war had blotted out the very traces
of morality. The vices of the clergy had drawn upon them contempt and
opposition, which they returned, not by refo^ming themselves, but by
persecuting those who opposed them. This reign was begun in attempting to
extirpate the heresy of Wickliffe: John Oldcastle, baron of Cobham, was the
most considerable protector of this sect; he was the King's domestic, and stood
highly in his favor. The Archbishop of Canterbury, therefore, undertook to
prejudice him in the royal opinion, and endeavored to persuade the young
Monarch, that fire and faggot were the only instruments that were capable of
saving an heretic from future damnation; and that Oldcastle's opinions deserved
the severest punishments of the law. The King was, at length, persuaded to talk
with Oldcastle in private, and, finding him immovable, gave him up to the fury
of his enemies. Persecution ever produces those crimes which it endeavors to
abolish; Oldcastle was condemned, but, escaping, was obliged to become, in
fact, that guilty person which they had at first falsely represented him: he
headed a body of malcontents, and refused to be demeanable to royal power.
This unhappy man, after a variety of distresses, at length fell into the power
of his enemies; and never did the cruelty of man invent, or the crimes of the
delinquent draw down, more torments than he was made to endure: he was hung up
with a chain by the middle, and, by a slow fire, burned, or, rather, roasted
alive.

Such spectacles as these, must naturally produce a disgust in the people, both
to the government and the clergy; but, to turn their minds from these hideous
spectacles, Henry was resolved to take advantage of the troubles in which
France was, at that time, involved. Charles, who was then King of France, was
subject to frequent fits of lunacy, which totally disqualified him from
reigning: in these intervals the ambition of his vassals and courtiers had room
for exertion, and they grew powerful from the weakness of their King. Isabella,
of Bavaria, his wife, was at the head of one faction; the Duke of Burgundy of
another: the faction of the children of the Duke of Orleans was considerable;
that only, which held by the King, was feeble. Each of these, as they happened
to prevail, branded their captives with the names of traitors, and the gibbets
were at once hung with the bodies of the accused and the accusers.

This was thought a most favorable opportunity to rescue, from France, those
grants that had formerly been given up by treaty: Henry, therefore, invaded
that kingdom, with an army of fifty thousand men. He took Harfleur, and
advanced into a country already rendered desolate by factions, and which he now
totally laid waste by a foreign invasion: but, though the enemy made but a feeble
resistance, yet the climate seemed to fight for them, a contagious dysentery
carried off three parts of Henry's soldiers. In such a situation, he had
recourse to an expedient common enough in the barbarous times I am describing;
he challenged the Dauphin to single combat, offering to stake his pretensions
on the event; this challenge, as might naturally be expected, was rejected; and
the French, though disagreeing internally, now seemed to unite at the appearance
of foreign danger.

Henry soon began to repent of his rash inroad into a country, where disease,
and a powerful army, every moment threatened destruction; and, therefore,
thought of retiring to Calais. In this retreat, which was at once both painful
and dangerous, Henry took every method to inspire his troops with courage and
perseverance, and showed them, in himself, an example of patience and
resignation. In the mean time the French army was drawn up to obstruct his
passage, nor was there any possibility of his passing them without a battle;
yet, even that could promise but small hopes of victory: his army was wasted
with disease, their spirits worn down with fatigue, destitute of provisions,
and but nine thousand in number, to sustain the shock of an enemy amounting to
an hundred and fifty thousand. This disparity, as it raised the courage of the
French, so it impressed the English with terror. So confident were the French
leaders of success, that they began to treat for the ransom of their prisoners:
on the 25th of October, 1415, the two armies drew up in battle array, early in
the morning, near the castle of Agincourt. A narrow ground, flanked on one side
by a wood, on the other by a rivulet, was to be the scene of action. The
Constable of France commanded the French, and Henry, with Edward, Duke of York,
the English: both armies, for some time, kept silently gazing at each other, as
if afraid to begin; which Henry perceiving, with a cheerful countenance cried
out, My friends, since they will not begin, let us set them the example; come
on, and the blessed Trinity be our protection: and now the whole army set
forward with a shout. The French still continued to wait their approach with
intrepidity, when the English archers let fly a shower of arrows, three feet
long, which did great execution: the French cavalry, advancing to repel these
two hundred bow-men, who lay till then concealed, rising on a sudden, let fly
among them: the English, seeing their confusion, now threw by their arrows, and
sell upon them sword in hand; though feeble by disease, yet they recompensed the
defect by valor. The French at first repulsed the assailants, but they,
resolving to conquer or die, again burst in upon the enemy, with such
impetuosity, that they gave way: in the mean time, a body of English horse,
which had been concealed in a neighboring wood, rushing out, flanked the
French infantry; and now a total disorder began to ensue.

The first line of the enemy being thus routed, the second line began to march
up to interrupt the progress of victory. Henry, therefore, alighting from his
horse, presented himself to the enemy, with an undaunted countenance; and, at
the head of his men, fought on foot, encouraging some, and assisting others.
Eighteen French cavaliers, who were resolved to kill him or to die in the
attempt, rushing forth together, advanced, and one of them stunned him with a
blow of his battle-ax; they then fell upon him in a body, and he was just going
to sink under their blows, when David Gam, a valiant Welchman, and two more of
the same country, came to his aid: they soon turned the attention of the French
from the King; but, being overpowered themselves, they fell dead at his feet.
The King had now recovered his senses, and, more help coming in, the eighteen
Frenchmen were all slain; upon which he knighted the brave Welchmen, who had
valiantly fallen in his defense. The heat of the battle still increasing, his
courage seemed to increase; and, now, the thickest of the battle was gathered
round his person: his brother, being fallen down by his side, stunned with the
blow of a club, he covered him for a while; but, receiving another blow
himself, it threw him on his knees: he soon, however, recovered, and his valor
seemed to inspire his troops with fury; they ran headlong upon the enemy, and,
by an unexpected attack, put them into such disorder, that their leaders could
never after bring them to the charge. The Duke of Alencon, who commanded the
second line, seeing it fly, resolved, by one desperate step, to retrieve the
day, or fall in the attempt: wherefore, running up to King Henry, and crying
aloud that he was the Duke of Alencon, he discharged such a blow on his head,
that it carried off a part of the King's helmet; Henry, not having been able to
ward off the blow, soon returned it, by striking the Duke to the ground; and he
was soon killed by the surrounding crowd, all the King's efforts to save him
from their fury being ineffectual.

The two first lines being thus dispersed, the third refused to assist them,
and marched off without fighting. The King, therefore, thinking himself thus
sure of victory, was surprised with an account that his baggage was plundering
by the enemy: just struck with an apprehension that the French had rallied, and
being sensible that the number of his prisoners was greater than that of his
army, he rashly ordered all the prisoners to be put to death; which order was
accordingly executed. This severity tarnished the glory which his victory would
otherwise have acquired: but all the heroism, and all the virtues of that age,
are tinctured with barbarity.

This victory, however great it may appear, was rather ostentatious than
useful: it acquired the English glory, but not dominion; and while it settled
Henry's interest more firmly in the hearts of his subjects, it only served to
inspire him with a love of new conquests. With this view, therefore, he
returned to England, in order to procure new stores of men and money.

The war between the two kingdoms, from this period, seemed to be carried on
rather by negotiations, treasons, plots, and fomented jealousies, than by the
force of arms. France was but as one vast theater of crimes, murders,
punishments, and devastation: the Duke of Orleans was assassinated by the Duke
of Burgundy, and he, in his turn, fell by the treachery of the Dauphin; while
the son, desiring to revenge his father's death, acknowledged Henry as lawful
heir to the crown, and a treaty was concluded between Henry and the young Duke
of Burgundy at Troyes, by which he was acknowledged heir to the crown of
France, after the death of Charles, who still reigned, though, by his diseases,
rendered totally incapable of business. Catharine, the French King's daughter,
was given to Henry in marriage: and it was resolved, that the Dauphin should be
brought to an account for the murder of the late Duke of Burgundy. Things being
adjusted in this manner, Henry entered the city of Paris without opposition,
and there conducted the government at his pleasure; while the feeble Charles
was attended as a King indeed, but with scarce even the liberty of a subject.

The Dauphin, in the mean time, wandered about, a stranger in his own
dominions, while Henry returned to London, to raise new subsidies and new
troops, to secure his late conquests. His presence, as might be expected,
inspired his subjects with joy, but they, at the same time, could not be much
pleased with a conquest, which seemed likely to transfer the seat of empire
from among them. The parliament, upon various pretenses, refused him a supply
equal to his demands: however, he again set sail with a new-raised army, and
the Dauphin, upon his appearance, thought fit again to retire. Henry then
enters Paris, and, while Charles had but a small court, he was attended with a
very magnificent one. On Whitsunday they dined together in public, the two
Kings and the two Queens, with their crowns on their heads; Charles, indeed,
receiving apparent homage, but Henry commanding with absolute authority. After
this he prepared to stop the progress of the enemy, who had already taken some
towns; but, whilst he flattered himself with a speedy victory, he was attacked
with a fistula, which the physicians were, at that time, too unskilful to treat
with judgment. He died at the castle of Vincennes, with the same intrepidity
with which he lived, and was buried at Westminster-abbey. His reign, during the
short time he lived, which was but thirty-four years, was rather splendid than
serviceable; the treasures of his native country were lavished upon conquests,
that to them were unprofitable. His military fame acquired him the reputation
of every other good quality; he favored the clergy, and they have returned the
debt to his memory: in general, the good or the erroneous conduct of a Prince
appears rather after his death than during his lifetime; and the successors of
imprudent Kings are often taxed with errors not their own, as we shall
presently see. He died, however, fortunate, by falling in the midst of his
triumphs, and leaving his subjects happy. Charles, who died two months after
him, finished a wretched reign, long past in phrenzy, and by all France branded
with contempt, leaving the most miserable subjects upon earth.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIII.
OUR triumphs, at this time, in France, produced scarce any good effects at
home; as we grew warlike, we became brutal; and, panting after foreign
possessions, we forgot the arts of cultivating those that lay nearer home. Our
language, instead of improving, was daily becoming more barbarous: Langland and
Chaucer, about a century before, seemed to have drawn it from obscurity, and
enriched it with new terms and combinations; but it was now relapsed into its
former grossness, and no poet or historian of note was born in this calamitous
period.

Henry VI, successor to Henry V, was not quite a year old when he came to the
throne; and his relations began, soon after, to dispute the government during
his minority. The Duke of Bedford was appointed, by parliament, Protector of
England, Defender of the Church, and First Counselor of the King: his brother,
the Duke of Gloucester, was to govern in his absence, while he conducted the
French war; but several others aspired at this post as well as he. The second
rank in every kingdom, as being the most powerful, is generally the most envied
situation: the first step his enemies took to render the Duke of Gloucester
odious, was to accuse his wife, the Duchess, of witchcraft. She was charged
with conversing with one Sir Roger Bolingbroke, a priest and reputed
necromancer, and one Mary Gurdemain, who was said to be a witch: it was
asserted, that, with their assistance, she made a figure of the King in wax;
this the accusers said was placed before a gentle fire, and, as the wax
dissolved, the King's strength was wasted; and, upon its total dissolution, his
life would be at an end. This charge Bolingbroke utterly denied; but the
Duchess confessed that she had desired the woman to make her a philtre, to
secure the affections of the Duke her husband. Neither their innocence, nor her
rank, could protect them: she was condemned to penance and perpetual
imprisonment, Bolingbroke was hanged, and the woman burnt in Smithfield.

Henry, during these contests of his ministers, was, at first, from age,
incapable of conducting the reins of government; and, when he became adult, he
was equally incapable, from ignorance and imbecility. Whether it was that his
governors had kept him in ignorance, in order to prolong their own power, or
whether he was naturally weak, history does not clearly determine. The Earl of
Suffolk, one of those who shared the power at that time, thought the best way
of managing the King would be to marry him to a woman who was herself capable
of reigning alone. He had still another motive, which was to create a new power
to oppose the Duke of Gloucester, who was his enemy, and an obstacle in the
road to his ambition: to this purpose, he fixed upon Margaret of Anjou,
daughter of Rene, King of Sicily, and niece of the King of France. She was a
Princess of uncommon resolution, and great penetration, but entirely without
fortune; for which, it was said, her other good qualities were sufficient to
atone. This match the Duke of Gloucester vainly opposed; the match went
forward, and the new Queen showed her resentment, by proving herself a
formidable enemy, willing and able to undo him.

She first began her reign, therefore, with removing him from the
council board. To palliate this proceeding, persons were suborned to accuse him
of cruelty and injustice: to these accusations he pleaded his innocence, with
such force of evidence, that the council, though consisting of his enemies,
were obliged to acquit him. Still, however, the Queen, bent upon his ruin,
ordered him to be apprehended, and accused before the parliament, summoned for
this purpose. As the people thought him innocent, it was expected he would come
off now as he had before; but, on the day he was to make his defense, he was
found dead in his bed, though without any signs of violence upon his body.

This violence rendered the Queen and the King equally odious; the Queen
especially was charged with the murder, and the dignity of her station only
served to render her a more conspicuous object of reproach. But what still
contributed to render the people discontented with the administration, was the
indifferent success of their arms in France. Triumphs and conquests were ever a
means of repressing the discontents of the people; but the present government,
to their quarrels at home, added the misfortune of being defeated abroad.

Upon the death of Henry V, the Dauphin of France asserted his claim to the
throne of that kingdom, under the title of Charles VII. Nothing could be more
deplorable than his situation, upon coming to the crown, of which he was only
the nominal possessor: the English were masters of almost all France. Henry VI.
was solemnly invested with regal power, by legates from Paris. The Duke of
Bedford, with a numerous army in the heart of the kingdom, confirmed his claim,
and the Duke of Burgundy was steady in the English alliance. Wherever Charles
attempted to face the enemy, he was overthrown; he could scarcely rely on the
friends next his person, and his authority was insulted, even by his own
servants. In this situation, nothing but miraculous assistance, or pretended
miracles, could save him. To the last expedient he had recourse, and it fully
answered his intentions: the French, from a vanquished nation, are suddenly
going to be victorious; and the English, who had been hitherto deemed
invincible,, are going to be everywhere worsted, and, at length, totally
driven out of the kingdom.

A gentleman, on the frontiers of Lorrain, whose name was Baudricourt, was the
person who first resolved to put this happy imposture into practice. He fixed
upon the servant-maid of an inn for this purpose, and she was instructed at
once to perform the duties of a warrior and a prophetess: this was Joan of Arc,
the renowned maid of Orleans; a woman of masculine strength and courage,
pretending to be but eighteen, but, in reality, twenty-seven years old. She
equipped herself in the arms and habit of a man, and it was given out, that she
was inspired: she was brought before the King, examined by the Doctors of the
University, and they, either deceived, or willing to assist the imposture,
affirmed that her commission was from heaven. The vulgar, as ready to give
credit to inspiration as to witchcraft, easily came into the imposture, and
acquired new hopes and confidence of success.

The English were, at that time, besieging the city of Orleans, Charles's last
resource; and were upon the point of becoming masters of it: Joan undertook to
raise the siege; and, to render herself the more remarkable, ordered a sword to
be brought her, from the tomb of a Knight buried in the church of Fierbois. She
addressed the soldiers as a messenger from heaven, and assured them, that
providence would strengthen their arms. She marched at their head, and
delivered Orleans; routed the English wherever they opposed; prophesied that
the King should be crowned at Rheims, and she herself assisted at the solemnity
which she had foretold. She was present at the coronation, holding in her hand
the standard under which she had been so often victorious.

This chain of successes, and the dignity which his late coronation gave the
French King, now entirely turned the scale in his favor; the English lost the
kingdom by the same methods the French had lost it before. While Charles united
his forces and proceeded with dispatch, they were quarrelling among themselves,
and losing the seasons for success. In the midst of the King's good fortune,
however, Joan of Arc, his brave champion, was taken prisoner, as she was
protecting the rear of her men in a retreat. The joy of the English, upon this
occasion, is not to be expressed; and the Duke of Bedford, their General,
thought no method could be so proper to restore their lost courage, as to
prosecute his prisoner for witchcraft. It is a disagreeable reflection upon
human nature, that Judges almost ever determine on the side of authority: she
was found guilty by several Bishops and the Doctors of the university of Paris.
She was at first condemned as a sorceress and an heretic, and enjoined to live,
by way of penance, upon bread and water, and to remain in prison for life. Some
time after, under color of her relapsing, she was publicly burnt for a witch.
Superstition adds virulence to the natural cruelty of mankind, and this cruel
sentence served only to inflame the hatred between the contending powers,
without mending the cause of the English. In vain the brave Talbot and his son
strove to maintain the declining interest of the English in France: in the year
1437, the French King made his triumphant entry into Paris, and, in a sequel of
thirteen years more, the English were entirely banished from France. They only
were left in possession of Calais and Guienne, and lost for ever all the fruits
of the victories of Cressy, Poictiers, and Agincourt. Such is the end of
ambition: the only consequences of their conquests there were to deluge that
kingdom with the blood of its slaughtered inhabitants, and their own.

It may easily be supposed, that the losses of the English in France, and the
divisions of their rulers at home, must raise factions. In this period of
calamity, a new interest was revived, which seemed to have lain dormant in the
times of prosperity and triumph: the Duke of York began to think of asserting
his right to the crown. This nobleman was descended, by the mother's side, from
Lionel, one of the sons of Edward III. The reigning King was descended from
John of Ghaunt, a son of the same Edward, but younger than Lionel; thus the
Duke of York's claim was prior to that of Henry. The ensign of the Duke was a
white rose, that of Henry a red. This gave name to the two houses, whose
contentions were now about to drench the kingdom with slaughter.

The Duke of Suffolk and the Queen were now at the head of affairs, and managed
all things with unlimited authority. As he had made his way to power by the
blood of Gloucester, he was resolved to establish himself by the usual
resources of tyranny, by cruelty to his inferiors, and flattery to the Queen.
This unjust and ill-managed power first drew against him the opposition of the
Duke of York: perhaps the cause of the public was the only motive for his first
resistance. Almost every malecontent has some real, and some fictitious causes
of complaint: he therefore had recourse to parliament, and accused the Duke of
Suffolk as the source of all the nation's disgraces in France. This accusation
might have been false, but the real motive, which was Suffolk's power, and the
cruel use he made of it, was left unmentioned, although it was true^ The court,
to content the people, condemned him to banishment, and he embarked in a little
vessel to take his passage to France; but he could not escape his destiny. He
was met in his passage by an English man of war; the Captain, having a mind to
search the ship the Duke was in, and finding him there, ordered his head to be
struck off without further delay. There is little in the transactions of these
times to interest us on the side of either party: we see crimes continually to
disgust us, and scarce a shining character or a virtue to animate the narrative.

By the death of the Duke of Suffolk, his rival, of York, saw himself rid of a
potent enemy, and found the discontents of the people against the
administration daily increase. Among the insurrections of these unhappy times,
was that headed by Jack Cade, who led a tumultuous body of forces to London, to
redress their grievances, and there beheaded the Lord Treasurer. The government
might readily perceive the disaffection of the populace, by his reception from
the city of London, who opened their gates to him: however, upon the King's
proclamation, his adherents, after a day or two, were dispersed, and he himself
taken and slain. In the mean time the Duke of York secretly fomented these
disturbances, and, pretending to espouse the cause of the people, from his
retreat in Wales wrote to the King, advising a reformation in the ministry. His
letters of counsel were soon backed by an army; he marched up to London, but
found an unexpected repulse from the city, which shut its gates upon him. In
this dilemma he offered to disband his army, if the Duke of Somerset, who was
at that time the envied object in power, should be sent to the Tower: this
request was complied with, contrary to his expectation; and now, coming to
court to accuse him in person, he was surprised to see the Duke of Somerset,
who was hid behind the hangings, suddenly coming forth, and retorting the
accusation upon him. York now perceived his danger, and repressed the
impetuosity of his accusation. As soon as he left the presence, the King
commanded him to be apprehended; but such was the Duke's authority, or such the
timidity of the King's council, that they suffered him to retire, upon
promising strict obedience for the future.

This reconciliation was only temporary; he still aspired at the crown, and,
the King falling ill, by his intrigues he had sufficient art to be taken into
the number of the privy council. This was a fatal blow to Henry's interests:
the Duke of York, now let into a share of the authority, and secure of the
affections of the people, carried all before him. The Duke of Somerset was sent
to the Tower, and the parliament declared his rival Protector of the realm.
This power the Duke of York, for some time, enjoyed without control; till the
unhappy King, recovering from his dizziness, as if awaking from a dream,
perceived, with surprise, that he was stripped of his authority. Margaret, his
Queen, did all in her power to rouse him to a sense of his situation: he
therefore began by deposing the Duke from his power, who instantly had recourse
to arms. The impotent Monarch, thus obliged to take the field, was dragged
after his army to the battle of St. Alban's, where he was routed by the Duke of
York, and Somerset, his General, was flain. The King, being wounded, and hiding
himself in a cottage near the field of battle, was taken prisoner, and treated
with seeming respect: from thence he was brought along, in triumph, to London;
and the Duke permitting him still to enjoy the title of King, reserved to
himself that of Protector, in which consisted all the power of the crown.

Henry was now but a prisoner, treated with the forms of royalty; yet, indolent
and sickly as he was, the title alone seemed sufficient for him. At last his
friends induced him once more to re-assert his prerogative: the Duke of York
again retired, to resist the designs of the Queen. Mutual distrust once more
brought their armies to the field, and the fate of the kingdom was to be
decided by the sword. On the King's side, the Queen seemed the only acting
General: she ranged the army in battalia, gave the necessary orders, while the
poor King was led about, from place to place, an involuntary spectator of those
martial preparations. The army on the opposite side was, in the absence of the
Duke of York, commanded by the Earl of Warwick, the most celebrated General of
his age: a man formed for times of trouble, extremely artful, and extremely
brave; equally skilful in council and the field, and born to give and to take
away kingdoms at pleasure. After many battles without effect, and designs
without consequence, both armies, at last, met on a plain near Northampton: the
Queen's army consisted of five and twenty thousand men, the army of Warwick of
forty thousand. Never was greater animosity between the chiefs of an army
before; both pretending to fight for the King, whose authority they equally
attempted to destroy. While the Queen went about from rank to rank, the King
staid in his tent, waiting the issue of the battle with female doubts and
apprehensions: both sides fought five hours with the utmost obstinacy, but the
good fortune of the Earl of Warwick was superior to that of the Queen; she was
conquered, and had the misfortune to see the King taken prisoner in his tent.
Thus Henry was once more brought back, in triumph, to his capital.

A parliament was now called to give a face to this successful rebellion. The
Duke of York, though formerly contented with the title of Protector, now
claimed the crown. Our prospects widen as we rise: the cause of Henry and the
Duke was solemnly debated in the House of Peers: each side produced their
reasons for or against the conqueror. This was the first time that a true
spirit of liberty ever appeared to exert itself in England, and in which
victory did not determine every inquiry. The Duke of York, though a conqueror,
could not entirely gain his cause: it was determined that Henry should possess
the throne during life, and that the Duke of York should be his successor, to
the utter seclusion of the Prince of Wales.

The Queen, to all appearance, seemed now utterly destitute of every resource:
but, though she had lost all, she yet retained her native perseverance and
intrepidity. She was a woman of a great mind, and some faults; but ambition
seemed to be what called them into action. Being now a fugitive, distant from
the capital, opposed by a victorious army, and a consummate General, she still
tried every resource to repair her disastrous circumstances: she flew to Wales,
animated her old friends, acquired new, and raised an army to defend her cause.
She, and her old enemy, the Duke of York, once more met upon Wakefield Green,
near the castle of Sandal: fortune this day turned the victory on her side; the
Duke of York was slain; the Duke of Rutland, his second son, fell in the
flight; and the father's head, being cut off, was fixed upon the walls of York.

Margaret, being now victorious, marched toward London, in order to give the
King his liberty. The Earl of Warwick, who now was at the head of the Yorkists,
still commanded an army, in which he led about the captive King to give a
sanction to his attempts. Another battle was to drench the kingdom with the
blood of its inhabitants: the Queen and the Earl met near St. Alban's, where
the Queen was now again victorious; she had the pleasure to see the General, by
whom she was once defeated, now fly in his turn; and, what added to her glory,
she had the fortune to release the King, her husband, from his captivity. Her
triumph was great, though contaminated with cruelty; but it was of short
continuance. The city of London was to be gained, but Warwick had already
secured it in his interests: the citizens also feared her tumultuous army, and
refused to open their gates upon her summons. In the mean time, Warwick
assembled the people in St. John's fields, and, showing them the son of the
late Duke of York, demanded, Whether they chose to have him or Henry for their
King? Upon which, the people crying out a York, an assembly was quickly called,
and the young Duke, being present, they elected him King, by the name of Edward
IV, and conducted him, with great ceremony, to the palace where Henry used to
lodge when within the walls of the city.

In the mean time, Queen Margaret collected a great army in the North,
amounting to sixty thousand men at arms. She was now to strike her strongest
blow: the command of this army was given to a person who acted under her
directions. On the other side Warwick conducted young Edward, at the head of
forty thousand men, to oppose her. Both sides, at length, met near Santon in
the county of York: never was England depopulated by so terrible a day. What a
dreadful sight to behold almost an hundred thousand men, of the same country,
fighting to satisfy the empty ambition of one or two weak and empty wretches;
murdering each other for an idiot and a boy: the contest only which should wear
a crown with diamonds, or wield an empty scepter? Strange infatuation; yet,
such as it was, not less than forty thousand men were left dead upon the field,
in asserting this dispute. Warwick gained a complete victory: Edward IV. was
established on the throne, and Margaret of Anjou abandoned. She fled, for
protection, to Scotland, with her son and husband, in order to attempt new
designs for the recovery of her kingdom. Edward now took down the head of his
father from the walls of York, and put up the heads of the conquered Generals
in its stead. Each party, as it happened to be victorious, thus called in the
executioner to complete the tragedy begun in the field; and our cruelty to each
other, in civil discords, is what has impressed foreigners with an idea of
English cruelty.

Though wretched as this reign was, yet the art of printing, which was
introduced into it at that time, seemed to make amends for a part of its
calamities: William Caxton, a mercer, was the first who practiced the art at
London; he translated some books himself from the French, and printed the
translations of others. Among the writers of that time were Lord Rivers and
Earl Tiptoft, whose labors, however, never ventured higher than translation.
To judge of the learning of those times by the works of the laity in the vulgar
tongue, we shall entertain the most despicable opinion of it; yet, when I read
the Latin productions of some of the priests of that period, I cannot avoid
allowing the authors no small share of erudition. The truth is, learning was
separated from the purposes of common life, at that time, but by no means
unknown or neglected by the clergy, as we are taught to believe.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIV.
WHATEVER side was victorious, in these times of civil slaughter, could confirm
their injustice with the show of authority. The parliament usually followed the
conqueror, and fixed him upon the throne, when he had an army to back his
pretensions. Edward was immediately, upon this victory, confirmed by their
unanimous approbation, while Henry and his Queen were to seek for new resources
in France and Scotland. No calamity was able to abate Margaret's perseverance;
though so often overcome, yet she was once more resolved to enter England with
five thousand men, granted her by the French King, bringing the unfortunate
Henry with her to enforce her claims. Her usual ill fortune attended her; her
little fleet was dispersed by a tempest, and she herself entered the Tweed with
no small difficulty. Again, however, she offered her enemy battle, and was
again defeated, near Hexham. The loss of this battle seemed to deprive her of
every resource: she and her husband were now obliged to find safety in a
separate flight, without attendants, and without even the necessaries of life.
The weak unfortunate Monarch, almost always imprudent, and consequently
unsuccessful, thought he could lie concealed in England: his error was soon
attended with the natural consequences; he was taken prisoner, carried to
London with ignominy, and confined in the Tower.

Margaret was rather more fortunate than he, for she escaped, with the Dukes of
Somerset and Exeter, out of the kingdom, and retired to her father, who, though
very poor, strove, as well as he could, to supply her with the mere necessaries
of life. You are not to suppose the miseries of the great, at those times, were
fictitious, as we find them at present; they, in reality, endured every
calamity that poverty now inflicts on the obscurest of wretches. Philip de
Comines, says, he saw the Duke of Exeter following the Duke of Burgundy's
equipage, barefoot, and serving for his livelihood as a footman. This was a
strange situation for a Lord, who had conducted armies, and was allied to Kings
and Princes: but the times were barbarous; the Princes on the coasts of
Negroland experience such reverses of fortune at this very day.

Edward, being now, by means of Warwick, fixed upon the throne, reigned in
peace and security. A spirit of gallantry reigned in his court, mixed with the
cruelty which seemed the distinguishing feature of those times of discord. In
the very same palace which one day smoaked with blood, a pageant or a mask
appeared the day sollowing; and the King would at once gallant a mistress and
inspect an execution.

As his amors, however, were likely to dissatisfy his subjects, the Earl of
Warwick advised him to marry; and, with his consent, went over to France to
procure him Bona of Savoy, and the match was accordingly, by his means,
concluded. But, whilst the Earl was hastening the negotiation in France, the
King himself put an effectual stop to it at home, by marrying Elizabeth
Woodville, with whom he had fallen in love, and whom he had vainly strove to
debauch. Having thus given Warwick real cause of offense, he was resolved to
widen the breach by driving him from the council. We are apt to hate the man we
have offended, as much as the man who has offended us; Edward was no sooner
established in security by Warwick, than he began to be ungrateful. Warwick,
whose prudence was equal to his bravery, soon made use of both to assist his
revenge: he seduced Clarence, the King's brother, and, to confirm him in his
interests, makes him his son-in-law: and now, finding his plot ready for
execution, flies into open rebellion. Vengeance seemed to be the only motive he
had in view: plots, truces, stratagems, and negotiations, followed each other
in a rapid succession. But Warwick, long acquainted with intrigue and
dissimulation, was, at last, too subtle for the young King: inviting him, by a
seeming promise of composition, to his house, he threw Edward off his guard;
and Warwick, seizing the opportunity, made him a prisoner.

Nothing now appeared that could oppose Warwick's designs; he therefore
disbanded his troops as unnecessary, and Edward was consigned to the custody of
the Archbishop of York. But soon an accident happened that overthrew all
Warwick's expectations: Edward's behavior, in confinement, was so very
obliging, that he got leave, upon some occasions, to hunt in a park adjoining
the place of his confinement; from thence he one day made his escape, by the
assistance of a couple of his friends, and, contrary to all expectation,
instantly repaired to York.

Fortune seemed to be for Edward; and, marching some troops to London, the
citizens immediately declared in his favor. It is surprising to think how one
party is seen this day at the head of numerous forces, while the next we behold
it abandoned, and the adverse party triumphing without a rival: a strong proof
of the fluctuating disposition of the English. Edw^rd now commanded a numerous
army, while Warwick, and his brother Clarence, were attended by a few. The
King, resolving to take the advantage of their weakness, after having defeated
a party commanded by Lord Wells, and cut off his head, the usual method of
treating the prisoners of either party, he marched to give them battle. In this
exigence they had no other course to take, but to embark, in order to screen
themselves from impending danger. Having arrived safely in France, they now
were reconciled to Queen Margaret, their former enemy; and, returning from
France, Warwick once more saw himself at the head of no less than sixty
thousand men.

It was now become Edward's turn to fly the kingdom; and, escaping the dangers
of the enemy, of the sea and of pirates, he landed safely in Holland. Warwick,
in the mean time, advanced to London, and once more poor passive Henry was
released from prison, and placed upon an useless throne. Warwick was received,
among the people, by the name of King-maker: a parliament was called, and
confirmed Henry's right; but they were now only ministers of the will of the
victor.

Edward, though an exile in Holland, had many partisans at home; and, after an
absence of about nine months, once more landed at Ravenspur, where Henry IV.
had landed upon a similar occasion. Though at first he was coldly received by
the English, yet his army increased upon its march, and his moderation and
seigned humility still added to the number of his partisans. London, at this
time, ever ready to admit the most powerful, opened her gates, and Henry was
again taken from his throne to be sent back to his old mansion.

Warwick at last found his party begin to decline, and Clarence, the King's
brother, on whom he had the greatest dependence, changed to the other side. In
this state of uncertainty, he knew no other expedient than to hazard a battle:
he knew his forces to be inferior, but he was conscious of the superiority of
his own generalship. With this resolution he marched from St. Alban's, and,
having advanced to Barnet, within ten miles of London, he met Edward, who was
marching down with a design to fight him. Warwick and Edward were the two most
renowned Generals of their age, and now was to be struck the decisive blow,
that was either to fix Edward on the throne, or overthrow his pretensions for
ever. The unfortunate Henry was dragged along to be a spectator of the
engagement; happy in his natural imbecility, which seemed to opiate all his
afflictions.

The battle began early in the morning, and lasted till noon: never did two
armies fight with greater obstinacy and bravery; not honor, but life, depended
upon the issue of the contest. The example of Warwick inspired his troops with
more than common resolution; and the victory, for a while, seemed to declare
for him: but his army, by reason of a slight mist, happening to mistake a body
of their own forces for that of the enemy, fell furiously upon them, and this
fatal error turned the fortune of the day. Warwick did all that experience,
conduct, or valor, could suggest, to retrieve the mistake, but in vain.
Finding, therefore, all hopes gone, he was resolved to sell his life dearly to
the conquerors; and, rushing, on foot as he was, into the midst of his enemies,
he fell covered all over with wounds. Thus died the ambitious Warwick, who had
made and unmade Kings at pleasure, yet who never seemed to aspire at regal
dignity himself. Ten thousand of his army shared the same fate with him, the
King having ordered that no quarter should be given.

Margaret, who was ever fruitful in resources, was, at this time, returning
from France, with her son the Prince of Wales, where she had been negotiating a
new supply. She had scarce time to refresh herself from the fatigues of her
voyage, when she received the fatal news of the death of the brave Warwick, who
was then her only defender. Though she had hitherto bravely withstood all the
attacks of fortune, this was too violent a shock for nature to support: her
grief now, for the first time, found way in a torrent of tears; and, yielding
to her unhappy fate, she took sanctuary in an abbey in Hampshire.

She had not been here long, when she found some few friends still willing to
assist her fallen hopes. The Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Pembroke, and one or
two Lords more, came to offer her their lives and fortunes: a dawn of hope was
sufficient to raise her courage, and her numerous misfortunes gave way to the
flattering prospect of another trial. She had now fought battles in almost
every province in England: Tewkesbury park was the last scene, that terminated
her misfortunes. The Duke of Somerset headed her army: a man who had shared her
dangers, and had ever been steady in her cause. He was valiant, generous, and
polite, but rash and headstrong: when Edward first attacked him in his
intrenchments, he repulsed him with such vigor, that the enemy retired with
precipitation; Somerset, supposing them routed, immediately pursued, and
ordered Lord Wenlock to support him, while he charged: but this Lord disobeyed
his injunctions, and the forces of Somerset were overpowered by numbers.
Somerset now, finding all gone, was unable to govern his rage: he had depended
upon Wenlock; but, when he beheld him inactive, in the very place where he had
first drawn up his men, giving way to his transport, with his heavy battle-ax
in both hands, he ran upon the coward, and, with one blow, dashed out his
brains.

After the battle, the Queen, torpid with griefs was taken prisoner, and
afterward had the misery of finding her son, the Prince of Wales, in the same
condition. But this noble youth was not long in bondage: being brought into the
victor's presence, he appeared before him with undaunted majesty. Edward,
surprised at the boy's behavior, asked him, How he durst enter into his
dominions without leave? I have entered the dominions of my father, replied the
Prince, to revenge his injuries, and to redress my own. The barbarous Monarch,
enraged at his intrepidity, struck him on the mouth with his gauntlet: this
seemed to be the signal for his death; Gloucester, Clarence, and others, like
wild beasts, rushing upon the unarmed youth at once, stabbed him to the heart
with their daggers. When the governors of a kingdom behave thus, what must be
the behavior of the people? To complete the tragedy, Henry himself, who had
long been the passive spectator of all these cruelties, was now thought unfit
to live. The Duke of Gloucester, afterward named Richard III, or the
Crouch-back, entering his chamber alone, murdered him in cold blood. Of all
those that were taken, none were suffered to survive but Margaret herself: it
was, perhaps, expected that she would be ransomed by the King of France, and in
this they were not deceived: Lewis XI. paid the King of England fifty thousand
crowns for her freedom, Thus Margaret of Anjou, after having sustained the
cause of her husband in twelve battles, after having survived her fortune and
her children, died a few years after in privacy in France, very miserable
indeed; but with no other claims to our pity, except her courage and her
distresses.

Of all people in the world the English are the most compassionate; a throne
raised upon cruelty never wanted enemies among them, and nothing could ever
have been more ridiculous than attempting to govern such subjects as the
English by the hand of the executioner. The heads of either faction seemed to
have been insensible of this truth, and it was their ill-judged punishments,
which, by turns, plunged them into new distresses. A tyrant, however, when once
drenched in blood, knows not when to give over. Edward, being now freed from
great enemies, turned to the punishment of those of lesser note: the gibbets
were hung with his adversaries, and their estates confiscated to his use.

Yet, while he was thus rendering himself terrible on the one hand, he was
immersed in gallantry on the other. Nature, it seems, was not unfavourable to
him in this respect, for he was universally allowed to be the most beautiful
man of his time. The court seemed willing to countenance those debaucheries, in
which they had a share; and the clergy, as they themselves practiced every
species of lewdness with impunity, were ever ready to lend absolution for all
his failings. The truth is, enormous vices had been of late so common, that
adultery was held but a very slight offense: among the number of his mistresses
was the wife of one Shore, a woman of exquisite beauty and good sense, but who
had not virtue enough to withstand the temptations of a beautiful man and a
Monarch.

England now enjoying a temporary calm, the King thought the best way to
ingratiate himself with the people, was to assert his right to his domains in
France, which the insurrections of his father had contributed to alienate in
the former reign: this proposal was sure of pleasing the English, who ever
appeared more fond of splendid than useful acquisitions. To prosecute this
scheme, therefore, he sends his ally, the Duke of Burgundy, a reinforcement of
three thousand men, and soon after passed over himself at the head of a
numerous army. Lewis XI, then King of France, was, with reason, alarmed at this
formidable invasion: he found himself unable to resist so powerful an
antagonist, and therefore had recourse to treaty: this succeeded better than
arms could have done; the two Kings had an interview at the bridge of
Perpignan, and, upon the payment of a stipulated sum, Edward led his forces
back to England. The English King wanted to return home to his mistresses, to
spend upon them the money he had gotten; and the French Monarch hoped to be
able to refuse those sums which he had only given a promise to pay.

Edward returned to renew his cruelty and his excesses. His brother Clarence,
who had assisted him in gaining the crown, had been, for some time, treated
with indifference and disrespect: this Clarence thought an ill recompense for
his former services, and often gave himself the liberty of invective in the
King's absence. In this posture of things, the King happened to kill a
favorite deer, belonging to Mr. Thomas Burdet, a friend of the Duk^'s: poor
Burdet, dropping some hasty expressions against the King, was sentenced to die,
and executed in two days after. The Duke of Clarence, upon the death of his
friend, vented his grief in renewed reproaches against his brother: the King,
unmindful of the ties of kindred, or the debt of gratitude, by which he was
bound had him arraigned, condemned, and executed: he was smothered in a butt of
Malmsey wine. When men arrive at a certain station of greatness, their regards
are dissipated on too great a number of objects to feel parental affection: the
ties of nature are only strong with those who have but few friends or few
dependants.

The rest of Edward's life was spent in riot and debauchery, in gratifications
that are pleasing only to the narrow mind; in useless treaties, in which he was
ever deceived; and in empty threats against the Monarch who had deceived him.
His parliament, now merely the ministers of his will, consented to a war with
France, at a time when it was impossible it could succeed: all the lords
unanimously declared, that they thought it both just and necessary. The people
seemed equally pleased at the prospect of a war, which might, in some measure,
alleviate their domestic calamities; great preparations were made on every
side, but Edward died in the midst of all his expectations. The character of
this Prince is easily summed up; his good qualities were courage and beauty;
his bad qualities -- every vice.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXV.
HORRID as the last reign was, you must prepare for events in the next still
more heinous. Edward left two sons, the eldest of whom, a boy between twelve
and thirteen, was proclaimed King, by the name of Edward V. The Queen, his
mother, being herself newly raised among the nobility, seemed willing to hide
the meanness of her former condition amongst a number of new promotions: this,
as might naturally be expected, was displeasing to the old nobility; and the
Duke of Gloucester, a monster both for the cruelty of his heart, and the
deformity of his body, fomented their discontents. Having gained over Lord
Hastings, the Duke of Buckingham, and some other lords, to his interests, he
made them a long speech, tending to show the danger that hung over their heads,
if the Queen should have the government in her hands: he enlarged upon the
usurpations of her family, and the lengths they would be apt to run upon being
invested with the supreme power. In short, he spared neither dissimulation nor
artifice, nor oaths, to get the guardianship of the minority, and the custody
of the King's person.

His first step, after being declared Protector of the kingdom, was to get the
King's brother, also a boy of about seven, who, with the Queen his mother, had
taken sanctuary in Westminster-abbey. The Queen foresaw the dangers which
threatened her family; and, parting with her child, clasped him, with a last
embrace, to her breast, and took leave of him with a shower of tears. The Duke
of Gloucester, on the other hand, took his young nephew in his arms, and,
clasping him, with feigned affection, declared, that, while he himself was
alive, the child should never want a parent. The young King, finding that he
was to have the pleasure of his brother's company, was greatly rejoiced,
without considering the fatal intention of these preparations: a few days
after, the Protector, upon a pretext of guarding them from danger, conveyed
them both to the Tower.

Having thus secured their persons, the Protector's next step was to spread a
report of their illegitimacy; and, by pretended obstacles, to put off the day
of the young King's coronation. Lord Stanley, a man of deep penetration, was
the first to disclose his fears of the Protector's having ill designs: he
communicated his suspicions to Lord Hastings, who was firmly attached to the
young King, perhaps this lord's wishes, that such a project might not be true,
influenced his judgment, and confirmed him in his security. Soon, however,
Catesby, a vile creature of the Protector's, was sent to sound him, and try
whether he could not be brought over to side with the projected usurpation:
Hastings appeared immovable in his adherence to the King, and his death was
therefore resolved on.

With this design, the Protector next day called a council in the Tower, under
the pretense of expediting the coronation: he came thither himself at nine
o'clock in the morning, with a cheerful countenance, saluting the members with
the utmost affability, and appearing with demonstrations of unusual good
humor; and then, going out for a short time, desired his absence might not
interrupt the debates. In about an hour he returned again, quite altered,
knitting his brows, biting his lips, and showing, by the frequent alterations
of his looks, some inward perturbation. A silence ensued for some time, and the
lords looked upon each other, not without reason, expecting some horrid
catastrophe: at length he broke the dreadful silence, My Lords, said he, What
punishment do they deserve who have conspired against my life? This redoubled
the astonishment of the assembly, and, continuing their silence, Lord Hastings
at length made answer, That whoever did so deserved to be punished as a
traitor: upon which the Protector, with a stern countenance, baring his
w^thered arm, cried out, See what the sorceress my Queensister, and that
wretch, Shore's wife, have done by their witcherafts! Their spells have reduced
my arm to this condition, and my whole body would have suffered the same
calamity, but for a timely detection. The amazement of the council seemed to
increase at this terrible accusation, and Lord Hastings again said, IF they
have committed such a crime, they deserve punishment. IF, cried the Protector,
with a loud voice, Do thou answer me with IFS? I tell thee, that they have
conspired my death; and that thou, traitor, art an accomplice in their crime.
Thus having said, he struck the table twice with his hand, and the room was
instantly filled with armed men. I arrest thee, continues he, turning to
Hastings, for high treason; and, at the same time, delivered him to the custody
of the soldiers.

The council-room was now filled with tumult; and, though no rescue was
offered, yet the soldiers caused a bustle, as if they apprehended danger. One
of them narrowly missed cleaving Lord Stanley's head with a battle-ax, but he
escaped by shrinking under the table: in all probability, the fellow had orders
for this attempt, so that, when thus killed, his death might be ascribed to the
tumult caused by an intended rescue. Stanley, however, escaping the blow, was
arrested by the Protector's order, who was well apprized of his attachment to
the young King. As for Lord Hastings, he was forced to make a short confession
to the next priest that was at hand; the Protector crying out, by St. Paul, he
would not dine till he had seen his head taken off: he was accordingly hurried
out to the little green before the Tower chapel, and there beheaded on a log of
wood that acccidentally lay there.

But not those alone of his council were thus barbarously treated: on the very
same day a similar tragedy was acted at Pontefract castle, where the Earl
Rivers, the most polite and gallant man of the age in which he lived, and Lord
Gray, were both beheaded by a decree of that very same council, the members of
which were now in such danger themselves. A plot against the King was the
pretext for their execution; but, in reality, they died as being the only
obstacles to prevent his destruction.

The Protector, having thus got rid of those he most feared, undertook to
punish even the least dangerous: Jane Shore, the late King's mistress, was an
enemy too humble for him to fear any thing from her attempts, yet, as she had
been accused of witchcraft, of which all the world saw she was innocent, he
thought proper to punish her for faults of which she was really guilty. This
unhappy woman had been deluded formerly from her husband one Shore, a goldsmith
in Lombard Street, and continued with Edward the most guiltless mistress in his
luxurious and abandoned court: she ever interceded for the distressed, and was
ever applied to as a mediator for mercy. She was charitable, generous, and
pleasing in conversation; her wit and her beauty were said to be irresistible.
Being blameless in other respects, the Protector ordered her to be sued for
incontinency, for having left her husband to live in adultery with another. It
is possible that the people were not displeased at seeing, again reduced to her
former meanness, a person, who had, for a while, been raised above them, and
enjoyed all the favors of the King. Her guilt was too notorious to be denied;
she acknowledged the charge, and was condemned to walk barefoot through the
city, and to do penance in St. Paul's church in a white sheet, with a wax taper
in her hand, before thousands of spectators. She lived above forty years after
this sentence, reduced to the most extreme wretchedness: an historian, in the
reign of Henry VII, assures us, that he saw her gathering herbs in a field near
the city, to supply her nightly meal; a strange employment for one who once had
been the favorite of a court, and the mistress of a king.

The Protector now began to lay aside his pretended regard for the sons of the
late King, and to aspire to the throne more openly: to effect this, the Duke of
Buckingham, who by promises and bribes was devoted to his interests, tried
every art to infuse into the people an opinion of the bastardy of the late
King, and that of his children. Dr. Shaw, a popular preacher, was hired to
harangue the people from St. Paul's Cross to the same purpose: the preacher,
after having displayed the incontinence of the Queen, insisted upon the
illegality of the young King's title, and the virtues of the Protector. It is
be, continued the sycophant, who carries in his face, in his soul, the image of
virtue, and the marks of a true descent. Still, however, the people continued
silent, each fearing to begin the cry of King Richard, or detesting the
tendency of his sermon. The Duke of Buckingham, therefore, next undertook to
persuade them in his turn: his speech turned upon the calamities of the last
reign, and the bastardy of the present pretender; he seemed apprehensive,
indeed, that the Protector could not be prevailed upon to accept the crown, but
he hoped that the people would take every method to persuade him: he concluded,
by desiring every man to speak his real sentiments, and to give a positive
answer, whether they would have the young bastard or the virtuous Protector? A
silence, for some time, ensued; but, at length, some of the Duke's own
servants, who had slipped in among the press, cried out, Long live King
Richard: this cry was seconded by some of the citizens, who were previously
bribed; and the mob at the door, a despicable class of people, ever pleased
with novelty, repeated the cry; and, throwing up their caps, cried out, a
Richard, a Richard. The Duke, now taking the advantage of this faint
approbation, next day, at the head of the Mayor and Aldermen, went to wait upon
the Protector, with offers of the crown. Richard, with his usual hypocrisy,
appeared to the crowd in a gallery between two Bishops, and, at first,
pretended to be surprised at the concourse: when he was informed that their
business was to offer him the crown, he declined accepting it, alleging his
love for the late King his brother, and his affection for the children under
his care. Buckingham, seeming displeased with this answer, muttered some words
to himself, and, at length, plainly told him, that all the people had
determined upon making him King: that they had now proceeded too far to recede,
and therefore were resolved, in case of his refusal, to offer it where it would
meet with a more ready acceptance. This was a resolution, which the Protector's
tenderness for his people could not permit him to see executed: I see, cried he
in a modest tone, I see the kingdom is resolved to load me with preferments,
unequal to my abilities or my choice; yet, since it is my duty to obey the
dictates of a free people, I will graciously accept their petition. I,
therefore, from this moment, enter upon the government of England and France,
with a resolution to defend the one, and to subdue the other. The crowd being
thus dismissed, each returned home, pondering upon the proceedings of the day,
and making such remarks, as passion, interest, or prudence, might suggest.

One crime ever draws on others, and usurpation naturally required security: as
soon, therefore, as he was fixed upon the throne, Richard sent the governor of
the Tower orders to put the two young Princes to death. There was yet one man
left in the kingdom, who had virtue enough to refuse being made the instrument
of a tyrant's cruelty: the governor of the Tower, whose name was Brackenbury,
submissively answered, that he could not embrue his hands in their blood. A fit
instrument, however, was not wanting long: one James Tyrrel was employed and
sent to command the Tower for one night. Tyrrel, that very night, whilst all
were asleep, went to the chamber where the two young Princes lay; here the
murderer, for some time, hesitated in his base design, struck, as it is said,
with the innocence of their looks: but, habit getting the better of remorse, he
at last smothered them between two pillows, and caused them to be buried under
a little staircase, near where they lay. Vengeance, though late, followed this
execrable wretch; he was executed for this fact in the succeeding reign, when
he confessed his crime and the manner of its execution.

The warlike spirit, first excited by the conquest of France, and then kept up
by the long civil war, seemed to have banished every sentiment of virtue from
the kingdom: cruelty and executions were grown so common, that the people now
became familiar with blood and death: scarce a noble family in the kingdom
which was not thinned by these terrible dissensions. The clergy seemed, at this
time, quite separated from the laity; they seldom suffered for treason, and
were but little conversant in the bloody politics of the times. As for arts,
sciences, and commerce, they were totally neglected. In all this carnage and
desolation, one power was imperceptibly gaining ground; as the lords were
declining, the commons were coming into authority; not so much exposed, as the
former, to the tempests of regal resentment, they continued to increase in
wealth and favor, and found safety from their humility.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVI.
THERE is somewhat that peculiarly strikes the imagination in the transactions
of this and the preceding reign; I have therefore treated them with more than
usual prolixity. Our tragic poets seem to have been sensible how much these
strange instances of depravation were susceptible of a poetic dress. Every
picture of the times is marked with strong lines, like an African prospect,
where all is vast, wild, and terrible.

Richard had, at length, waded through every obstacle to the throne, and now
began, after the usual manner of all usurpers, to strengthen, by his ill got
power, foreign alliances. Sensible also of the influence of pageantry and show
upon the minds of the people, he caused himself to be crowned first at London,
and then at York. The clergy he endeavored to secure in his interests, by
great indulgences to them, and by his own hypocritical behavior.

But, while he endeavored to establish his power, he found it undermining, on
a side from whence he least expected it: the Duke of Buckingham, who had been
the principal instrument in placing him upon the throne, now began to expect
the reward of his adherence. Richard, indeed, had given him several posts and
governments, but denied him a moiety of the consiscated lands of Hereford, to
which he had some family claims. Very great obligations between two friends, on
either side, generally end in disgust: Buckingham supposed that his services
could never be over-rewarded; while Richard, on the contrary, was willing to
curb his desires, which seemed to increase by gratification. Soon, therefore,
the Duke was disgusted with the new Monarch, and as soon conceived a scheme for
depriving him of the crown. Doubtful, for a while, whether he should put in for
the crown himself, or set up another; the latter opinion prevailed, and he was
resolved to declare for Henry, Duke of Richmond, then an exile in Bretagne.
Henry, of Richmond, was one of those who had the good fortune to survive the
numerous massacres of the preceding reigns: he was the only remaining branch of
the house of Lancaster; he was descended from John of Ghaunt, but, by the
female line; his right to the throne was very doubtful, but the crimes of the
usurper strengthened his claims. He had long lived in exile, and was once
delivered up to the ambassadors of Edward IV, and just upon the point of being
brought back to England, to suffer a cruel death; when the Prince, who had
delivered him up, repented of what he had done, and took him from the
ambassadors, just as he was brought on shipboard. This was the youth whom the
Duke of Buckingham pitched upon to dethrone the tyrant, and a negotiation was
commenced between them for that purpose.

Richard, in the mean time, either informed by his creatures, or made
distrustful by conscious guilt, suspected a conspiracy, and could not avoid
thinking Buckingham among the number of the conspirators. Impressed with these
suspicions, he came to a resolution of sending for him to court, and the Duke's
refusing to come confirmed him in his belief: but soon he had no cause to doubt
of his treachery, for word was brought, that the Duke of Buckingham was up in
arms. The Duke, having found that he could dissemble with Richard no longer,
had drawn together some Welsh forces, and began to march to the western shore,
where he had appointed young Richmond to land. Richard, however, no way
dismayed at the approaching danger, prepared to meet him with the few forces he
then had in readiness; but fortune seemed to favor the usurper, and rendered
his preparations, for this time, needless. As Buckingham was advancing, by
hasty marches, toward Gloucester, where he designed to pass the Severn, just
then the river was swollen to such a degree, that the country, on both sides,
was deluged, and even the tops of mountains covered with water. It held ten
days, during which the Welsh army could neither pass the river, nor subsist on
the other side, where they found nothing but desolation: at length, compelled
by hunger, after having suffered a thousand hardships, they all dispersed, and
returned home, notwithstanding the Duke's entreaties so the contrary. In this
helpless situation, the Duke, after a moment's reflection, thought the properest
place of safety he could fix upon, was at the house of one Banister, who had
been his servant, and who had received repeated obligations from his family. No
maxim was ever more just, than, that there is no friendship among the wicked:
Buckingham had himself been first false to his King, and after to Richard, the
creature of his own power; how then could he expect fidelity from others? A
large reward was set upon the Duke's head: the villain Banister, unable to
resist so great a temptation, went and betrayed his master to the Sheriff of
Shropshire, who, surrounding the house with armed men, seized the Duke in a
peasant's dress, and conducted him to Shrewsbury, where he was beheaded,
without the form of a trial, or delay.

In the mean time, Richmond landed in England, but, finding his hopes
frustrated, by the catastrophe of Buckingham, he hastily set sail again, and
returned to Bretagne. Richard, thus freed from the impending danger, gave a
loose to cruelty, the favorite passion of his breast. In order to expedite his
revenge, he gave one Ashton an unbounded commission to condemn and execute,
upon the spot, such as were deemed by him guilty, or even suspected of guilt. A
cruel King never wants a bloody minister: Ashton executed his commission with
the utmost rigor, putting husbands to death in presence of their own wives,
and children before the eyes of their parents. It is said, that, this execrable
wretch being solicited by a beautiful woman to release her husband, who was a
prisoner upon suspicion, he consented, upon her promising to grant him a favor
of another nature: scarce had the poor creature indulged his brutal desire,
when he brought her out, and pointed to her husband, whom, in the mean time, he
had given orders should be hanged upon a neighboring tree!

Still, however, the authority of a parliament was wanting, to give sanction to
the injustice of Richard's proceedings: but, in these times of vice and
servility, that was soon procured. The parliament approved his proceedings,
confirmed the illegitimacy of Edward's children, passed an act of attainder
against the Earl of Richmond, and all his adherents; and seemed, upon the
whole, more disposed to slavery, than he to be a tyrant. One thing more was yet
wanting to complete his security, the death of his rival: to effect this, he
sent ambassadors to the Duke of Bretagne, with whom Richmond had taken shelter,
seemingly upon business of a public nature, but, in reality, to treat with
Laudais, that Prince's prime minister, and to induce him to deliver up
Richmond. The minister was base enough to enter into the negotiation; but
Richmond, having had timely notice, fled away into France, and had just reached
the limits of that kingdom, when his pursuers came up with him.

Richard, finding his design of seizing his enemy's person without success, as
his power became more precarious, became, every day, more suspicious and more
cruel. Lord Stanley, who was now married to the widow of Edward IV, fell
strongly under his suspicion; and, to secure his fidelity, he took the son as
an hostage for his father's good behavior. He now also resolved to get rid of
his present Queen, in order to marry his own niece; a match from which he
expected to derive several advantages. The Lady he was then married to was
formerly the wife of the young Prince of Wales, that was murdered by him at
Tewkesbury. It is no slight indication of the barbarity of the times to find a
woman thus taking the murderer of her husband for her second lord. She felt,
however, the consequences of her ingratitude to the deceased Prince, in the
inhumanity of the present: Richard treated her with so much contempt and
indifference, that she died of grief, according to his desire. But his wishes
were not crowned with success in his applications to his niece; she treated his
vile passion with retaliated contempt and just detestation.

In the perplexity, caused by this unexpected refusal, it was, that he received
the news of Richmond's being once more landed at Milford-haven, with an intent
to deprive him of the crown: but, being informed that he brought with him but
two thousand men, he seemed to despise the effort, and issued orders to oppose
him with the greatest coolness and intrepidity. Richard was possessed of
courage and military conduct, and these were his only virtues. Having heard
that Richmond was marching with his little army to London, he was resolved to
meet him on the way, and end the pretensions of one, or the other, by a battle.
Richmond, though very much inferior in number, was not less defirous of
engaging; so that the two armies soon met at Bosworth field, to determine a
dispute that had now, for more than thirty years, drained England of its
bravest subjects.

Richard, perceiving his enemy advance, drew up his army, consisting of about
thirteen thousand men, in order of battle; he gave the command of the vanguard
to the Duke of Norfolk, and led the main body himself, with the crown on his
head, either designing by this to inspire the enemy with awe, or to render
himself conspicuous to his own army. The Earl of Richmond, who had not half the
number of men, drew up his forces also in two lines, the Earl of Oxford
commanding the first, and he himself the second: Lord Stanley, in the mean
time, posted himself in one flank between the two armies, and his brother took
his station in the other, which was opposite. Richard, seeing him thus in a
situation equally convenient for joining either army, immediately sent him
orders to join him, which the other refusing, he gave instant command for
beheading Lord Stanley's son, whom he had kept as an hostage; but, being
persuaded to postpone the execution till after the fight, he complied, and
immediately ordered the trumpets to sound to battle. The two armies approaching
each other, the battle began with a shower of arrows, and soon the two ranks
began to close: this was what Stanley expected, who immediately, profiting
himself of the occasion, joined the line of Richmond, and turned the fortune of
the day. In the mean while, Richard spurred up his horse into the thickest of
the fight, and Richmond quitted his station behind, to encourage his troops, by
his presence in the front. Richard, perceiving him, was willing to end all by
one blow; and, with the fury of a lion, flew through thousands to attack him.
He slew Sir William Brandon, the Earl's standard bearer, who had attempted to
stop his career; Sir John Cheney, having taken Brandon's place, was thrown to
the ground: Richmond, in the mean time, stood to oppose him; but, the crowd
interposing, they were separated. Richard now, therefore, went to inspire his
troops at another quarter; but, at last, perceiving his army everywhere
yielding or flying, and now finding that all was gone, he rushed, with a loud
shout, into the midst of the enemy, and there met a better death than his
actions had merited: after the battle his body being found amidst an heap of
slaughter, stripped naked, covered over with wounds, and the eyes frightfully
staring, was thrown across an horse, the head hanging down on one side and the
legs on the other, and so carried to Leicester. It lay there two days, exposed
to public view, and then was buried without farther ceremony.

Richard's crown, being found, by one of the soldiers, in the field of battle,
was immediately placed upon the head of the conqueror; the whole army, as if
inspired, with one voice, crying out, Long live King Henry. Thus ended the
bloody reign of Richard; and, by his death the race of the Plantagenet Kings,
that had been in possession of the crown during the space of three hundred and
thirty years, became extinct. Thus ended also the contests between the houses
of York and Lancaster, which had, for thirty years, been as a pestilence to the
kingdom, and in which above an hundred thousand men lost their lives, either by
the executioner, or on the field of battle.

These dissensions had reduced the kingdom to a state of almost savage
barbarity; laws, arts, and commerce were entirely neglected for the practice of
arms; and to be a conqueror was sufficient, in the eyes of the people, to stand
for every other virtue. They had, as yet, no idea of pacific government, nor
could lend applause to those who cultivated it, and, except only in their
gallantry to the fair sex, they little differed from the ancient painted
inhabitants of the island. In these wars the women, though never so formidable,
or never so active, unless accused of witchcraft, were exempted from capital
punishments, which probably proceeded from a spirit of gallantry, the single
virtue of the times. As for the clergy, they were entirely distinct from the
laity, both in customs, constitutions, and learning: they were governed by the
civil law, drawn up by one of the Roman Emperors; whereas the laity were
governed by the common law, which was traditionally delivered to them from
their ancestors. The clergy, however you may be told to the contrary,
understood and wrote Latin tolerably well; the laity, on the other hand,
understood no Latin, but applied themselves wholly to French, when they aspired
to the character of politeness. The clergy, as a body, little interested
themselves in the civil polity, and perhaps were not displeased to see the
laity, whom they considered not as fellow subjects, but rivals for power,
weakening themselves by continual contests: the laity regarded the clergy with
blind veneration, and this veneration lessened their regard for their King. In
short, as there was no virtue among the individuals of the nation, the
government was like a feverish constitution, ever subject to ferment and
disorder. France served, for a while, as a drain to the peccant humors; but,
when that was no longer open, the disorder seemed to increase in the internal
part of the constitution, and produced all the horrors of civil war.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVII.
IT was in this state of the nation that the Earl of Richmond, who took the
name of Henry VII, came to the throne. You are now to behold one of the
greatest revolutions, that ever was brought about in any kingdom, effected by
the prudence, clemency, and perseverance of one great Prince: a nation of
tumult reduced to civil subordination; an insolent and factious aristocracy
humbled; wise laws enacted; commerce restored; and the peaceful-arts rendered
amiable to a people, for whom before war only had charms. In a word, you are
now to turn to a period, where the whole government seems to put on a new form;
and to view the actions of a King, if not the greatest, at least the most
useful, that ever sat upon the British, or any other throne. Hitherto you have
only read the history of a barbarous nation, obeying with reluctance, and
governed by caprice; you are henceforth to view more refined politics, and
better concerted schemes; to behold human wisdom, as if rouzed from her
lethargy of thirteen hundred years, exerting every art to reduce the natural
ferocity of the people, and to introduce happiness.

Henry's first care, upon coming to the throne, was to marry the Princess
Elizabeth, daughter of Edward IV, and thus unite the interests of the houses of
Lancaster and York: but, lest the people should suppose he claimed the crown
upon the strength of this alliance, he deferred her coronation (...) two years
after, by which he made evident the priority of his own claim. His reign
happily commenced with an obedience to the laws that had been hitherto unknown
in England. An act had been passed, in the preceding reign, for the attainder
of his friends and followers: this act still continued in force, and many
members of that house, by which it was to be repealed, were those who were
mentioned in the attainder. To suffer such to join in repealing that statute
would be admitting them judges in their own cause, to which Henry bravely and
justly objected: they were, therefore, obliged to leave the house, till an act
was passed to reverse their attainder.

Before his reign, it was usual, when any person was attainted, to take away
his life, and give away his fortune to some court favorite: Henry wisely
perceived that this had two bad effects; it first excited resentment, by its
cruelty; and, in the next place, only made the favorite too powerful for
subjection. This prudent Monarch took a better method to repress tumult and
rebellion: he deprived such as were caught in arms of their estates and
fortunes, and these he reserved for the use of the crown. By this means he
deprived them of the power to injure him, and he strengthened the sinews of
government, by enriching the crown. A great part of the miseries of his
predecessors proceeded from their poverty, and the opulence of the nobility.
Henry saw that money alone could turn the scale of power into his own hands,
and therefore hoarded up all the confiscations of his enemies with the utmost
frugality. Avarice, upon these motives, is not only excusable, but
praiseworthy; it is not meanness, but economy; and, whatever historians tell
us of liberality in a King, is, at best, misplaced applause. Such liberalities
are, in general, extorted from the poor, the industrious, and the useful; and
bestowed, as rewards, upon the rich and powerful; perhaps upon the sycophants
of a court, and flatterers of debauchery. Henry was different from his
predecessors in this respect; he gave away few rewards to the courtiers about
his person, and none but the poor shared his benefactions. He released all the
prisoners for debt in his dominions, whose debts did not amount to forty
shillings, and paid their creditors from the royal coffers. His economy
rendered him not only useful to the poor, but enabled him to be just to his own
creditors, either abroad or at home. Those sums which he borrowed from the city
of London, or any of his subjects, he repaid at the appointed day, with the
utmost punctuality; and thus, as he grew just in his own dominions, he became
respectable abroad.

Immediately after his marriage with Elizabeth, he issued out a general pardon
to all such as chose to accept it; but those lords, who had been the favorites
of the last reign, and long used to turbulence, refused his proffered
tenderness, and flew to arms. Lord Lovel, Humphrey and Thomas Stafford, placed
themselves at the head of this insurrection: Henry sent the Duke of Bedford to
oppose the insurgents, with orders to try what might be the effects of a
proffered pardon, previous to his attempts to reduce them. The Duke punctually
obeyed his instructions, but the rebels seemed to listen to no accommodation:
but, contrary to all expectation, Lord Lovel, apprehensive of being deserted by
his followers, first showed them the example, and fled away to Flanders. The
rebel army, now without a leader, submitted to the mercy of the King, which
they received. The Staffords, who were in the mean time besieging Worcester,
hearing of the surrender of their confederates, attempted to take sanctuary in
a church which had no privilege to protect them: being taken from thence, the
eldest of the brothers was executed, the other received a pardon.

But the people were become so turbulent and factious, by a long course of
civil war, that no governor could rule them, nor any King please. One rebellion
seemed extinguished only to give rise to another: the King kept, at that time,
a son of the Duke of Clarence, who had been formerly drowned in the butt of
wine, as has been mentioned, a prisoner in the Tower. This poor youth, who was
styled the Earl of Warwick, had long been a stranger to liberty; he was
unacquainted with men and things, and so little conversant with common life,
from his long and early confinement, that he knew not the difference, to use
the words of the historian, between a duck and an hen. This unhappy boy,
harmless as he was, was made an instrument of to deceive the people: a priest,
of Oxford, had trained up one Lambert Simnel, a baker's son, to counterfeit the
person of this Earl; and he instructed him to talk upon some facts and
occurrences relative to the court of King Edward. Thus, having prepared him for
his purpose, he set out for Ireland, judging that the properest theater to open
the scene: the plot unfolded to his wish, Simnel was received and proclaimed
King of Ireland, and he was conducted, by the people and judges, with great
pomp to the castle, where he was treated conformably to his pretended birth and
distinction.

The King could not avoid being troubled at this imposture, because he saw his
mother-in-law at the bottom of it: he was resolved, therefore, to take the
advice of his council upon this occasion, who, after due deliberation,
determined upon confining the old Queen to a monastery; but, to wipe off the
aspersion of treason, from one to whom he was so nearly allied, he gave out
that she was thus punished for having formerly delivered up the Princess, her
daughter, to King Richard. The people, as usual, murmured upon this occasion;
but the King, unmindful of their idle clamours, persisted in his resolution,
and she remained in confinement till she died, which did not happen till some
years after. The next resolution of the King's council was to show the Earl of
Warwick, who was still confined in the Tower, publicly to the people: in
consequence of this, he was led through the principal streets of London, and
conducted, in a solemn procession, to St. Paul's, where great numbers were
assembled to see him. Still, however, they proceeded at Dublin to honor their
pretended Monarch, and he was crowned, with great solemnity, in presence of the
Earl of Kildare, the Chancellor, and other officers of state. Such impofitions
upon the people were very frequent, at that time, in several parts of Europe:
Lorrain, Naples, and Portugal, had their impostors, who continued, for a long
time, to deceive without detection. In fact, the inhabitants of every county
were so much confined to the limits of their own peculiar place of abode, and
knew so little of what was passing in the rest of the world around them, that
nothing was more easy than to deceive. King Simnel, being now joined by Lord
Lovel, and one or two lords more of the discontented party, resolved to pass
over into England, and accordingly landed in Lancashire: from thence he marched
to York, expecting the country would rise and join him as he passed along. But
in this he was deceived; and he soon had the mortification to find that the
King himself was coming up with a superior force to give him battle: the event
of the contest was such as might have been expected; the Earl of Lincoln, who
commanded for Simnel, was overthrown and slain in battle, and the impostor
himself taken prisoner. Henry had now an opportunity of showing the humanity
and the greatness of his mind: Simnel was pardoned, and given a mean employment
in the King's kitchen, and afterward preferred to be one of his falconers, in
which post he died. As for the priest, his instructor, he was made a prisoner
for life.

Things being thus adjusted, we may turn to France, which had long been the
grave of the English, who yet coveted nothing so much as to continue the war
there. Henry had all along perceived the futility of conquests upon the
continent, conquests that could produce no other advantages than military
glory: but, while he internally despised such pernicious triumphs, he was
obliged, in order to gain popularity, to countenance them. He therefore often
pretended, that he was going to ravish his kingdom once more from the usurper,
and lay all France in blood; but, in fact, he had nothing farther from his
heart. As far as negotiations and threats went, he did all that lay in his
power to keep the jarring states of that kingdom nearly balanced, and
consequently feeble; but, as for succors of men and money, he too well knew
the value of both to exhaust them, in the manner of his predecessors, upon such
vain projects.

The parliament, however, was taught to believe, that he intended something
considerable against France; and they, ever cheerful when France was to be
opposed, furnished him with the necessary supplies. But money was, at that
time, more easily granted than levied in England. A new insurrection arose when
the supplies came to be collected, and the Earl of Northumberland was killed by
the mob of Yorkshire, while he attempted to enforce obedience to the laws. The
mutineers did not stop here; by the advice of one John a Chamber, an
incendiary, they set Sir John Egremont at their head, and marched toward
London to give the King battle: the consequence of this rash step was the
defeat of the rebels, and the death of John a Chamber, their ringleader. It
was necessary to treat this man with rigor, to induce a more ready compliance
to the future grants of parliament, and prevent all insurrections on the same
occasion; for now people seemed continually more willing to revolt than to pay
their taxes.

One would not have imagined, by the success of Simnel's imposture, that it
could have produced imitations; but the old Duchess of Burgundy, sister to
Edward IV, finding the former fraud had deceived so many, was resolved to
project a new scheme, with more art and greater plausibility. She first spread
a report, that the young Duke of York, said to have been murdered in the Tower,
was still alive; and soon a youth made his appearance that took upon him the
title of the Duke of York. The person pitched upon to play this part was called
Peter Warbeck, the son of a Flemish Jew, a youth of a beautiful person, good
understanding, and possessing something in his carriage and manner far above
his birth or circumstances. The King of France, ever attentive to sow the seeds
of division in England, received him at his court, and gave him proper
encouragement; but, at the intercession of Henry, dismissed him, upon the
prospect of a peace. Having quitted France, Perkin went to seek protection from
the Duchess of Burgundy, taking the greatest care to conceal his former
acquaintance. At their first meeting, the Duchess pretended much displeasure at
his assurance, in assuming the title of her nephew; but soon after, as if
brought over by conviction, she owned him for the Duke of York, and gave him a
guard suitable to that dignity. The English, ever ready to revolt, gave credit
to this new imposture, and the young man's prudence, conversation, and
deportment, served to confirm what their credulity had began. All that were
disgusted with the King prepared to join him, but particularly those that were
formerly Henry's favorites, and had contributed to place him on the throne,
thinking their services could never be sufficiently repaid, were now the chief
heads of the conspiracy. These were joined by numbers, some greedy of novelty,
some blindly attached to their leaders, and some induced, by their desperate
fortunes, to wish for a change.

Whilst the King's enemies were thus combining to involve the kingdom in its
former calamities, he himself was no less intent upon preventing the impending
danger. He endeavored to undeceive the people, first by showing that the Duke
of York was really dead, and by punishing his murderers; and next by tracing
Perkin, the impostor, to his primitive meanness: the last of these projects was
not easily executed, for Warbeck's parents and place of abode were so well
concealed, that it was almost impossible to come to a knowledge of them But
Henry, at length, won over Sir Robert Clifford, who was then accompanying the
impostor in Flanders, and had been entrusted with his and the Duchess's
secrets. From Clifford the King learned, not only their designs, but the names
of the conspirators, and had several of them arrested: his former lenity,
however, did not exempt him from fresh ingratitude: he found that the Lord High
Chamberlain, brother to the famous Lord Stanley, who had been lately created
Earl of Derby, was among the number of those who now had conspired against him.
Though this nobleman had been loaded with favors, and was even then possessed
of an immense fortune; yet, still dissatisfied, he sought for more, from his
country's calamities. He was therefore arrested by the King's order, and,
confessing his crime, was sentenced to suffer that death he so justly merited.
You have hitherto observed how difficult it was to rule the English at this
time; each province seemed desirous of placing some particular family upon the
throne, and more eagerly took up arms, than willingly disposed themselves to
legal subordination. To mix lenity with justice, upon proper occasions,
required a very nice discernment: Henry showed his judgment in this particular;
whenever a conspirator took up arms against him, from a conscientious adherence
to principle, and from a love of the house of York, he generally found pardon;
but, if the only motive of his conspiring was a love of change, or an illicit
desire to subvert those laws by which he was governed, he was then treated with
more severity.

While Warbeck's adherents were thus disappointed in England, he himself
attempted landing in Kent, but, being beat off from that coast by the
inhabitants, he went from thence to Ireland: finding his hopes frustrated there
also, he went next to try his success in Scotland. Here his fortune began to
mend; James III, who was then King of that country, received him very
favorably, acknowledged (...) pretensions to be just, and soon after gave him,
in marriage, a daughter of the Earl of Huntley, one of the most beautiful and
accomplished ladies of her time. But, not content with these instances of
favor, he was resolved to attempt setting him upon the throne of England: it
was expected, that, upon Perkin's first appearance in that kingdom, all the
friends of the house of York would rise in his favor: upon this ground,
therefore, the King of Scotland entered the country with a strong army, and
proclaimed the young adventurer wherever he went; but, contrary to expectation,
he found none to second his claims; and, thus disappointed, he again retreated
back to Edinburgh, where he continued to reside, till, upon the conclusion of a
treaty of peace between the two kingdoms, he was once more obliged to leave
Scotland, and to seek for a new protector.

Perkin had now, for the space of five years, continued to alarm the King; he
had been acknowledged in France, Flanders, Ireland, and Scotland, as lawful
heir to the British crown, and had made some bold attempts to second his
pretensions. The time, at length, came, that he was to act the same character
in England which he had performed elsewhere with so much success. Some months
before this there had been an insurrection in Cornwall: the inhabitants of that
distant county, upon levying the taxes granted by parliament, resused to
contribute to expenses which were destined for the defense of an opposite part
of the kingdom. Every insurrection now was followed with a project of
dethroning the King; they therefore marched, with one Flammock, a lawyer;
Bodiley, a carrier; and Lord Audley, at their head; directly to London, and
encamped upon Black Heath. The King's forces there surrounded and attacked
them; the battle was bloody, two thousand of these poor deluded wretches were
killed upon the spot, and the rest forced to surrender at discretion. Lord
Audley, and one or two of their ringleaders, were executed; but the rest, to
the number of four thousand, dismissed home again in safety. But this
moderation had not the proper effect upon minds too ignorant for gratitude;
they attributed the King's clemency to fear, and, upon returning home, induced
their friends to believe, that the whole kingdom was ready to rise to vindicate
their quarrel. It was now, therefore, determined to send for Perkin Warbeck,
who was then in Ireland, to put himself at their head: Perkin did not hesitate
to accept their invitation; and, taking upon him the command, chose for his
privy council one Hern, a broken mercer; Skeleton, a tailor; and Astley, a
scrivener. He published a proclamation also against Henry, in which he took the
title of Richard IV; and, having drawn together a body of three thousand men,
attempted to storm the city of Exeter, but without success.

Henry, having received advice of his proceedings, said merrily, that he should
now have the pleasure of visiting a person whom he had long wished to see, and
then took the necessary measures to oppose him. Perkin, on the other hand
seeing that the King was marching to attack him, lost all courage, and, in the
night, took sanctuary in the monastery of Bewley. Soon after, upon promise of a
pardon, he surrendered himself to the King, and was confined in the Tower; but,
escaping from thence, and finding it impracticable to get out of the kingdom,
he again took sanctuary in the monastery of Bethlem. The Prior of this house
gave him up to the King, upon promise of a pardon; and Perkin was now a second
time confined in the Tower: but, plotting, even there, against the King, he and
the Earl of Warwick being convicted of designs to kill the keeper of the Tower,
and so escape, they were both put to death.

There was as yet, in Henry's reign, nothing but plots, treasons,
insurrections, ingratitude, imposture, and punishments. You have seen several
of these somentors of treason brought to justice, yet infinitely greater
numbers pardoned; but there was a wide difference between the punishments of
this, and those arbitrary sentences of the reigns preceding: the courts of
judicature now sat upon every criminal, uninfluenced by the royal authority;
and scarce one person was punished for treason, but such as would, at present,
receive the same rigorous treatment. A King, who can reign without ever
punishing, is happy; but that Monarch must certainly be undone, who, through
fear, or ill-timed lenity, suffers repeated guilt to escape without notice.
When a country becomes quite illicit, punishments then, like the loppings in a
garden, only serve to strengthen the stock, and prepare for a new harvest of
virtues.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVIII.
YOU have hitherto only seen Henry employed in suppressing rebellion, and
bringing the kingdom from a state of anarchy to just subordination: let me now
exhibit that part of his reign in which he most deserves our admiration, and
show him as the friend of peace, and the refined politician. Indeed no man
loved peace more than he, and much of the ill will of his subjects arose from
his attempts to repress their inclination for war. The usual preface to his
treaties was, That, when Christ came into the world, peace was sung; and, when
he went out of the world, peace was bequeathed. He had no ambition to extend
his power, except only by treaties, and by wisdom; by these he rendered himself
much more formidable to his neighbors, than his predecessors had done by their
victories. They were formidable only to their own subjects; Henry was dreaded
by rival Kings.

He all along had two points principally in view, one to depress the nobility
and clergy, and the other to humanize and raise up the populace. From the
ambition of the former, and the blind dependence of the latter, all the
troubles in former reigns arose; every nobleman was possessed of a certain
number of subjects, over whom he had an absolute power, and, upon every
occasion, could influence numbers to join in revolt and disobedience.

He first, therefore, considered, that giving these petty Monarchs a power of
selling their estates, which before they had not a right to do, would greatly
weaken their interest. With this view he got an act passed, in which the
nobility were granted a power of alienating their possessions; a law infinitely
pleasing to the commons, nor was it disagreeable even to the nobility, since
they thus had an immediate resource for supplying the waste of prodigality and
the demands of their creditors. The blow reached their posterity alone, but
they were too ignorant to be sensible of remote sufferings.

His next scheme was to prevent their giving liveries to many hundreds of
dependents, who served, like standing forces, to be ready at the summons of
their lord. By an act passed in his reign, none but menial servants were
permitted to wear a livery, under severe penalties; and this law he took care
to enforce with the utmost rigor. It is told us, by Bacon, that the King, one
day paying a visit to the Earl of Oxford, was entertained, by him with all
possible splendour and magnificence. When the King was ready to depart, he saw
ranged, upon both sides, a great number of men, dressed up in very rich
liveries, apparently to do him honor. The King, surprised at such a number of
domestics, as he thought them, cried out, What, my Lord of Oxford, are all
these fine fellows your menial servants? The Earl, not perceiving the King's
drift, answered, with a smile, that they were only men whom he kept in pay to
do him honor upon such occasions. At this the King started a little, and said,
By my faith, my Lord, I thank you for your good cheer, but I must not suffer to
have the laws broken: my Attorney General must talk with you. The historian
adds, that the King exacted a severe fine for this transgression of the statute.

It has been already observed what a perverted use was made of monasteries, and
other places appropriated to religious worship, by the number of criminals who
took refuge in them. This privilege the clergy assumed as their undoubted
right; and those places of pretended sanctity were become the abode of
murderers, robbers, and conspirators. Witches and necromancers were the only
persons who could not avail themselves of the advantages of the security these
afforded: they whose crimes were only fictitious, were the only people who had
not the benefit of such a retreat. Henry used all his interest with the Pope to
abolish these sanctuaries, but without effect; all that he could procure was,
that, if thieves, murderers, or robbers, registered as sanctuary-men, should
sally out and commit fresh offenses, and retreat again, in such cases they
might be taken out of the sanctuary, and delivered up to justice.

Henry politically pretended the utmost submission to all the Pope's decrees,
and showed the greatest respect to the clergy, but still was guided by them in
no single instance of his conduct. The Pope, at one time, was so far imposed
upon by his seeming attachment to the church, that he even invited him to renew
the crusades for recovering the Holy Land. Henry's answer deserves to be
remembered: He assured his Holiness, that no Prince in Christendom would be
more forward than he to undertake so glorious and necessary an expedition; but,
as his cominions lay very distant from Constantinople, it would be better to
apply to the Kings of France and Spain for their assistance; and that, in the
mean time, he would come to their aid himself, as soon as all the differences
between the Christian Princes were brought to an end. This was, at once, a
polite refusal and an oblique reproach.

Henry had seen the fatal consequences of having favorites, and therefore
resolved to have none; he even excluded, from his privy council, all such as,
by their titles or fortune, might attempt to govern him instead of executing
his intentions. His council was composed of private men, who had learning and
wisdom to advise, but neither influence nor ambition to govern.

But, while he was thus employed in lowering his nobility and clergy, he was
using every art to extend the privileges of the people. In former reigns they
were sure to suffer, on whatever side they fought, if they had the misfortune
to lose the victory: this rendered each party desperate, in cases of civil war;
and this was the cause of such terrible slaughters. He therefore procured the
passing of an act, by which it was established, that no person should be
impeached or attainted for assisting the King for the time being, or, in other
words, him who should be then actually on the throne. This excellent statute
served to repress the desire of civil war, as several would naturally take arms
in defense of that side on which they were certain of losing nothing by a
defeat, and their numbers, would intimidate insurgents.

But his greatest efforts were directed to promote trade and commerce, because
this naturally introduced a spirit of liberty among the people, and disengaged
them from their dependence on the nobility. Before this happy era, all our
towns owed their original to some strong castle in the neighborhood, where
some great lord generally resided; and these also were made use of as prisons
for all sorts of criminals. In this also there was generally a garrison, or a
number of armed men, who depended on the nobleman's bounty for support. The
number of these, of course, drew all the artificers, victuallers, and
shopkeepers, to settle in some place adjacent, in order to furnish the lord
and his attendants with what necessaries they wanted. The farmers also and
husbandmen, in the neighborhood, built their houses there, to be protected
against the numerous gangs of robbers that hid in the woods by day, and
infested the country by night, who were called Robertsmen. Henry, on the other
hand, endeavored to bring the towns from such a neighborhood, by inviting the
inhabitants to a more commercial situation. He attempted to teach them
frugality and payment of debts, the life and soul of industry, by his own
example; and never omitted the rights of commerce in all his treaties with
foreign Princes.

About this time the whole world seemed to improve: Sweden, France, and Spain,
enjoyed excellent Monarchs, who encouraged and protected the rising arts. The
Portuguese had sailed round the Cape of Good Hope, and Columbus had made the
discovery of America. Henry, in imitation of them, gave a patent to some
Bristol and Portuguese merchants to go in quest of new countries. But an
accident gave him a better opportunity of improving commerce, than his most
sanguine hopes could have aspired to: the King of Spain and his Queen, being
upon their return to their own dominions, after the conclusion of a successful
war in Holland, were driven, by a storm, upon the coasts of England. As soon as
Henry had notice of their arrival, he received them both with marks of the
sincerest friendship and respect, meditating, in the mean time, how to make his
subjects reap some advantage from the accident. He therefore treated them with
a splendour which was by no means agreeable to his own nature; and, while he
kept them thus entertained with a round of pageantry and amusements, he
concluded a treaty of commerce, which has, even to this day, continued to be
beneficial to his posterity.

He now, at length, saw his country civilized; the people paid their taxes
without insurrections; the nobility learned a just subordination; the laws
alone were suffered to pass sentence; towns began to separate from the castles
of the nobility; commerce every day increased; foreigners either feared
England, or sought its alliance, and the spirit of faction was happily
extinguished at home. He was at peace with all Europe, and he had issued out a
general pardon to his own subjects. It was in this situation of things that he
died of the gout in his stomach, having lived fifty-two years and reigned
twenty-three. Since the times of Alfred, England had not seen such another
King. He rendered his subjects powerful and happy, and wrought a greater change
in his kingdom, than it was possible to expect could be effected in so short a
time. If he had any fault, it was, that, having begun his reign with economy,
as he grew old, his desires seemed to change their object, from the use of
money, to the pleasure of hoarding it; but we can easily him, as he only saved
for the public, the royal coffers being then the only treasury of the state;
and, in proportion to the King's sinances, the public might be said to be
either rich or indigent.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIX.
NEVER did Prince come to the throne with a conjuncture of so many fortunate
circumstances in his favor as Henry VIII, who now took upon him the government
of the kingdom. His prudent father left him a peaceable kingdom, prudent
ministers, and a well stored treasury. All factions were extinguished, and all
divisions united ^n his person: he by the father's side claimed from the house
of Lancaster, and by the mother's from the house of York. He was at peace with
all Europe, and his subjects were every day growing more powerful and more
wealthy: commerce and arts had been introduced in the former reign, and they
seemed to find in England a favorable reception. The young King himself was
beautiful in person, expert in polite exercises, and loved by his subjects. The
old King, who was himself a scholar, had him instructed in all the learning of
the times, so that he was perfectly versed in school divinity at the age of
eighteen.

Yet, from this beginning, you must not expect to read the history of a good
Prince. All these advantages were either the gifts of nature, of fortune, or of
his father; with all these happy talents, Henry VIII. wanted the two great
requisites in forming every good character; wisdom and virtue. The learning he
had, if it might be called by that name, served only to inflame his pride, but
not control his vicious affections. The love of his subjects was testified by
their adulations, and served as another meteor to lead him astray. His vast
wealth, instead of relieving his subjects, or increasing his power, only
contributed to supply his debaucheries, or gratify the rapacity of the
ministers of his pleasures. But happy for him, had his faults rested here: he
was a tyrant; humanity takes the alarm at his cruelty, and, whatever fortunate
events might have been the consequence of his designs, no good man but must
revolt at the means he took for their accomplishment.

The first act of injustice which marked his reign, was his prosecution of
Empson and Dudley, the Judges whom his father had constituted to inquire into
cases of treason, and levy fines proportionable to the offense. Their conduct
was examined, but, nothing being found against them that could amount to a
capital conviction, a false accusation was produced, and they were convicted of
having plotted against the new King, and received sentence to be beheaded,
which was executed accordingly.

These two Judges had been long hated by the people, though apparently without
cause; they only put the laws in execution against criminals, and, instead of
their lives, deprived the guilty of their fortunes. This action of an unjust
compliance with popular clamor was followed by another still more detrimental
to the nation, yet more pleasing to the people: the spirit of chivalry and
conquest was not yet quite extinguished in the nation; France was still an
object of desire, and Henry was resolved once more to strike (...) the crown.
It was in vain that one of his old prudent counselors objected, that conquests
on the continent would only be prejudicial to the kingdom, and that England,
from its situation, was not destined for extensive empire; the young King, deaf
to all remonstrances, and perhaps inspired by the voice of the people, resolved
to lead an army into that kingdom. The consequence of the campaign was an
useless victory and an empty triumph. The French fled without fighting; a truce
was concluded between the two Kings, and Henry returned home to dissipate, in
more peaceful follies, the large sums which had been amassed for very different
purposes by his father.

But, while he thus changed from one pleasure to another, it was requisite to
find out a minister and favorite, who would take care of the kingdom.
Indifferent Princes ever attempt to rule, and are ruled by favorites, and soon
a proper person was found to answer the King's intentions in this particular:
the man I mean was the famous Cardinal Wolsey; and, as a great part of this
reign was ruled by him, his history may, with propriety, make a part in that of
his master. Thomas Wolsey was the son of a private gentleman (and not of a
butcher, as is commonly reported) in Ipswich: he was sent to Oxford so early,
that he was a bachelor at fourteen, and from that time called the boy bachelor.
He rose, by degrees, upon quitting college, from one preferment to another,
till he was made rector of Lymington by the Marquis of Dorset, whose children
he had instructed. He had not long resided (...) this living, when one of the
justices of the peace put him in the stocks, for being drunk and raising
disturbances in a neighboring ^air. This disgrace, however, did not retard his
promotion; he rose, by degrees, till he was, at last, entrusted with
negotiating an intended marriage between Henry VII. and Margaret of Savoy. His
dispatch, upon that occasion, procured him the deanery of Lincoln; and in this
situation it was that Henry VIII. pitched upon him as a favorite, and
entrusted him with the administration of affairs. Presently after his being
introduced at court he was made a Privy Counselor, and, as such, had an
opportunity of ingratiating himself with the King, who found him at once
submissive and enterprizing. Wolsey sung, laughed, danced, with every libertine
of the court; and his house was the scene of all the King's criminal pleasures
and amors. To such a weak and vicious Monarch as Henry, qualities of this
nature were highly pleasing, and Wolsey was made his Prime Minister, and
managed the whole kingdom at his pleasure. The people saw, with indignation,
the new favourite's mean condescensions to the King, and his arrogance to
themselves. They had long regarded the vicious insolence and unbecoming
splendour of the clergy with envy and detestation, and Wolsey's greatness served
to bring a new odium upon that body, already too much the object of the
people's dislike.

Wolsey had some talents as a minister, but his failings outbalanced them,
being excessively revengeful, ambitious, and intolerably proud. Among other
instances of his ambition, he aspired at the Popedom. Ferdinand, who was then
Emperor of Germany, promised him his interest to procure it, and this
consequently attached the English minister more closely to the Emperor: this
Monarch was then at war with France, and each power solicited the alliance of
England. It was the interest of the English calmly to look on as spectators of
the quarrel, and suffer its rivals in power to grow weak by their mutual
animosity: Wolsey, however, preferring his own interest to that of his country
or his master, engaged in a league against France. Soon after, however, the
Pope dying, and the Emperor failing in his promise, Wolsey, in revenge, induced
his master to change sides, and assist France against Ferdinand.

A victory over the Scots, rather ostentatious than useful, served, in some
measure, to repress the discontents of the people during this
mal-administration of the ecclesiastical favorite: this victory was obtained
by the Earl of Surrey over James IV. of Scotland; it was fought at Flodden
Field, and the Scots lost, upon this occasion, the flower of their nobility and
gentry, and James, their King, was slain in batttle.

Success ever serves to stop the murmurings of the English, and no nation can
better endure to be splendidly miserable. Wolsey now became a Cardinal, grew
every day more powerful, and more desirous of power; the Pope was sensible of
his influence over the King, and therefore created him his legate in England.
The Pontiff's design was to make him thus instrumental in draining the kingdom
of money, upon pretense of employing it in a war against the Turks, but, in
reality, to fill his own coffers. In this he so well served the court of Rome,
that he, some time after, made him legate for life: he was now, therefore, at
once a Legate, a Cardinal, a Bishop, a Prime Minister, and possessed of
numberless church benefices; yet, still unsatisfied, he desired greater
promotions. He therefore procured a bull from the Pope, impowering him to make
Knights and Counts, to legitimate bastards, to give degrees in arts, law,
physic, and divinity, and grant all sorts of dispensations. So much pride and
power could not avoid giving high offense to the nobility, yet none dared to
vent their indignation, so greatly were they in terror of his vindictive
temper. The Duke of Buckingham, son of him who lost his life in the reign of
Richard III, was the only person who had resolution enough to complain. His
threats were soon conveyed to Wolsey by an informer, who was not slow to accuse
the Duke of high treason. The substance of his impeachment was, that he had
consulted a fortune tellers concerning his succession to the crown, and had
affected to make himself popular. This was but a weak pretext to take away the
life of a nobleman, whose father had died in defense of the late King: however,
he was condemned to die as a traitor. When the sentence was pronouncing against
him, and the High Steward came to mention the word traitor, the unhappy
prisoner could no longer contain: My Lords, cried he to his Judges, I am no
traitor; and, for what you have now done against me, take my sincere
forgiveness; as for my life, I think it not worth petitioning for; may God
forgive you, and pity me. He was soon after executed on Tower Hill.

Every just man must feel the highest indignation at so unmerited a punishment.
In the former reign, the few that perished under the hand of the executioner
were really culpable; but here we see a nobleman's life taken away, only for
his dislike to an aspiring and licentious upstart. It is this cruelty of
punishing without guilt, and not the number of executions in a reign, that
distinguishes it into tyrannical or merciful: perhaps there were more
executions under Henry VII, than his successor; and yet the first was a just
and merciful Prince, the latter an arbitrary and merciless tyrant.

By this time all the immense treasures of the late King were quite exhausted
on empty pageants, guilty pleasures, or vain treaties and expeditions. Wolsey
was a proper instrument to supply the King with money, which now began to be
wanted; this he extorted by the name of a benevolence: Henry minded not by what
methods it was raised, provided he had but the enjoyment of it. However, his
minister met some opposition in his attempts to levy those involuntary
contributions: having exacted a considerable subsidy from the clergy, he next
addressed himself to the House of Commons, but they only granted half the
supplies he demanded. The Cardinal was highly offended at their parsimony, and
desired to be heard in the house; but, as this would have destroyed the very
form and constitution of that august body, they replied, that none could be
admitted to reason there but such as were members. This was the first attempt
made, in the present reign, to render the King master of the debates in
parliament; Wolsey first paved the way, and, unfortunately for the kingdom, the
King too well improved upon his design.

Wolsey was, soon after, raised to still greater dignities than before: he was,
at once, Archbishop of York, Bishop of Durham, Abbot of St. Alban's, a
Cardinal, Legate for life, Lord Chancellor of England, Prime Minister, and
favorite, and caressed or feared by all the powers of Europe: he now,
therefore, undertook more openly to render the King independent of his
parliament, and levied the subsidy granted by them for four years, and
consequently to be paid at four different times, all at once. Against this the
poor, who were the greatest sufferers, most loudly exclaimed; but he
disregarded their clamours, secure in the King's approbation and the Pope's
protection.

These proceedings only paved the way to still greater extortions: Wolsey was
too haughty to be refused in his demands by the House of Commons, and
determined to levy money upon the King's authority alone. This was deemed a
breach of the Magna Charta, and the people absolutely refused to comply, even a
general rebellion threatened to ensue: the King, finding what were likely to be
the consequences of the Cardinal's precipitate measures, pretended that they
were carried on without his authority; but, at the same time, demanded from the
people a benevolence, which was only an artifice to extort money, under a
different name. The people seemed sensible of the King's art, and the citizens
of London refused to give the benevolence demanded: their example was followed
by the country, and an universal defection seemed to prevail. The King,
apprehensive of bad consequences, by persisting in his demand, thought proper
to retract, for this time, and wait a more favorable opportunity of oppression.

You now find the people laboring under a very different form of oppression
from that in the reigns preceding Henry VII. In those earlier times their
miseries chiefly arose from the licentiousness of the nobility; in this reign
they proceeded from the usurpations of the King. Before Henry VII. had balanced
the government, the people often discharged their taxes by an insurrection; but
now, that the present Henry had destroyed that balance again, the people were
obliged to pay taxes that were not due. In short, they now seemed as miserable
as when their great restorer had brought them from anarchy: an arbitrary King,
an avaricious Pope, a revengeful favorite, a luxurious clergy, all conspired
to harrass them: yet, during this whole reign, there was no rebellion; not from
the justice of the King's administration, nor from the love the people had to
their Sovereign; but, happily for the reigning tyrant, he enjoyed the effects
of his predecessor's prudence, not his own.

LETTER XXX.
AS, in a family, the faults and the impertinence of servants are often to be
ascribed to their masters; so, in a state, the vices and the in^ence of
favorites should justly be attributed to the King who employs them. The pride
of Wolsey was great, but his riches were still greater; a^ in ord^r to have a
pretext for amassing such sums, he undertook to found two new colleges at
Oxford, for which he received every day fresh grants from the Pope and the
King. To execute his scheme he obtained a liberty of suppressing several
monasteries, and converting their funds to the benefit of his intended scheme.
Whatever might have been the Pope's inducement to grant him these privileges,
nothing could be more fatal to the Pontiff's interests; for Henry was thus
himself taught to imitate afterward what he had seen a subject perform without
crime or danger.

Hitherto the administration of affairs was carried on by Wolsey alone; as for
the King, he lost in the embraces of his mistresses all the complaints of the
nation, and the Cardinal undertook to keep him ignorant, in ^rder to maintain
his own authority. But now a period approached that was to put an end to this
minister's exorbitant power: one of the most extraordinary and important
revolutions that ever employed the attention of man, was now ripe for
execution. But, to have a clear idea of this grand reformation, it will be
proper to take a cursory view of the state of the church at that time, and
observe by what seemingly contradictory means Providence produces the happiest
events.

The church of Rome had now, for more than a thousand years, been corrupting
the sacred doctrines of Christianity, and converting into a temporality the
kingdom of another world. The Popes were frequently found at the head of their
own armies, fighting for their dominions with the arm of flesh, and forgetting,
in cruelty and immoral politics, all the pretended sanctity of their character.
They drained other kingdoms of their treasures upon the most infamous pretexts,
and were proud of setting at Rome, in their own conduct, an example of refined
pleasure and studied luxury. The cardinals, prelates, and dignitaries of the
church lived and were served like voluptuous Princes, and some of them were
found to possess eight or nine bishoprics at a time. Wherever the church
governs, it exerts its power with cruelty; and to their luxury these great ones
added the crime of being tyrants too.

As for the inferior clergy, both Popish and Protestant writers exclaim against
their dissolute and abandoned morals. They publicly kept mistresses, and
bequeathed to their bastards whatever they were able to save from their
pleasures, or extort from the poor. There is still to be seen, says a fine
writer, a will made by a Bishop of Cambray, in which he sets aside a certain
sum for the bastards he has had already, and those which, by the blessing of
God, be may yet happen to have. In many parts of England and Germany the people
obliged the priests to have concubines, so that the laity might keep their
wives in greater security; while the poor laborious peasant and artizan saw all
the fruits of their toil go, not to clothe and maintain their own little
families, but to pamper men who insulted and despised them.

But the vices of the clergy were not greater than their ignorance; few of them
knew the meaning of their own Latin mass; they were chiefly employed in finding
out witches, and exorcising the possessed: but, what most increased the hatred
of the people against them, was the selling pardons and absolutions for sin at
certain stated prices. A deacon, or subdeacon, who should commit murder, was
absolved from his crime, and allowed to possess three benefices, upon paying
twenty crowns. A Bishop or an Abbot might commit murder for ten pounds. Every
crime had its stated price, and absolutions were given, not only for sins
already committed, but for such as should be committed hereafter. The wisest of
the people looked with silent detestation on these impositions, and the
ignorant, whom nature seemed to have formed for slavery, began to open their
eyes to such glaring absurdities.

There arose, at last, a champion to rescue human nature from its degeneracy.
This was the famous Martin Luther. Leo X, being employed in building the church
of St. Peter's at Rome, in the year 1519, in order to procure money for
carrying on this project, he gave a commission for selling indulgences, or, in
other words, a deliverance from the pains of purgatory, either for one's self
or their friends. There were everywhere shops opened, where these were sold;
but, in general, they were to be had at taverns and suchlike places. These
indulgences were granted to the Dominican friars to be distributed by them,
whereas the Augustine friars had been in possesson of the distribution of them
time out of mind before. Martin Luther was an Augustine Monk, and one of those
who resented this transferring the sale of indulgences to another order. He
began to show his indignation, by preaching against their efficacy: opposition
soon drove him farther than he at first intended to go, and, now the veil was
lifted, he proceeded to examine the authority of the Pope himself. The people,
who had long groaned under the Papal tyranny, heard his discourses with
pleasure, and defended him against the authority and machinations of the church
of Rome. Frederic, Elector of Saxony, surnamed the Wise, openly protected him.
Luther as openly declaimed against the number of sacraments, reducing the seven
held by the church of Rome, first to three, and afterward to two: from thence
he proceeded to examine the doctrine of transubstantiation, to show the folly
of supposing a purgatory, and the dangerous consequence of celibacy among the
clergy.

The Pope issued out his bulls against Luther, and the Dominican friars
procured his books to be burned. Luther abused the Dominicans, and boldly, in
the streets of Wirtemberg, burned the bull of the Pope. In the mean time the
dispute was carried on by writings on either side: Luther, though opposed by
the Pope, the Cardinals, and all the body of the clergy, supported his cause
singly and with success. If indeed we look into his works at this day, we shall
find them trifling and unsatisfactory enough; but then he had only ignorance to
contend with, and, ill as he wrote, they answered still worse. Opinions are
inculcated upon the minds of the public; rather by fortitude and perseverance
than by strength of reasoning or beauty of thought, and no man had more
fortitude and more perseverance than he.

In this dispute it was the fate of Henry VIII. to be one of the champions. His
father, who had given him the education of a scholar, permitted him to be
instructed in school divinity, which then composed the learning of the times.
He was, therefore, willing to give the world a demonstration of his abilities
in this respect, and desired the Pope's permission to read the works of Luther,
which had been forbidden to be read under pain of excommunication. Having
readily obtained this request, the King, from St. Thomas Aquinas, defended the
seven sacraments, and showed some skill in school divinity, though it is thought
that Wolsey had the chief hand in directing him. A book being thus finished in
haste, it was sent to Rome for the Pope's approbation: the Pope, ravished with
its eloquence and depth, compared the work to that of St. Augustine or St.
Jerome, and gave Henry the title of Defender of the Faith, little suspecting
that Henry was soon going to be one of the most terrible enemies that ever the
church of Rome had yet experienced

Besides these causes which contributed to render the Romish church odious or
contemptible, there were still others proceeding from political motives.
Clement V^I. had succeeded Leo, and, the hereditary animosity between the
Emperor and the Pope breaking out into (...), Clement was taken prisoner in the
castle of St. Angelo, and, with thirteen Ca^inals beside, kept in custody for
his ransom. As the demands of the Emperor were exorbitant, Henry undertook to
negotiate for the Pope, and procured a ^reaty in his favor; but his Holiness,
in the mean time, corrupting his guards, had the good fortune to escape from
confinement, and left the treaty unfinished, but sent H^ a letter of thanks for
his mediation. The conduct of the Emperor showed Henry that the Pope might be
injured with impunity; and the behavior of the Pope manifested but little of
that sanctity or infallibility to which the Pontiffs pretended. Besides, as he
had obliged the Pope, he supposed that he might, upon any emergency, expect a
return of favor.

It was in this situation of the church and of the Pope, that a new drama was
going to be performed, which was to change the whole system of Europe. Henry
had now been married eighteen years to Catharine of Arragon, who had been
brought over from Spain to marry his elder brother, Prince Arthur, who died
some months after his co-habitation with her: Henry had three children by this
lady, one of whom was still living, while she herself was esteemed for her
virtue and the gentleness of her disposition. The King, though he felt no real
passion, either for the qualifications of her mind or person, yet for a long
time broke out into no flagrant contempt; he ranged from beauty to beauty in
the court, and his title and authority always procured him a ready compliance
from female frailty. It happened, at length, that among the maids of honor
that then attended the Queen, was one Anna Bullen, the daughter of a gentleman
of distinction, though not of the nobility. Her beauty surpassed what had
hitherto appeared at this voluptuous court; her features were regular, mild,
and attractive; her stature elegant, though below the middle size; while her
wit and vivacity even exceeded the allurements of her person. The King, who
never restrained one passion which he desired to gratify, saw, and loved her;
but, after several efforts to induce her to comply with his criminal passion,
he found that without marriage he could have no hopes of succeeding. This
obstacle, therefore, he quickly undertook to remove; his own Queen was now
become hateful to him, and, in order to procure a divorce, he pretended that
his conscience rebuked him, for having so long lived in incest with his present
Queen, formerly his brother's wife. This every person of candor saw was only a
pretext to cover his real motive; he himself had eagerly solicited the match
with Queen Catharine; he had lived with her eighteen years without any scruple,
and had the Pope's license for this cohabitation; but he asserted, that a
wounded conscience was his motive, and none of his subjects offered to divulge
the real one.

In this perplexity, therefore, he applied to Clement VII, who owed him
obligations, and from whom he expected a ready compliance, to dissolve the bull
of the former Pope, who had given him permission to marry Catharine, and to
declare that it was contrary to all laws, both divine and human. Clement was
now in the utmost perplexity, Queen Catharine was aunt to the Emperor who had
lately made him a prisoner, and whose resentment he dreaded to rekindle, by
thus injuring so near a relation; beside, he could not, in honor, declare the
bull of a former Pope illicit, for this would be entirely destroying papal
infallibility. On the other hand, Henry was his protector and friend; the
dominions of England were the chief resource of his finances, and the King of
France, some time before, had got a bull of divorce in somewhat similar
circumstances. In this exigence he thought the best method was to spin out the
affair by a negotiation; and thus he argued, temporized, promised, recanted,
and disputed, hoping that the King's passion would never hold out during the
tedious course of an ecclesiastical controversy. In this he was mistaken; Henry
had been taught to argue as well as he, and quickly found, or wrested, many
texts of scripture to favor his opinions and his passion. To his arguments he
added threats, which probably had greater influence: the Pope was assured that
the English were already but too much disposed to withdraw their obedience from
the Holy See, and that, if he continued to refuse, the whole country would
readily follow their Monarch's example, and exclude themselves from his
protection. The King even proposed to his Holiness, whether, if he was denied
the putting away his present Queen, he might not have a dispensation to marry
two wives at a time? The Pope, though his measures were already taken not to
grant the bull, yet still seemed unresolved, as if waiting for more full and
authentic information.

During these solicitations, on which Henry's happiness seemed to depend, he
expected, in his favorite Wolsey, a warm defender and a steady adherent; but,
in this, he was deceived. Wolsey seemed to be in pretty much such a dilemma as
the Pope himself. On the one hand he was to please his master the King, from
whom he had received a thousand marks of favor: on the other hand he could not
disoblige the Pope, whose servant he more immediately was, and who had power to
punish his disobedience: in this dilemma he chose to stand neuter; though, of
all mankind, he was most haughty, on this occasion he gave way in all things,
to his colleague Cardinal Campegio, sent by the Pope from Italy. Wolsey's
method of temporizing highly disgusted the King, yet he endeavored to conceal
his resentment: he now only looked out for some man of equal abilities and less
art, and it was not long till accident threw in his way one Thomas Cranmer, of
greater abilities than the former, and rather more integrity. Cranmer was a
Doctor of Divinity and a Professor at Cambridge, but had lost his place upon
marrying contrary to the institutes of the canon law, which enjoined him
celibacy. He had traveled into Germany, where he read Luther's works, and
embraced his doctrine; and, upon his return, was tutor to the sons of a
gentleman, who one night happened to entertain two of the principal men of the
court: Cranmer, being asked his opinion of the King's divorce, which was then
the topic of the conversation, delivered himself in so learned a manner, that
the King was soon informed of his abilities, and ordered him to follow the
court.

The King's resentment now appeared more openly against the Cardinal. The
Attorney General was ordered to prepare a bill of indictment against him, and
soon after he himself was orderdered to resign the great seal. Crimes are
readily found against a man when he is hated, and the Cardinal was sentenced to
be excluded from the protection of the laws. As soon as he was outlawed, the
King commanded him to retire to a country house, and directed that an inventory
of his goods should be taken, which contained immense riches, acquired by
various methods of guilt and extortion: of fine holland alone there were found
in his house a thousand pieces, which may serve to give an idea of the rest of
his wealth. The parliament confirmed the sentence of the courts, and he was
sent an exile to his country seat, there to await the King's disposal of his
person, with all the fluctuations of hope and apprehension. Still, however, he
was left the archbishopric of York, and, even shattered as his fortunes were,
he was resolved to perform the ceremony of his instalment there with a
magnificence little suitable to his present condition: but, while he was
preparing to enjoy, in this retreat, those splendors which he ever loved, by
another unexpected revolution, he was at the King's command arrested by the
Earl of Northumberland for high treason. He at first refused to comply, as
being a Cardinal; but, finding the Earl bent upon performing his commission, he
complied, and set out, by easy journies, for London, to appear as a criminal in
a place where he formerly acted as a King. In his way he stayed a fortnight at
the Earl of Shrewsbury's, where one day at dinner he was taken ill, not without
violent suspicions of having poisoned himself: being brought forward from
thence, with much difficulty he reached Leicester abbey, where, the Monks
coming out to receive him, he said, Father Abbot, I am come to lay my bones
among you: as his disorder increased, an officer being placed near his bedside
at once to guard and attend him, he cried out to him, O, if I had served my God
as I have served my King, he would not thus have forsaken me in adversity. He
died soon after, in all the pangs of repentance and remorse, and left a life
which he had all along rendered turbid by ambition, till he found that all his
ambition was but vanity at the last. He left two natural children behind him,
one of whom being a priest, was loaded with church preferments. Henry, being
thus freed from a person whom he considered as an obstacle to his intentions,
by the advice of Cranmer had the legality of his present marriage canvassed in
the different universities of Europe. It was very extraordinary to see the King
on one side soliciting the universities to be favorable to his passion, and on
the other the Emperor pressing them to incline to his aunt: Henry liberally
rewarded those Doctors who declared in his favor, and the Emperor granted
benefices to such as voted on his side of the debate. Time has discovered these
intrigues; in one of Henry's account-books we find the disbursements he made
upon these occasions; to a deacon he gave a crown, to a subdeacon two crowns,
and so of the rest, to each in proportion to his consequence. The person who
bribed on these occasions, however, excused himself by declaring, that he never
paid the money till after the vote was given. Henry at length prevailed; his
liberalities were greater than those of his rival, as he was most interested in
the success of the debate: all the colleges of Italy and France unanimously
declared his present marriage against all law, divine and human, and that
therefore it was not at first in the power of the Pope to grant a dispensation.
The only places where it was most warmly opposed, were at Cambridge and Oxford;
these universities, it seems, had, even then, more freedom and integrity than
were to be found elsewhere, but at last they also concurred in the same
opinion.

The agents of Henry were not content with the suffrages of the universities;
the opinions of the Rabbi's were also demanded; but they were easily bought up
in his favor. Thus fortified, the King was resolved to oppose even the Pope
himself, for his passion by no means could brook the delays and subterfuges of
the Holy See: being, therefore, supported by his clergy, and authorized by the
universities; having seen the Pope formerly degraded by a lay Monarch, and
Luther's doctrine followed by thousands; and yet, still further instigated by
the King of France, he, without further dispensation, annulled his marriage
with Queen Catharine, and Cranmer, now become an Archbishop, pronounced the
decree.

The Queen, during this contest, always supported her rights with resolution,
and yet with modesty: at length, however, having found the inutility of further
resistance, she retired to the country, without once offering to complain: she
saw the power of her rival, and yielded without murmuring. Anna Bullen had
already consented to marry the King, and even shared his bed two months before
his marriage with Catharine was dissolved. Though her prudence and her virtue
demanded esteem in the former parts of her conduct, yet she now for a moment
forgot the ties of each, and gave a loose to her triumph. She passed through
London with a magnificence greater than had ever been known before; the streets
were strewed, the walls were hung, the conduits ran with wine, while she and
her corpulent lover rode through the city like the heroine and knight of a
romance.

In the mean time the Pope now thought himself obliged to hold no measures with
the King; and, being also frighted by the menaces of the Emperor, published a
sentence, declaring Queen Catharine alone to be Henry's lawful wife, and
requiring him to take her again, with a denunciation of censures in case of a
refusal. When Henry received news of the sentence given against him at Rome, he
was convinced that no measures could be kept with the Holy See, and therefore
no longer delayed to execute his long meditated scheme of separating entirely
from the church of Rome. The parliament was at his devotion; a part of the
clergy was for him, as they had already declared against the Pope, when they
decreed in favor of the divorce; the people were flattered with the
expectation of being rid of the burden of their taxes; and such as were
displeased to see Italian Bishops hold English church preferments, expected
their downfall: in short, all things conspired to cooperate with his designs;
he, therefore, at once ordered himself to be declared, by his clergy, head of
the church. The parliament confirmed his title, and abolished all the authority
of the Pope in England, the tribute of Peter Pence, and the collation to
ecclesiastical benefices. The people came into the King's project with joy, and
took an oath, called the oath of supremacy; all the credit of the Pope, that
had subsisted for ages, was now at once overthrown, and few, except those who
held to the religious houses, seemed dissatisfied. They who believed that it
would have been dangerous to break with the Pope, were now convinced that it
could be effected with impunity; and it was soon perceived, that all authority,
which is not supported by power, is nothing but an empty name.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXI.
IN this manner began the reformation in England, and by such surprising
methods Providence brought about its designs, as if to mock human sagacity. Let
us now pursue its progress, and follow this capricious Monarch through his
various projects, cruelties, and inconsistencies. The parliament were now
entirely dependant upon the King; they had, from the beginning, sided with him
in his separating from the church of Rome, and consequently were now obliged to
comply with all his other measures, in order to strengthen the new reformation.

Henry was very sensible that the parliament was now, even from motives of
interest, entirely dedevoted to him, and therefore he was resolved to make use
of the opportunity, and render himself absolute. He therefore opposed the
parliament against the monks, and availed himself of the hatred which that body
incurred by their suppression: the parliament at first began by examining the
abuses practiced in monasteries, and, finding some, condemned all: but, while
they were employed in suppressing them, Henry was busy in destroying the power
of the suppressors. This was the origin of the unlimitted power he now assumed;
his parliament, at different times, passed every statute he thought proper to
propose, how absurd soever; and many of them were, in fact, marked with the
highest absurdities. They testified their satisfaction, not only for what he
had done, but also for whatever he intended to do. They enacted, that the same
obedience should be paid to the King's proclamation as to an act of parliament,
which was destroying all their power at one blow; they declared their readiness
to believe, not only what had been directed, but whatever the King should
direct, in matters of religion, for the future: but, to crown all, they enacted
that the King should not pay his debts, and that such as had been paid by him,
should refund the money.

Being thus empowered to act as he thought proper, he went vigorously to work
in the suppression of monasteries, colleges, and religious houses. Cambridge
and Oxford, without any regard to their antiquity, shared the same fate with
the rest, and the lectures were, for a time, discontinued, and the revenues
confiscated. To reconcile the people to these proceedings, Henry took care to
have the counterseit relics exposed, the scandalous lives of the friars and
nuns made public, and all their debaucheries detected. Whatever had served to
engage the people in superstition, was publicly burnt; but what grieved the
people most to see, were, the bones of Thomas Becket, the saint of Canterbury,
treated with the same severity, burnt in public, and his rich shrine, in which
there was a diamond of great value, confiscated among the common plunder. The
people looked on with silent horror, afraid to rebel, equally detesting the
vices of the monks and the impiety of the King.

But, while the King had entirely separated himself from Rome, yet he was by no
means willing to be a follower of Luther. The invocation of saints was not yet
abolished by him, but only restrained: he ordered the Bible to be translated
into the vulgar tongue, but not put into the hands of the laity. It was a
capital crime to believe in the Pope's supremacy, and yet equally heinous to be
of the reformed religion, as practiced in Germany. His opinions upon religion
were delivered in a law, which, from its horrid consequences, was termed the
Bloody Statute; by which it was ordained, that whoever, by word or writing,
denied transubstantiation, that whoever maintained the communion in both kinds
was necessary, or that it was lawful for priests to marry, or that vows of
chastity could innocently be broken, or that private masses were unprofitable,
or that auricular confession was unnecessary, should be burnt or hanged as the
court should determine.

The kingdom, at that time, was in some measure divided between the followers
of Luther and the adherents to the Pope; this statute, with his former decrees,
in some measure excluded both, and therefore opened a wide field for
persecution.

These persecutions, however, were preceded by one of a different nature,
arising neither from religious nor political causes, but tyrannical caprice.
Anna Bullen, his Queen, was herself of the Lutheran persuasion, and had
secretly favored that party: these attachments soon created her enemies, who
only waited some favorable occasion to destory her credit with the King, and
that occasion presented itself but too soon. The King's passion was, by this
time, quite exhausted; the only desire he ever had for her was that brutal
appetite which enjoyment soon destroys; he was fallen in love, once more, if we
may call it love, with Jane Seymour, a maid of honor to the Queen.

As soon as the Queen's enemies perceived the King's disgust, they soon gave
him an opportunity to gratify his inclinations, by accusing her of sundry
intrigues with her domestics; which accusation was eagerly caught up by the
King. All his passions were in extreme; he immediately flew to parliament, and
had her accused of adultery and incest with her own brother. This parliament,
who had long shown themselves the timid ministers of all his passions,
condemned the Queen and her brother, without ever knowing on what foundation
the sentence was grounded.

Her brother, Lord Rochfort, was beheaded, though there was not the least proof
of his guilt: one Norris and Brereton were hanged for only having paid her such
compliments, as would now merdy pass for gallantry and innocent amusement:
Smeton, a musician, was compelled to acknowledge his having received favors
from her, and he was then hanged without an opportunity of being confronted by
the Queen.

Upon such slight suspicions was this unhappy Queen sent to the Tower, in order
to await the execution of her sentence. She who had been once the envied object
of royal favor, was now going to give a new instance of the capriciousness of
fortune: she was ever of a cheerful disposition, and her easy levities perhaps
disgusted the gloomy tyrant. She had distributed, in the last year of her life,
not less than fifteen thousand pounds among the poor, and was at once their
protector and darling. Upon being conducted to her prison, she sat down to
address the King, by letter, for mercy: in this she insisted upon her innocence
in the strongest terms: You have raised me, said she, from privacy to make me a
lady; from a lady you made me a Countess, from a Countess a Queen, and from a
Queen I shall shortly become a saint. On the morning of her execution she sent
for Mr. Kingston, the keeper of the Tower, to whom, upon entering her prison,
she said, Mr. Kingston, I hear I am not to die till noon, and I am sorry for
it, for I thought to be dead before this time, and free from a life of pain.
The keeper attempting to comfort her by assuring her the pain would be very
little, she replied, I have heard the executioner is very expert; and, clasping
her neck with her hands, laughing, and I have but a little neck. Kingston, who
gives this account, continues to observe, that he had seen many men and women
executed, but never one whose fortitude was equal to here is. She was beheaded
soon after, behaving with the utmost decency and resolution.

Anna Bullen seemed to be guilty of no other crime than that of having survived
the King's affection: many crowned heads had already been put to death in
England, but this was the first royal execution upon a scaffold. Henry ordered
his parliament to give him a divorce, between her sentence and execution, thus
to bastardize Elizabeth, the only child he had by her, as he had already
bastardized Mary, his only child by Queen Catharine.

The very next day after her execution he married Jane Seymour, who died the
year following, after having been delivered of a son.

In the mean time the fires of Smithfield began to blaze: those who adhered to
the Pope, or they who followed Luther, were equally the objects of royal
vengeance and ecclesiastical persecution. Thomas Cromwell, raised by the King's
caprice from a blacksmith's son to be a royal favorite (for tyrants ever raise
their favorites from the lowest of the people) and Cranmer, now become
Archbishop of Cauterbury, with all their might, assisted the reformation.
Bishop Gardener and the Duke of Norfolk, on the other hand, were for leading
the King back to his former superstitions, with every art; and Cromwell fell a
sacrifice to their intrigues, but the Duke and Bishop did not succeed.
Unhappily for his subjects, the King became an equal persecutor of the two
religions proposed for his acceptance.

It was now that England saw a spectacle to strike the boldest with horror; a
company of people condemned and executed all together, some for being steadfast
to the Pope, and others for adhering to Luther: among this number were Dr.
Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerard, and William Jerome, for being Lutherans; Buttolph,
Danepliss, Philpot, and Brinholm, for continuing to acknowledge the Pope. These
were all burnt together, without ever being permitted to plead their own cause,
or even to know their crimes or their accusers. The people in the North,
indeed, during these times of cruelty, ventured to rise in rebellion, but by
the means of the Duke of Norfolk they were soon brought to a submission.

During these transactions Henry contracted a new marriage with Anne of Cleves,
being induced by her picture, in which it seems the painter had flattered her.
He found her very different from what his passion had expected, but married her
from political motives. He could not, however, long bear the uneasiness of
being married for life to a woman, whose corpulence, it seems, gave him
disgust: he therefore resolved to have once more a divorce from his parliament,
which he found it no difficult matter to obtain. Among other reasons to cancel
his espousals, he declared, that he had not given an inward consent to the
marriage, without which it was affirmed that his promises could not be
obligatory: he added, that, as he was resolved not to consummate the marriage,
and to have legitimate issue, so it was proper to give him a Queen by whom he
might accomplish these intentions. These reasons were thought good; virtue and
justice had been long banished from the servile parliament.

He took, for a fifth wife, Catharine Howard, the Duke of Norfolk's niece: in
this match he seemed to be perfectly happy, and even ordered his confessor to
draw up a particular form of thanksgiving, for the blessings he enjoyed in a
faithful wife. The Queen, it seems, pretended to the same affection for him:
but, alas, his amiable days were long over! he was now almost choked with fat,
and had contracted a morose air, very improper for inspiring affection: the
Queen had actually committed those lewdnesses before marriage, of which Anna
Bullen had formerly been falsely accused. But those crimes did by no means
deserve death, nor even a divorce; since her fidelity to him, since marriage,
was all that the most scrupulous delicacy could require: Henry, however,
considered her former inconstancy as a capital offense; and, not yet satiated
with blood, this Queen was executed on Tower Hill. All this was terrible, but
still the King was resolved to be peculiarly cruel: though branded with three
divorces, and stained with the blood of two wives, he ordered a law to be
enacted, equally remarkable for its absurdity and impossibility, namely, That,
whatever person knew of the intrigues of a Queen, he should reveal it upon pain
of high treason; or if any woman, not a virgin, should presume to marry the
King of England, she should be guilty of high treason! One would think that it
were impossible to procure a body of men capable of giving sanction to such
inscrutable absurdities, and yet lay claim to reason. It was pleasantly said
(for even those times of slaughter could not suppress ridicule) that the King,
according to that statute, could only marry a widow. His next and last wife
actually was a widow, Catharine Parr, widow of Lord Latimer; and she was a
favourer of the reformation.

She was, however, to proceed with great caution; the King prided himself much
on his skill in theology, and it might be fatal to dispute with him upon
religion, as she had seen in the case of one Lambert, some time before. It
seems this man had denied transubstantiation, which Henry had ordered to be
believed: the King, hearing that he was to be tried at Westminster for this
offense, which was capital, undertook, himself, to dispute the point with him
in public. Letters were written to many of the Bishops and Nobility to be
present upon this extraordinary occasion; and, on the ^ay prefixed, (...) was a
great concourse in the ^ll. Lambert ^od alone without a second; the King was
s^rounded with a crowd of flatterers, who applauded all he said, and averred,
that his arguments were invincible. They extolled him above all the divines of
the age, and at once confirmed his pride and his prejudices: the result of the
argument was, that Lambert had his choice, either to abj^ his opinions or to be
burnt as an obstinate he^ Lambert chose to die rather than for^ that he (...)
considered as the truth, and (...) ^tence was soon after executed in Smithfi^
(...) his legs and thighs were burnt off; there not ^ing fire enough to consume
the rest, two of the officers, raising his body up with their halberds, pushed
it into the flames, where it was soon consumed to ashes.

It was not without reason, therefore, that the present Queen concealed her
sentiments, and behaved with caution; upon this account she durst not intercede
for three Protestants, who were burnt at Windsor just after her marriage: she
once, indeed, attempted to argue with the King, but it had like to have cost
her her life; wherefore afterward she suffered the divines on each side to
dispute, and the executioner to destroy. During these transactions the King
would frequently assemble the houses of parliament, and harangue them with
florid orations, in which he would aver, that never Prince had a greater
affection for his people, or was more beloved by them. In every pause of his
discourse, some of his creatures, near his person, would begin to applaud, and
this was followed by loud acclamations from the rest of the audience.

It is, indeed, astonishing, to what a pitch of cruelty he attained, and to
what a state of servility his people: I can account for either in no other
manner, than that religious disputes had now so divided the people, and set one
against the other, that the King, availing himself of the universal weakness
which was produced by universal dissension, became the tyrant of all.

But nature, at last, seemed kindly willing to rid the world of a monster that
man was unable to destroy: Henry had been troubled, for some time, with a
disorder in his leg, which was now grown very painful; this, added to his
monstrous corpulency, which rendered him unable to stir, made him more furious
than a chained lion: he became froward and untractable, none dared to approach
him without trembling. He had been ever stern and severe, he was now
outrageous: flattery had corrupted all his senses; he deemed it an unpardonable
crime to controvert those opinions which he himself was changing every hour.
His courtiers, contending among themselves, and conspiring the death of each
other, had no inclination to make an enemy of him. Thus he continued, for four
years, the terror of all and the tormentor of himself: at length his end
approached; he perceived he had not long to live, his fat increasing and his
leg growing worse. He had already slaughtered several favorites, raised from
obscure stations to share his dignities and his cruelty; More, Fisher,
Cromwell, and others, died upon the scaffold, and Wolsey prevented it by his
own death: he was resolved to make one victim more before he left the world,
and that was the Duke of Norfolk, who had formerly suppressed a rebellion
excited against him, and who had, all along, been the vigilant minister of his
commands. This nobleman had, outwardly, complied with the reformation, but, in
his heart, favored the Pope: the King knew this, and only wanted a pretext to
put him and his son, the Earl of Surry, to death: it was no difficult matter to
find one; the son had used the arms of Edward the Confessor in his escutcheon,
and the father had left a blank space in his own where they might be inserted.
This was all the crime alleged against them, but it was sufficient when the
King gave his opinion that it was his will they should die. The Earl of Surry
was beheaded upon Tower Hill, and a warrant sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower
to cut off the Duke of Norfolk's head in two days following: this sentence was
just upon the point of being executed, when the King's own death gave him an
unexpected reprieve. Henry had been suffered to languish without any of his
domestics having the courage to warn him of his approaching end; they who had
ever come near him with trembling, now dreaded to give him this friendly
admonition. At length Sir Anthony Denny had the charity to inform him of his
situation: he thanked this courtier for his friendly admonition, and soon after
expired, full of sorrow for his former guilt, and with all the horrors of
approaching dissolution.

Some Sovereigns have been tyrants from contradiction and revolt; some from
being misled by favorites, and some from a spirit of party; but Henry was
cruel from disposition alone, cruel in the government, cruel in religion, and
cruel in his family: yet, tyrant as he was, he died peaceably a natural death,
while Henry VI, the most harmless of all Monarchs, was dethroned, imprisoned,
and assassinated. It is a folly and a wickedness to say, that good or bad
actions are their own recompense here: true is the doctrine of holy writ, The
wicked have their good things in this life, the virtuous must look for them in
another.

Our divines have taken much pains to vindicate the character of this vicious
Prince, as if his conduct and our reformation were, in fact, united: nothing
can be more absurd than this, as if the most noble designs were not often
brought about by the most vicious instruments; we see even the cruelty and
injustice of man employed in our holy redemption.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXII.
THE alterations, in the reign of Henry, were rather separations from the Pope
than a reformation of religious abuses: in the reign of his successor Edward
VI, his son by Jane Seymour, and heir to the crown, the errors of Rome, in
reality, began to be reformed. This Prince was but nine years old when he
ascended the throne of his father, and the history of his government is rather
a detail of the methods pursued by his governors to reform the abuses of
religion, than a series of politics or war; and their characters, rather than
his, should be the object of the historian's research.

The Duke of Somerset was made Protector of the minority, and thus engrossed
the whole administration; the rest of the council, which were joined with him,
either sided with his views, or ineffectually opposed them. To strengthen his
power, he marched against the Scots who had invaded England, their constant
practice whenever they saw the country employed in faction and dispute: a
slight victory, gained by him upon this occasion, acquired him popularity and
power. I have more than once remarked, that, to gain the hearts of the English,
it was requisite to be a conqueror. But to this character Somerset added
virtues of a much more amiable kind: he was humble, civil, affable, courteous
to the meanest suitor, and all the actions of his life were directed by motives
of religion and honor: he, at the same time, had learned to look with contempt
and detestation on the errors and corruptions of the church of Rome, and was
consequently the warm friend of Archbishop Cranmer, who now undertook to make a
real reformation, which Henry VIII. only pretended to do.

You have seen, in Henry's reign, that the only alterations he made in
religion, were such as either favored his passions or increased his power.
Thus all his subjects were under a peculiar restraint, which, upon his death,
was no longer continued: each took the liberty of speaking his thoughts upon
religion, though the laws of the last reign were still in force. In this
division of opinions, as it may easily be supposed, the Reformers prevailed,
for they had the Protector of their party: to that and, therefore, they
procured a general visitation of churches, and reformed numberless abuses that
were almost held sacred by prescription. It was left to people's choice to go
to confession, which had been hitherto deemed an indispensable duty, or to
neglect that practice. It was ordered, that all images should be taken out of
churches, priests were allowed to marry, the old mass was abolished, and a new
liturgy drawn up, which retrenched several abuses in the service of the church,
and which is the same with that now used, bating a few alterations.

These reformations were evidently calculated for the benefit of the subject;
but still the Popish clergy, who either were expelled their monasteries or had
refused to conform, stirred up the people to rise in rebellion against them: we
may judge, from the number of places in which insurrections were made, that
those reformations were by no means received with universal satisfaction. There
were, at once, insurrections in Wiltshire, Sussex, Hampshire, Kent,
Gloucestershire, Suffolk, Warwickshire, Essex, Hertfordshire, Leicestershire,
Rutlandshire, and Worcestershire; and the flames of war were rekindling through
the whole kingdom. The Protector, who both by principle and interest was a
friend of the populace, did every thing to redress their grievances, and by
that means stopped their fury for a while, In fact, they had several complaints
that were founded in justice: the nobility had become possessors of the
forfeited lands which belonged to the clergy, and, instead of leaving them to
be cultivated by the poor, as formerly, enclosed them for the purposes of
pleasure or magnificence. This necessarily drove numbers, besides the ejected
friars, to the utmost streights; but, to add to their misfortunes, an act was
passed against them, the most severe that had hitherto been known in England:
it was enacted, that, if any person should loiter, without offering himself to
work, for three days together, he should be adjudged a slave for two years to
the first informer, and should be marked on the breast with the letter V, or
vagabond, imprinted with an hot iron. It is not to be wondered at, therefore,
that there should be a general insurrection of the people, when suffering such
severe oppressions.

But all the Protector's promises and endeavors could not effectually redress
their grievances, he therefore was obliged to have recourse to violence. These
were not the compact bodies of men that we have seen in former rebellions,
headed by some discontented or ambitious courtier, and led on with conduct and
success: Henry VII. had effectually suppressed all such; these were now only a
tumultuous rabble; without arms and without discipline, led on by some obscure
desperado; unreasonable in their demands, and divided among each other; the
unhappy wretches were therefore easily overthrown. Above a thousand of them
were slain near Exeter by Lord Russel, and two thousand more near Norwich by
the Earl of Warwick.

The kingdom was now again inclining to an aristocracy: the nobility, by the
late increase of their possessions, were grown powerful, and oppressed the
people at pleasure. They now began to find that they had a separate interest
from that of the commons, and conspired to carry on their power by union among
themselves, while the rest of the kingdom was divided. The Duke of Somerset,
however, opposed this project, as he was ever a favourer of the people; and it
was incumbent therefore to destroy his power before they could establish their
own. With this view they placed the Earl of Warwick, afterward made Duke of
Northumberland, at their head, and began by spreading reports to destroy the
Protector's reputation; they next won over the common council of London to
favor their projects, and lastly had him accused of high treason. The interest
of the Protector was overpowered by that of his rival: he was condemned, and
lost his head upon Tower Hill.

In all this struggle for power, the young King, by reason of his age, was
barely passive: he was only made the executor of the resentment and ambition of
the contending ministers, as either happened to prevail; and at one time signed
the order for execution on this side, at another time on that, but ever with
tears in his eyes; a tenderness of disposition was one of this amiable youth's
conspicuous qualities: to these were added a sagacity far surpassing his years
and learning, that amazed all such as happened to converse with him. When the
dignity of the throne was to be supported, he behaved like a man; and, at other
times, was gentle and affable as became his age. In short, he had such great
qualities, or was said to have such, that mankind had reason to lament his
short continuance among them. It is very probable, however, that flattery would
have contributed to destroy those talents, as it had those of his father; for
few Princes, except his father, had received more flattery than he. He died of
a defluxion upon his lungs, his death being hastened by medicines given by a
woman who confidently pretended she could cure him. His death made way for
another scene of horrid barbarity, in which the kingdom was to be ruled by a
weak and bigoted woman, who was herself ruled by merciless priests, who
received their orders from the court of Rome.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXIII.
YOU have hitherto seen the succession to the throne of England, partly
obtained by lineal descent, and partly by the aptitude for government in the
person chosen: neither wholly hereditary, nor quite elective, it has ever made
ancestry the pretext of right, but, in fact, the people sued for the support of
these pretensions. And this is the best species of succession that can be
conceived: it prevents that aristocracy, which is ever the result of a
government entirely elective; and that tyranny which is too often established
where there is never an infringement upon hereditary claims.

Whenever a Monarch of England happened to be arbitrary, he generally
considered the kingdom as his property, and not himself as a servant of the
kingdom. In such cases it was natural for him, at his decease, to bequeath his
dominions as he thought proper: Henry, in conformity to this practice, made a
will, in which he settled the succession merely according to his usual caprice;
Edward VI. was first nominated to succeed him, whose reign you have just seen;
then Mary, his eldest daughter by Catharine of Spain, but with a mark of
special condescension, by which he would intimate her illegitimacy; the next
that followed was Elizabeth, his daughter by Anna Bullen, with the same marks
of her not being legitimate: after his own children his sister's children were
mentioned; his younger sister the Duchess of Suffolk's issue were preferred
before his elder sister the Queen of Scotland's, which preference was thought
by all to be neither founded in justice nor supported by reason.

Edward VI, as has been seen, succeeded him. He also made a will, in which he
gave the kingdom away from Mary and Elizabeth to the Duchess of Suffolk's
daughter, the lady Jane Gray, a girl of sixteen. By these dispositions there
were, after the death of young Edward, no less than four Princesses who could
lay claim to the crown: Mary, who was first upon the will, had been declared
illegitimate by parliament, and that act was never repealed; the same could be
alleged against Elizabeth, but she had another foundation by being restored to
her rights in her father's reign; the Queen of Scotland, Henry's eldest sister,
could plead the illegitimacy of his two daughters; and Jane Gray might allege
the will of the last King in her favor.

You have seen, in the last reign, the Earl of Warwick suppressing an
insurrection of the people, afterward becoming a favorite of the King, then
made Duke of Northumberland, next overturning the Duke of Somerset his rival,
and at length pursuing the measures of the man whom he had destroyed. This
nobleman's ambition did not rest here; he had hopes of securing the crown in
his own family, and, with this view, he matched the lord Guilford Dudley, his
son, with lady Jane Gray, whom, by his interest, he hoped to settle on the
throne. He was hated by the people for his cruelties as much as the young lady
was loved for her virtues, and this was the greatest obstacle to his design. I
have been more prolix than usual upon this topic of the succession, but you
should attend to it with care, in order to have a clear idea of the present and
the succeeding reigns.

Immediately upon the death of the young King, but two competitors put up for
the crown. Mary, relying upon the justice of her pretensions; and Jane Gray,
supported by the Duke of Northumberland, her father-in-law. Mary was strongly
bigoted to the Popish superstitions, having been bred up in restraint: she was
reserved and gloomy; she had, even during the life of her father, the
resolution to maintain her sentiments and ceremonies, and refused to comply
with his new institutions: her zeal had rendered her cruel, and she was not
only blindly attached to her religious opinions, but even to the Popish clergy
who maintained them. On the other hand, Jane Gray was attached to the
Reformers; though yet but sixteen, her judgment had attained such a degree of
perfection as few enjoy in their more advanced age. All historians agree, that
the solidity of her understanding, improved by continual application, rendered
her the wonder of her age. Ascham, tutor to Elizabeth, informs us, that, coming
once to wait upon her at her father's house in Leicestershire, he found her
reading Plato's works in Greek, when all the rest of the family were hunting in
the park. He seemed surprised at her being the only person absent from the
diversions abroad, but she assured him, that Plato was an higher amusement to
her than the most studied refinements of sensual pleasure. It was philosophy,
and not ambition, which she seemed born for: when her ambitious father-in-law
came to inform her of her advancement to the throne, she heard the news with
sorrow, and accepted the proffered honor with reluctance. However, the
entreaties of her friends, and the authority of her husband, at length
reconciled her to her fortune; she was removed to the Tower, and soon after
proclaimed at London, while the people showed few of those marks of
satisfaction which usually accompany a ceremony of this kind.

Jane was proclaimed by the council, but the people were for Mary. The men of
Suffolk rose in her favor, Norfolk soon joined her, and Lord Hastings, with
four thousand men which were raised to oppose her, revolted to her side. It was
in vain that the Duke of Northumberland attempted to lead his army against
them; his soldiers deserted on the march, he found himself abandoned, and soon
after the council itself, which he once governed, now freed from restraint,
declared against him. Jane, who had but just been crowned, now saw herself
again stripped of her dignities, and, without any reluctance, laid down an
honor which she was at first compelled to accept, and which she held but nine
days. Her father, the Duke of Suffolk, delivered up the Tower, of which he had
the command; and her father-in-law, the Duke of Northumberland, being prevented
from flying out of the kingdom, pretended to be pleased at Mary's success, and
was the first to fling up his cap when she was proclaimed in Cambridge.

Mary now entered London, and, without the least effusion of blood, saw herself
joyfully proclaimed, and peaceably settled on the throne. This was a juncture
that seemed favorable to British happiness and liberty; a Queen, whose rights
were the most equitable, in some measure elected by the people; the aristocracy
of the last reign almost wholly suppressed; the house of commons, by this
means, re-instated in their former authority; the pride of the clergy humbled,
and their vices detected; together with peace abroad and almost unanimity at
home. This was the flattering prospect upon Mary's accession, but soon this
pleasing phantom was dissolved; Mary was cruel and a bigot; she gave back their
former power to her clergy, and the kingdom was, once more, involved in the
horrors from whence it had lately been extricated.

The Queen had promised to the men of Suffolk, who first declared in her
favor, that she would suffer religion to remain in the situation in which she
found it. This promise, however, she by no means intended to perform: political
cruelty ever precedes religious: she had resolved on a change of religion; but,
before she persecuted heretics, who were as yet her friends, it was necessary
to get rid of some of the late council, who were, in reality, her enemies. The
Duke of Northumberland was the first object of royal vengeance, and not indeed
without reason. It is instructive enough to observe the vicissitudes of
fortune; the Duke of Norfolk was now taken from his prison in the Tower, to sit
as judge upon the Duke of Northumberland, who had kept him there. The accused
made a very skilful defense, but what could that avail in a court predetermined
to condemn him? He was capitally convicted and soon after executed, Sir John
Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer, who had assisted in his projects, sharing in his
punishment.

While these were falling as victims to their ambition, the Queen's ministers
were, in the mean time, carrying on a negotiation of marriage between her and
Philip, King of Spain. The people thought they saw that this would be a fatal
blow to their liberties, and therefore loudly murmured against it; but, when
they found the treaty actually concluded, they could no longer contain. Sir
Thomas Wyat, a Roman Catholic, at the head of four thousand insurgents, marched
from Kent to Hyde-Park, and entered the city in hopes of securing the Tower:
but his rashness undid him; as he passed through the narrow streets, care was
taken, by the Earl of Pembroke, to block up the way behind him, by
fortifications thrown across the streets; and guards were placed at all the
avenues to prevent his return. This unhappy man passed boldly forward, and was
now ready to reap the fruits of his undertaking, when, to his astonishment, he
found that he could neither proceed nor yet make good a retreat. He now, too
late, perceived his own temerity, and, losing all courage in the exigency, he
surrendered at discretion. In the mean time the Duke of Suffolk had endeavored
to foment the insurrection, but without success; he was taken prisoner also,
and destined for the common slaughter. Accordingly, Wyat, the Duke of Suffolk,
Sir John Throgmorton, and fiftyeight more, were executed; but what raised the
compassion of the people most of all, was the execution of Lady Jane Gray and
her husband Guilford Dudley, who were involved in this calamity.

Two days after Wyat was taken, Lady Jane and her husband were ordered to
prepare for death: Lady Jane, who had long before seen the threatened blow, was
no way surprised at the message, but bore it with heroic resolution; and, being
informed that she had three days to prepare for death, she seemed displeased at
so long a delay. Guilford Dudley was the first that suffered: as the Lady was
conducted to execution, the officers of the Tower met her on the way, bearing
the headless body of her husband, streaming with blood, in order to be interred
in the chapel in the Tower: she looked on the corpse without trembling, and
only, with a sigh, desired to proceed. She testified, to the last moment of her
sufferings, great constancy, great piety, and an immovable adherence to the
reformation. This was the second Queen who died by the hands of the executioner
in England.

The enemies of the state being thus suppressed, the theater was now opened for
the pretended enemies of religion. The Queen was freed from all apprehensions
of an insurrection, and therefore began by assembling a corrupt parliament,
which was to countenance her future cruelties. The nobility, whose only
religion seemed that of the Prince who governed, were easily gained over, and
the house of commons seemed passive in all her proceedings. She began by giving
orders for the suppression of married Bishops and priests; the mass was
directed to be restored; the Pope's authority was re-established, with some
restrictions; the laws against heretics were renewed, and the church and its
privileges put upon the same foundation in which they were before the
alterations of Henry VIII.

This was kindling up the fires of persecution anew: at the head of these
measures were Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, and Bonner, Bishop of London.
Poole, the Pope's Legate, a great part of whose life was spent in Italy, seemed
too much civilized in that country, then the most polite in Europe, to be
accessory to the measures now pursued. Gardener began this bloody scene with
Hooper and Rogers: Hooper had been Bishop of Gloucester; Rogers was a
clergyman, who had shone amongst the most distinguished of the Protestants. He
was prebendary of St. Paul's, and refused all submission to the church of Rome,
which he looked upon as antichristian. They were condemned by commissioners
appointed by the Queen, the Chancellor at the head of them. Rogers suffered in
Smithfield: when he was brought to the stake, he had it in his power to save
himself, by recanting his opinions; but neither hopes nor fears could prevail
upon him to desert his religion. When the faggots were placed around him, he
seemed no way daunted at the preparation, but cried out, I resign my life with
joy, in testimony of the doctrine of Jesus. Hooper had his pardon offered him
upon the same terms, but he refused it with equal indignation. This old martyr,
who was executed at Gloucester, was three quarters of an hour in torment; the
fire, either from malice or neglect, had not been sufficiently kindled, so that
his legs and thighs were first burnt, and one of his hands dropped off before
he expired.

Saunders and Tailor, two other clergymen, whose zeal had been distinguished in
carrying on the reformation, were the next that suffered Tailor was put into a
pitch barrel, and before the fire was kindled, a faggot from an unknown hand
was thrown at his head, which streamed with blood: still, however, he continued
undaunted, singing the xxxist Psalm in English, which one of the spectators
observing, hit him a blow on the side of the head, and commanded him to pray in
Latin: he therefore continued a few minutes silent, only with his eyes
steadfastly fixed upon heaven; when one of the guards, either through impatience
or compassion, struck him down with his halbert, and thus delivered him from a
world of pain to a life of immortal happiness.

The death of these only served to increase the savage appetite of the Monks
and Popish Bishops for fresh slaughter. Bonner, bloated at once with rage and
luxury, let loose his vengeance without restraint; while the Queen, by letters,
exhorted him to pursue the pious work without pity or interruption: and now
Ridley, Bishop of London, and the venerable Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, were
to receive the Martyr's crown. Ridley was one of the ablest champions of the
reformation; his piety, learning, and solidity of judgment, were admired by his
friends and dreaded by his enemies. The night before his execution he invited
the mayor of Oxford, and his wife, to see him die; and, when he saw them melted
into tears, he himself appeared quite unmoved, heaven being his secret
supporter and comforter in this hour of agony. When he came to the stake where
he was to be burnt, he found his old friend Latimer there before him, and began
to comfort him in his sufferings, while Latimer was as ready to return the kind
office. A furious bigot ascended to preach to them, before the execution of
their sentence: Ridley gave a serious attention to the sermon, and offered to
answer it, but this he was not allowed to do. At length the fire was set to the
pile; Latimer was soon out of pain, but Ridley continued much longer, his legs
being consumed before the fire reached his vitals.

Cranmer, whom you have seen already so zealous in the reformation, was the
next personage of note that was burnt: he had this peculiar aggravation of his
calamity, that he was prevailed upon to abjure his principles and sign his
recantation, by the hopes of pardon. Being, notwithstanding this, brought to
the stake, his confusion and shame were there inexpressible: there he retracted
all that their false promises had made him abjure; and, resolving that the hand
which had signed should first suffer, he held it out, with an intrepid
countenance, in the flames, till it dropped off, frequently crying out, in the
midst of his agony, that unworthy hand!

Bonner now seemed not satisfied with single deaths, but sent men in whole
companies to the flames; women themselves were not spared: but the cruelty went
yet farther; a woman, condemned for heresy, was delivered of a child in the
midst of the flames; some of the spectators humanely snatched it out; the
magistrate, who was a Papist, ordered it to be flung in again, and it was then
consumed with the mother. The perpetrators of such actions were no longer
human; they must have forfeited all pretensions to the name, for hell itself
could be guilty of nothing more atrocious!

But they were not content with punishing the living alone, their vengeance
extended even to the dead: Bucer and Fagius, two German divines, who had been
dead some years before, were cited, very formally, to appear and give an
account of their faith; in default of their appearance, their bodies were taken
from their graves, and being hung upon a gallows were consumed to ashes. The
wife of Peter Martyr, who himself had the prudence to escape, was dug up like
the former, and buried in a dung hill. In short, the persecutions of the
priests and friars went such lengths, that the very magistrates who had at
first been instruments of their cruelty, at last refused to assist at the
punishing heretics for the future, till a court, somewhat resembling the
inquisition, was established, which continued the slaughters without remorse.
In this reign five bishops, twenty-one ministers, and above eight hundred
others, went to the flames in maintenance of the truth; numbers died in prison,
and several by whips and tortures were forced to abjure.

Yet, still in this dismal situation with respect to religion, the temporal
concerns of the nation were conducted with very little better success. Calais,
which had long been possessed by the English, and was a curb to the ambition of
France, was taken in this reign by the Duke of Guise, and all the English drove
out of it, as the great Edward had drove the French out two hundred years
before. The Queen was only bent on ruining Protestants, and took no care to
defend her dominions.

Philip, her husband, seemed no way pleased with his alliance: the Queen, some
time after their marriage, was delivered of a false conception. This created
disgust in him: he quitted England, therefore, to pursue his own schemes in
Flanders, leaving the Queen sufficiently mortified at his coldness for her, of
which he gave repeated proofs.

The loss of Calais, and the disappointment with regard to her pregnancy, soon
excited murmurs among the people. The Protestants now exerted their influence
in exposing the weakness of the government and the cruelty of the council: but
no person had a greater share of reproach than the Queen, and none felt it so
severely. The house of commons, that had hitherto been all along so submissive,
now also testified their displeasure, and refused to grant a subsidy, though
she condescended to lay the bad state of her affairs before them. During these
mortifications her health sensibly declined: she was naturally melancholy and
sullen, and her repeated disappointments increased her distemper. She had been
ill attended during her pretended pregnancy, having committed herself to the
care of women, and neglected the advice of her physicians. After having been
for some time afflicted with the dropsy, this disorder carried her off in the
forty-third year of her age, after a reign of about five years. Had she been
born at any other period, she might have been a good Princess, but her zeal for
religion was louder than the calls of humanity. Henry VIII, her father, acted
like a tyrant and a persecutor from vicious motives, and he knew it: Mary was
both a tyrant and a persecutor from motives of virtue, and she was never
undeceived.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXIV.
WERE we to adopt the maxim in morals, that evil may be done for the production
of good, one might say that the persecutions in Mary's reign were permitted
only to bring the kingdom over to the Protestant religion. Nothing could preach
so effectually against the cruelty and the vices of the Monks, as the actions
of the Monks themselves: wherever heretics were to be burnt, they were always
present, rejoicing at the spectacle, insulting the fallen, and frequently the
first to thrust the flaming brand against the faces of the condemned. The
English were effectually converted by such sights as these; to bring any people
over to any opinion, it is only necessary to persecute instead of attempting to
convince: the people had formerly embraced the reformed religion from fear,
they were now internally Protestants from inclination.

We have hitherto seen England like the element that surrounds it, ever
unsettled and stormy; ever sinking under foreign invasion or domestic disputes:
it had felt a short interval of happiness, indeed, under Henry VII, but his
successors soon disturbed that felicity, and laid the country once more in
blood. At length the genius of the people prevailed over all opposition, and
England was now about to make its own happiness, and to set mankind an example
of industry, commerce, freedom, learning, opulence, and power.

To Mary succeeded her sister Elizabeth, who was unanimously declared Queen at
the accustomed places, and with the acclamations of the people. Elizabeth had
her education in that best of schools, the school of adversity: as during the
life of her sister, who had no children, she was next heir to the throne, and
at the same time was known to be of the Protestant religion, she was obnoxious
to the reigning tyrant for two reasons: it was feared she might aspire to the
throne during her sister's life; but it was still more reasonably apprehended,
that she would, if ever she came to the crown, make an innovation in that
religion which Mary took so much pains to establish. The Bishops, who had shed
such a deluge of blood, foresaw this, and often told Mary, that her destroying
meaner heretics was of no advantage to the state, unless she attacked the
principal heretic; that it was to no purpose to lop off the branches while the
body of the tree was suffered to stand: Mary saw and acknowledged the justice
of their observations, confined her sister with proper guards, and only waited
for some new insurrection, or some favorable pretext to destroy her: her own
death prevented the perpetration of her meditated cruelty, and Elizabeth was
taken from a prison to be fixed upon a throne.

Elizabeth had made the proper use of her confinement; being debarred the
enjoyment of pleasures abroad, she sought for knowledge at home; she cultivated
her understanding, learned the languages and sciences; but, of all the arts in
which she excelled, her arts of keeping fair with her sister, of not offending
the Papists, of being in esteem with the Protestants, of dissembling and
learning to reign, were the greatest.

This virgin Monarch, whose memory England still reveres with gratitude and
respect, was scarce proclaimed Queen, when Philip of Spain, who had been
married to Mary, but who ever testified an inclination for Elizabeth, sought
her in marriage. What political motives Elizabeth might have against this
match, is uncertain; but certain it is, she neither liked the person nor the
religion of her admirer: she was willing at once to enjoy the pleasure of
independance and the vanity of numerous solicitations.

She had ever resolved upon reforming the church, even in the restraints of a
prison; and, upon coming to the throne, she immediately set about that great
design. The people were now almost wholly of the Protestant religion; the ill
use the Papists had made of their power, in the last reign, had totally undone
their cause: a religion, marked with cruelty, tyranny, and persecution, was not
a religion for the people of England. She began, therefore, in imitation of the
deceased Queen, to forbid all meddling with controversy in the pulpit, and all
innovations of the established rites, except that the service should be
performed in the vulgar tongue, till a parliament should determine the proper
modes of worship. The parliament soon met, and the reformation was finished,
and religion established in the manner we enjoy it at present.

The opposition which was made to these religious establishments was but weak;
a conference of nine doctors on each side was proposed and agreed to; they were
to dispute publicly upon either side of the question, and it was resolved that
the people should hold to that which came off with victory. Disputations of
this kind are never attended with conviction to either party; so much is to be
said on either side, and so wide is the field that both sides have to range in,
that each generally loses his strength in vain preparations, and ineffectual
prefacing, before he is properly said to begin the engagement. The conference,
therefore, came to nothing; the Papists declared, that it was not in their
power to dispute a second time upon topics, in which they had gained a former
victory under Queen Mary; and the Protestants attributed the caution to their
fears. Of nine thousand four hundred beneficed clergymen, which were in the
whole kingdom, only fourteen Bishops, twelve Archdeacons, fifteen heads of
colleges, and about eighty of the parochial clergy, chose to quit their
preferments rather than their religion. Thus England changed its belief in
religion four times since Henry VIII. Strange, says a foreign writer, that a
people, who are so resolute, should be guilty of so much inconstancy! That the
same people, who this day publicly burnt heretics, should the next not only
think them guiltless, but conform to their opinions.

Elizabeth was now fixed upon a Protestant throne, while all the neighboring
nations were open or secret enemies: France, Scotland, Spain, the Pope, were
all combined against her. Her subjects of Ireland were concealed enemies, and
the Catholic party in England, though not so numerous as formerly, yet was not
entirely suppressed: these were the dangers she had to fear, nor had she one
friend to assist her upon an emergency. In this situation, therefore, she could
hope for no other resource, but what proceeded from the affection of her own
subjects, and the wisdom of her administration. To make herself beloved by the
people, and, at the same time, feared by her courtiers, were the governing
maxims of her conduct. She was frugal of the public treasury, and still more
sparing in her rewards to her favorites: this at once kept the people in
spirits, and kept the great too poor to shake off lawful subjection. She
distributed both rewards and punishments with impartiality; knew when to
flatter and when to upbraid; could dissemble submission, but preserve her
prerogative: in short, she seemed to have studied the people she was to govern,
and often to have flattered their follies in order to secure their hearts.

Her chief minister was Robert Dudley, son to the late Duke of Northumberland,
whom the Queen seemed to regard from capricious motives, as he had neither
abilities nor virtue; but, to make amends, the two favorites next in power
were Bacon and Cecil, men of great capacity and infinite application. They
regulated the finances, and directed the political measures that were followed
with so much success.

Mary Stewart, Queen of France and Scotland, gave the first alarm to this state
of tranquillity, by taking the title of Queen of England; and her cause was
supported by the Popish faction, which still wanted to make new disturbances.
The throne of Elizabeth was not yet perfectly fixed, and the intrigues of
religion could still overturn it: she therefore was not remiss in sending an
army into Scotland, and forcing the French troops out of that kingdom, by a
treaty signed to that effect. Soon after the King of France died, and Elizabeth
forced her rival to renounce the title of Queen of England, which she had
assumed. She went yet still farther, she encouraged the parliament of Scotland
to introduce the reformation into that country; her intrigues succeeded, and
she thus gained over a steadfast friend in the Scots, from whom the English had,
till then, only received repeated acts of enmity and ill will.

This tempest was scarce allayed, when Philip of Spain gave new alarms. As long
as he had fears from the power of the Queen of Scots, by her union with France,
he was still attached to Elizabeth; but, when, by the death of the King of
France her husband, she was again reduced to her primitive weakness, his
jealousy then began to fall upon Elizabeth. With this view he encouraged the
insurrections and discontents in Ireland, and Elizabeth with equal care
suppressed them. He supported, in France, a league made to exclude the royal
family from the throne; Elizabeth protected the opposite side. He oppressed the
people of Holland with cruelty and injustice; Elizabeth supported them from
sinking under his power. Thus, on every side, she guarded off the dangers that
threatened her, and soon after, in her turn, prepared to act offensively
against her enemies.

But the cares of war did not repress her assiduity in the administration of
justice at home: she was resolved to show the Roman Catholic party an example
of moderation, which they might admire but could not imitate. The Monks, who
were dispossessed of their monasteries, had been assigned pensions, which were
to be paid by the possessors of the forfeited lands. These payments were
entirely neglected, and these unhappy men, who had been educated in solitude
and ignorance, were now starving in old age, too much disregarded by the
Protestants, and too numerous to find relief from those of their own
persuasion. Elizabeth ordered that their pensions should be paid with
punctuality and justice, and satisfaction made for all arrears unjustly
detained.

In order the more to ingratiate herself with the people, she visited Cambridge
and Oxford, and made each a Latin speech, and showed, by her discourse and
conduct, a regard for those seminaries of learning, which had been suppressed
by her father.

She not only affected this obliging carriage to her inferiors, but also
behaved in something of a romantic strain to the courtiers next her person. The
gallantries of the court were conducted according to the rules of chivalry:
every damsel had her knight; Dudley, who was now become Earl of Leicester, was
generally the Queen's: but all writers agree, that her passion for him never
proceeded beyond the bounds of Platonic affection. When her commons, in a
dutiful manner, represented to her how much the safety of the kingdom depended
upon her marrying, she thanked them in an obliging manner, and assured them she
was now become the wife of her people, and would be pleased at having it
inscribed on her tomb, that having reigned with equity, she lived and died a
virgin.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXV.
THE ancient ferocity of the English was not yet quite reclaimed: the barbarous
method of fixing the Monarch upon the throne, by executions performed upon the
scaffold, was not quite done away: the only difference seemed to be, that
formerly those who were obnoxious to the crown, fell without any legal trial;
but now they fell with all the forms, yet all the severity of justice.

While Elizabeth was thus attempting to settle religion, to establish the
power, and humble the enemies of her country, she at the same time was guilty
of some instances of cruelty, which, though colored with the pretext of law,
could only be the effect of the yet uncivilized disposition of the times. The
Catholics held meetings to restore their religion by open force: the Countess
of Lenox, Arthur Poole, and others, began to form factions in the kingdom:
their plottings, however, were discovered, and, upon their own confession, they
were condemned; but the Queen, in consideration of their illustrious descent,
forgave their offense. A sister of the late Jane Gray, however, though less
guilty, met with less clemency: she had married the Earl of Pembroke, without
leave from the court; this was considered as an high offense, and the Earl and
she were committed to the Tower. After a long imprisonment he was obliged to
forsake her; and she, loaded with the misfortune, died in confinement.

But this only prepared the way for a cruelty of a more heinous nature, which
gave the world a disagreeable remembrance of the transactions committed in the
reign of her father. Mary, Queen of Scots, had long renounced her title to the
crown of England, but not her claim of succeeding to the throne: this
renunciation, however, being extorted from her by Elizabeth, Mary took every
method of disturbing her in the quiet possession of the crown, and yet gave
every mark of reconciliation and sincere amity. There were, in fact, many
circumstances to contribute to their mutual dislike: the jealousy of
neighboring crowns, the opposition of religion, of wit, and of beauty; Mary,
less powerful, less absolute, less politic, was, however, Elizabeth's superior
in personal charms, and this only served to inflame their animosity. The Queen
of Scotland encouraged the Catholic faction in England, while Elizabeth, with
still more success, fomented the Protestant party among the Scots. Mary had
now, for some time, thoughts of marrying a second husband, after the death of
the French King; Elizabeth, on the other hand, who had no thoughts of marriage
herself, strove, by every art, to prevent this marriage, as she considered that
it would be strengthening the power of her rival. With this view she wrote Mary
a letter, in which, after many insincere protestations of friendship, she
begged that Mary would not offer to marry till her consent should first be
obtained. This unreasonable request not a little disturbed the Queen of
Scotland, but, fearing to offend her potent rival, she pretended to comply; in
secret, however, she was resolved to marry the Earl of Darnly, her relation,
who had the merit of being a Catholic, like herself; but, perhaps, whose
greatest recommendations were his size and his person, which were large and
comely. The party gained by Elizabeth, in Scotland, tried every measure to
prevent her design. It was agitated, whether the Queen could marry without the
consent of the states; several of the nobility rose in arms to prevent it, the
ambassadors of England made daily remonstrances upon its impropriety, but all
in vain: Mary, to cut short their proceedings, had the marriage solemnized in
her own chapel, and banished the opposers by a solemn act of the states.

All hitherto appeared fortunate for Mary; her enemies banished, her rival
defeated, and herself married to the man she loved: yet this was but a
flattering calm, for soon, whether from the capriciousness of her temper, or
from what other cause I will not pretend to determine, Lord Darnly,
notwithstanding the elegance of his person, became entirely disagreeable to
her. She had conceived such an aversion to him, that it was soon obvious, even
to the people; and she took every method to mortify him in the eyes of the
public. Her vices were the cause of all her misfortunes: there was, at that
time in her court, one David Rizzio, the son of a musician at Turin, who had
followed the ambassador from that court into Scotland. As he understood music
to perfection, and sung a good bass, he was introduced into the Queen's
concert, who was so taken with him, that she desired the ambassador, upon his
departure, to leave Rizzio behind. The excellence of his voice soon procured
him greater familiarities; the Queen loved him, confided in him, and ever kept
him next her person. The new King, who now only had the name, could not,
without jealousy, see this insinuating foreigner receive all the Queen's
favors, while he was treated only with contempt. Stung at once with envy,
rage, and resentment, he at length resolved to murder the man he could not
equal, and consulted with some Lords about the method of accomplishing his
cruel design. Men in power ever find accomplices in their guilt; two other
Lords and he settled it, that the murder should be committed before the face of
the Queen, as a punishment of her scandalous conduct: thus prepared, they were
informed that Rizzio was, at that very instant, in the Queen's chamber; Lord
Darnly led the way, conducting the assassins up by a private staircase, and
entering the Queen's chamber, who was at table with her favorite Rizzio;
Darnly stood for some time leaning upon the back of her chair. His fierce
looks, and unexpected intrusion, in some measure alarmed the Queen, who,
however, kept silence, not daring to call out: a little after Lord Ruthven, one
of the murderers, and George Douglas, entered abruptly, all in arms, and
attended with more of their accomplices. The Queen could no longer refrain, but
asked the reason of this bold intrusion; Ruthven made her no answer, but
ordered Rizzio to quit a place of which he was unworthy. Rizzio now saw that he
was the object of their vengeance, and, trembling with fear, took hold of the
Queen's robe, to put himself under her protection, who, on her part, strove to
interpose between the assassins and him: Douglas, in the mean time, had reached
the unfortunate Rizzio, and, taking a dagger from the King's side, drew it,
and, while the Queen filled the room with her cries, he plunged it, in her
presence, into Rizzio's bosom. She was five months gone with child, and this
horrid scene had such an effect upon the fruit of her womb, that it is said
that her child, who was afterward King James I, could never venture to look
upon a drawn sword without shuddering. Thus ended Rizzio, a man who has been
more spoken of, than perhaps any other who rose from so mean a station. What
his other talents to please might have been, is unknown; but certain it is,
that several indications of his skill in music remain even to the present time:
all those pleasing Scotch airs, which are set in such a peculiar taste, being
universally allowed to be of his composition.

This was but a temporary check upon Mary's power; she resumed her authority,
by the influence of her charms upon the Earl her husband, who gave up the
murderers of Rizzio to her resentment, but they had previously escaped into
England. One criminal engagement, however, was scarcely got over, when Mary
fell into a second: the Earl of Bothwell now began to hold the same place in
her affections that Rizzio had formerly possessed. This new amor was attended
with still more terrible consequences than the former; her husband fell a
victim to it. His life was first attempted by poison, but the strength of his
constitution saved him for a short time, only to fall by a more violent death:
he was strangled by night, the house in which the fact was committed being
blown up with gunpowder, in order to persuade the people that his death was
accidental; but his shirt not being singed, and his slippers found near him,
together with blue marks round his neck, soon confirmed the suspicion of his
real murder. His body was buried near that of Rizzio, among the Scottish Kings.

All orders of the state, the whole body of people, accused Bothwell of this
assassination, and at last demanded justice upon him from the Queen, for the
late murder, openly arraigning him of the guilt. In this universal demand for
justice, the Queen, deaf to the murmurs of her people, deaf to the voice of
decency, married the murderer of her husband, and prevailed upon him to divorce
his former wife to make way for this fatal alliance.

Bothwell was possessed of all the insolence which attends great crimes: he
assembled the principal Lords of the state, and compelled them to sign an
instrument, purporting, that they judged it the Queen's interest to marry
Bothwell, as he had lain with her against her will. These transactions excited
the whole kingdom of Scotland to resistance, and Mary, abandoned by her
followers, was obliged to give herself up as a prisoner to the confederacy.
Bothwell fled to the Orkney islands. The Queen, being confined in Lochlevin
castle, was compelled to resign the crown to her son, as yet a child; but she
was permitted to nominate a regent. She turned her eyes upon the Earl of
Murray, who was then in France, and appointed him, expecting that he would
defend her cause, and restore her. In this, however, she was entirely deceived;
Murray, upon his arrival, instead of comforting her as he formerly used, loaded
her with reproaches, which reduced her almost to despair. The calamities of the
great, however justly deserved, excite pity and create friends; an army of
forty thousand men declared in her favor, and she escaped from prison to put
herself at their head. But this was only to encounter new misfortunes; she was
met by a body of but four thousand, commanded by the new regent, and was
totally defeated. For fear of falling into the hands of her enemies, she fled
toward the borders of England; Elizabeth, being informed of her misfortunes
and her retreat, at first granted her an honorable reception, and ordered her
to be lodged at a gentleman's house, where she was treated with fitting
dignity. Notwithstanding this kindness, she refused to see her until she had
justified herself from the reproaches with which she was branded. By this means
Elizabeth in a manner declared herself umpire of the differences between the
two parties, and each accordingly pleaded their cause before her; Mary by her
emissaries, and Murray, the regent, in person. It was the Queen of England's
duty to protect, and not to examine, her royal fugitive: however, she
lengthened out the pleadings on both sides, and enjoyed the pleasure of seeing
her rival humbled, without passing any definitive sentence. Mary privately
complained of her unworthy treatment and long delay; these complaints were
carried to Elizabeth, which ended in the Queen of Scots being sent a prisoner
to Tutbury castle.

The disasters of the crown of Scotland fell upon the people, divided as they
were into factions, and animated with mutual animosity. The regent, attempting
to quell them, was himself slain, and the assassins, pretending to act in the
name of their imprisoned Queen, made an incursion into England, and committed
some ravages on the frontier counties. Elizabeth, with an army, quickly
repressed these invaders, and procured the Earl of Lenox, brother to the late
regent, to be elected in his room. In the mean time, while she was employed in
bringing Scotland to measures, she found herself attacked, in her own
dominions, by a conspiracy: the Pope, in order to assist the rebels, procured a
bull to be fixed up in several places in London, whereby he excommunicated
Elizabeth, and absolved her subjects from their oath of allegiance. This bull
was fixed up by John Felton, grand uncle to him whom we are shortly to see act
another desperate part: John Felton, when he was told that the government was
in pursuit of him, disdained to fly; he waited with intrepidity till he was
taken, and then boldly confessed the fact of which he was charged, and gloried
in the commission: he might have received pardon upon acknowledging his crime,
but he refused it, and was hanged near the place, meeting death with a
resolution that astonished even the brave. What noble actions might not such a
mind have been capable of, had it at first received a right direction.

These efforts, in favor of the Queen of Scots, only served to hasten her
ruin. The two Queens entered into various negotiations and frivolous treaties;
the one attempting to humble her prisoner, the other, with fruitless pride,
attempting to preserve the luster of fallen Majesty. Scotland, in the mean
time, streamed with blood: the Papists and the Protestants carried on a civil
war. The Archbishop of St. Andrew's, one of the warmest partisans of Mary, was
taken in arms, and executed upon the deposition of his confessor, who swore
that this prelate had privately confessed that he was an accomplice in the
murder of Darnly.

The greatest misfortunes of Mary rather proceeded from her friends than
enemies. The Duke of Norfolk, who professed a friendship for her, expected, by
her means, to rise to the British throne: he, therefore, privately negotiated a
marriage with her, and she, on the other hand, attempted to break off that
which she had already contracted with Bothwell. He formed a party in London,
feeble indeed; but he expected assistance from the intrigues of the Pope, and
the arms of Spain: he was himself a weak man, and his plots were but shallow;
the spies of Elizabeth discovered them all: he was arrested, accused,
condemned, and executed. This nobleman's blood only contributed to fasten the
chains of the unfortunate Mary; yet, still, she conceived hopes from foreign
assiances, which seldom are of any weight in domestic disputes. She had the
League in France in her favor, the Pope, the Spaniards, and the Jesuits; she
not only hoped to be reinstated in her former power, but to have the crown of
England, to which she laid claim as her birthright, added to her own. In
pursuance of these designs, a new conspiracy was formed, fourteen of the
conspirators executed, and, last of all, Mary was brought to a trial, before a
Queen who had no other right to be her judge, but that of power. Forty-two
members of parliament, and five judges, were sent to examine her in prison; she
protested against their right, yet made a defense: they had originally no
foundation in justice to try her, and they carried on her accusation with only
a show of equity. In short, after an imprisonment of eighteen years, this
unhappy Princess was brought to the block, and beheaded in one of the rooms of
her prison, which had been hung in black for the occasion. This action stained
the reign of Elizabeth with such colors, as neither her dissimulation, nor the
prosperity of her reign, could ever wash away: her subjects, while they found
themselves happy, attempted to excuse her conduct, but conscience internally
condemned her cruelty, and time, that speaks plain, at last declares her guilt.
In treating the actions of mankind, we almost ever find both sides culpable,
and so it was here, Mary, who was a murderer and adulteress, died by the orders
of Elizabeth, who was at once cruel and unjust.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXVI.
THE constitution of England took a long series of years to settle into form,
nor even yet was its structure entirely completed: the (...) still preserved a
degree of ancient pride, and often were guilty of injustice and tyranny,
without punishment. Had the actions of Elizabeth, which are now the subject of
our praise, only been performed by one of our present Monarchs, they would be
sufficient to cause his expulsion: there is something lucky in every great
reign, like this in view; its luster is rather owing to the indifferent periods
that preceded it, than to its own intrinsic value. Elizabeth left her kingdom,
it must be owned, in a better state than she found it; but her actions should
be neither the subject of our praise, nor the object of our imitation.

We see a mixture of cruelty and gallantry in all the transactions of these
times: while Elizabeth was thus plotting the death of Mary, she was, at the
same time, employed in a treaty of marriage with the young Duke of Anjou. This,
however, came to nothing, the Queen resolving to enjoy that power uncontrouled,
which her subjects had not yet learned to abridge.

But, though she disliked an husband, yet none more passionately desired to
have a lover: it is thought, indeed, her affections were confined to Platonic
wishes only, and her age, for she now began to decline, seemed to favor the
supposition; but the choice of her favorites countenanced the contrary report,
and her sorrow for the Earl of Leicester, who died about this time, confirmed
it. But one favorite always made room for another, and Devereux, Earl of
Essex, succeeded Dudley, Earl of Leicester. This nobleman was young, active,
ambitious, witty, and handsome; in the field and at court he ever appeared with
superior luster. In all the masks which were then performed, the Earl and
Elizabeth were generally coupled as partners; and, though she was almost sixty,
and he not half that number of years, yet flattery had taught her to forget the
disparity of age; the world told her she was still beautiful and young, and she
was inclined to think so. This young Earl's interest in the Queen's heart, as
may naturally be expected, promoted his interests in the state: he conducted
all things without a rival, and, wherever he went, he acquired a degree of
unbounded popularity. Young and unexperienced as he was, he at length began to
fancy the applause of the people given to his merits, and not to his favor:
thus possessed of a false opinion of his own security, to use the words of the
poet, he kicked down the ladder by which he rose; he began to despise the
Queen, and was heard to drop some expressions, that he thought her, in spite of
flattery, both old and ugly. Her remonstrances, on this occasion, were such as
might have been expected from a disappointed girl, very angry, yet wishing for
a vindication. She gave him, in a passion, a box on the ear, pardoned him,
employed him; he again transgressed, and she again pardoned the offense. Secure
in her affections, he at length proceeded to actual disobedience; his former
favor had gained him enemies, his present insolence lost him the friendship of
the Queen; he was condemned to retirement, when he might have been capitally
convicted. He now came to a sense of his misconduct, and was resolved to try
the long unpractised arts that had at first brought him into favor.
Immediately after sentence, when he was preparing for retirement into the
country, he first assured the Queen, that he could never be happy till he again
saw those eyes which were used to shine upon him with such luster; that, in
expectance of that happy moment, like another Nebuchadnezzar, he would dwell
with the beasts of the field, and be wet with the dew of heaven, till she again
propitiously took pity on his sufferings. This romantic message seemed
peculiarly pleasing to the Queen; she thought him sincere from the
consciousness of her own sincerity: she replied, that, after some time, when
convinced of his humility, something perhaps might be expected from her lenity.
This hope of pardon made him think slightly of his guilt: his pride once more
increasing with his success, he laid designs of destroying his rivals in power,
and securing the person of the Queen. With this resolution, he imprisoned the
Queen's messengers, headed a few malcontents, and marched through the city,
exhorting the citizens to arms, and crying out for the Queen, for the Queen.
During a long march, not one citizen thought proper to join him, though
numbers, led by curiosity, ran to see him pass by. In this disappointment, word
was brought that he was proclaimed a traitor; upon which he made one effort
more to excite an insurrection, but without success: he therefore now resolved
to return to his own house, but found the street secured by a great chain, and
a guard of soldiers. As he saw no other way to force his passage, but by an
attack upon the guards, attended by his followers, he immediately fell on, but
was beat back and wounded in the thigh. He then went down to the waterside,
and, putting himself and his retinue on board small boats, he escaped to his
house, which he fortified in the best manner he could. The house was soon
invested by the Lord Admiral, and the Earl and his followers were obliged to
deliver themselves up: the Earl of Southampton was a companion in his guilt and
his misfortunes; they were soon after brought to their trials, and condemned to
die: when the day of his death came, the Queen appeared irresolute; she sent an
order to stop the execution, and soon after ordered it to proceed. However
romantic it may seem, she felt in her bosom all the fluctuations of love and
resentment, and was irresolute which passion to obey: her resentment, at last,
prevailed; he was executed six days after his sentence, and died with penitence
and resolution.

Thus ended a favorite who had merits, but did not owe his rise to them; he
was gallant, romantic, and ostentatious: his genius for shows, and those
pleasures that carry an image of war, was as remarkable as his spirit in the
profession itself; and, had he been possessed of humility equal to his
abilities, he at last might have mounted a throne instead of a scaffold. The
Queen, at first, carried her resentment so far as to have a sermon preached at
St. Paul's cross to blacken his memory: his haughty behavior, and unguarded
expressions, had entirely alienated her affections, and imprinted an asperity,
which, it seems, even his death could not soften.

With the death of this favorite, Elizabeth's pleasures seemed to expire; she
went through the business of the state merely from habit, but her happiness was
no more. Historians are fond of representing all their characters without
passion, and give to every action of the great either political or rational
motives; they therefore treat this Queen's affection as a fable, but many of
the actions of her life appear dictated by resentment or regard, nor ever had
woman a greater variety of caprice; the great feel as the rest of mankind, and
her passions were particularly violent and lasting. She lived but a short time
after the death of Essex, and had the mortification of being forsaken by most
of her courtiers before she died, who now strove to court the favor of King
James, whom she had appointed her successor. She died in the seventieth year of
her age, and the forty-fourth of her reign. Her character differed with her
circumstances; in the beginning of her reign she was moderate and humble,
toward the end haughty and severe: she was indebted to her good fortune that
her ministers were excellent, but it was owing to her want of wisdom that her
favorites, who were chosen more immediately by herself, were unworthy. Though
she was possessed of excellent sense, yet she never had the discernment to
discover that she wanted beauty: to flatter her charms, even at the age of
sixty-five, was the surest way of gaining her interest and esteem. She was
greater in her public than her private character, and they most disliked and
feared her who were placed next her person. But, whatever might have been the
Queen's character, the character of her people, at that period, demands our
praise and imitation. Permit me to reserve that glorious picture of genius,
struggling to get free from barbarity, to the succeeding letter.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXVII.
WHATEVER punishments or cruelties were exerted in this reign, they mostly fell
upon the Great; but never was the people of England more happy internally, or
more formidable abroad, than during this period: the vices and virtues of a
nation are often wholly ascribed to the Monarch who rules them, but such
influence extends only through a narrow sphere; no single reign, however good,
nor indeed any succession of virtuous reigns, can give happiness, morals, and
arts, a general spread, unless the people be pre-disposed for the reception.
From Nerva to Antoninus, what a noble succession of Roman Emperors! and yet,
even under them, Rome was declining fast into barbarity: it was not owing to
Elizabeth alone, that England enjoyed all its present happiness; the people, as
if spontaneously, began to exert their native vigor, and every art and every
genius put forth all their powers.

The English were put in possession of neither new nor splendid acquisitions,
nor had they such great influence in foreign courts: but commerce grew up among
them, and, almost without a protector, flourished with vigor. The people now
began to know their real element, and this rendered them more happy than the
foreign conquests or the former victories of their celebrated kings: a nation,
which was once subject to every invasion, and the prey of every plunderer, now
became powerful, polite, laborious, and enterprizing. The newly successful
voyages of the Spaniards and Portuguese excited their emulation: they fitted
out several expeditions for discovering a northern passage to China, and,
though disappointed in their aim, their voyages were not wholly fruitless;
Drake and Cavendish surrounded the globe, and discovered skill and courage
superior to those very nations which had first shown them the way. The famous
Sir Walter Raleigh, without any assistance from the government, colonized New
England: these expeditions at length formed one of the most powerful marines of
Europe, and they were able to oppose the fleet of Spain, called by the boasting
title of the Invincible Armada, with an hundred ships: when this fleet of Spain
had been destroyed, partly by tempests and partly by conduct, the English
remained masters at sea. This superiority was constantly increasing, till
another victory, gained over the fleet of Philip III, gained them a naval
sovereignty, which they have ever since inviolably preserved, and which has
been scarce ever molested by a competitor.

But external commerce was not more cultivated than internal manufactures:
several of the Flemmings, who were persecuted from their own country, by the
bad conduct of Spain, found an asylum in England: these more than repaid the
protection they found, by the arts which they introduced, and the industry
which was thus propagated by their example.

Thus far in the useful arts: but, in the polite arts, England excelled all the
world, so that many writers fix the Augustan age of literature to that period.
The disputes, caused by the reformation of religion, had retarded the progress
of our language among the powerful, yet spread a love of literature among the
lower orders of the state. The people now began to learn to read, and the
Bible, translated into the vulgar tongue, was not only serviceable in improving
their morals, but their taste. The persecution of Mary was, however, of great
detriment to the language; the reformers, being driven into foreign countries,
on their return, introduced, into their sermons, a language compounded of those
dialects which they had acquired abroad, and the language of England was
actually in a state of barbarity, when Elizabeth came to the throne. Latin
sermons were in fashion, and few of the nobility had either the courage, or the
taste, to declare themselves the patrons of learning.

Either the fortune, or the discernment of Elizabeth, made Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury; and he set himself affiduously to reform the corruptions of style,
both by precept and example: for this purpose he reviewed and corrected the
English translation of the Bible, and printed it with royal magnificence. His
own style had all the eloquence of the times; it was manly and concise, but
wanted smoothness.

The Earl of Essex, a sketch of whose history you have seen, was himself one of
the greatest improvers of our language: his education had freed him from the
technical barbarities of the schools, and his style ran on unembarrassed by the
stiffness of pedantry. His letters (particularly that which he wrote from
Ireland to the Queen) are regarded as models of fine writing to this day. Sir
Walter Raleigh has the reputation of being one of the improvers of our
language, and none can contest with him the honor of being foremost in the
improvement of our history. Hooker, the author of the Ecclesiastical Polity,
was the first Englishman whose style, upon theological subjects, does honor to
his memory, as a scholar and a gentleman. But what particularly deserves
notice, is, that a man, like him, bred up in poverty, and seclusion from the
polite, should express himself in a more modern and elegant manner than his
contemporary authors, Sidney or Raleigh, who were bred at court.

I shall mention only one prose writer more, the greatest and wisest of all our
English philosophers, and perhaps the greatest philosopher among men; I need
hardly mention the name of Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam; his style is copious
and correct, and his learning only surpassed by his genius.

Among the poets, two of particular note attract our attention, Spenser and
Shakespeare; to attempt an encomium of either is needless; all praise must be
too low for their merits, or unnecessary to make them more known.

In short, the English now began to rival the Spaniards, who, at that time,
aimed at universal monarchy, both in arts and arms: the city of London became
more large and more beautiful; the people of the country began to consider
agriculture as one of the most useful and honorable employments; the English
were, in power, the second nation in Europe, and they were, shortly, to become
the greatest, by becoming the most free.

During this reign, a few suffered death for their religious opinions; but we
may venture to assert, that they raised the disturbances by which they
suffered, for those who lived in quiet were permitted to enjoy their opinions
under the necessary restraints.

If we look through history, and consider the rise of kingdoms, we shall not
find, in all its volumes, such an instance of a nation becoming wise, powerful,
and happy, in so short a time. The source of our felicity began in Henry VII,
and, though repressed by the intervening tyrannies, yet, before the end of
Elizabeth's reign, who was only his granddaughter, the people became the most
polished and the most happy people upon earth. Liberty, it is true, as yet
continued to fluctuate: Elizabeth knew her own power, and often stretched it to
the very limits of despotism; but, when commerce was introduced, liberty
necessarily entered in its train; for there never was a nation perfectly
commercial and perfectly despotic.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXVIII.
YOU are now to turn to a reign, which, though not splendid, was useful: the
English only wanted a season of peace, to bring those arts to perfection which
were planted in the preceding reign. No Monarch was fonder of peace than James
I, who succeeded Elizabeth; and none ever enjoyed a reign of more lasting
tranquillity. Historians, for what reason I know not, are fond of describing
this Monarch's transactions with ridicule; but, for my own part, I cannot avoid
giving just applause, both to his wisdom and felicity.

King James came to the throne with the universal approbation of all orders of
the state; for, in his person was united every claim to the crown, that either
descent, bequest, or parliamentary sanction could confer. But, on his first
arrival, it was readily seen that he by no means approved of the treatment of
his mother, Mary Queen of Scots; and not only refused to wear mourning himself
for the late Queen, by whom she had been beheaded; but also denied admission to
any who appeared in mourning upon her account.

Upon a review of his conduct, there are few of this Monarch's actions that do
not seem to spring from motives of justice and virtue; his only error seems to
consist in applying the despotic laws and maxims of the Scottish government to
the English constitution, which was not susceptible of them. He began his reign
by a laudable attempt to unite both the kingdoms into one, but this the
jealousy of the English prevented: they were apprehensive, that the posts and
employments, which were in the gift of the court, might be conferred on the
Scotch, whom they were, as yet, taught to regard as foreigners. By his repulse
in this instance, he found the people he came to govern very different from
those he had left, and perceived that the liberty and the spirit of the English
could not be restrained by the shadows of divine right and passive obedience.

He now, therefore, attempted to correct his first mistake, and to peruse the
English laws as he had formerly done those of his own country, and by these he
was resolved to govern. He was in this second attempt disappointed in his aim:
in a government so fluctuating as that of England, custom was ever deviating
from law, and what was enacted in one reign was contradicted, by precedent, in
another: the laws and the manners of England were, at this particular juncture,
very different from each other. The laws had all along declared in favor of an
almost unlimited prerogative: the present manners, on the contrary, were formed
by instruments, and upon principles of liberty. All the Kings and Queens before
him, except such as were weakened by intestine divisions, or the dread of
approaching invasion, issued rather commands than received advice from their
parliaments: James was early sensible of their conduct in this respect, and
strove to establish the prerogative upon the laws, unmindful of the alteration
of manners among the people, who had, in the reign of Queen Mary, got an idea
of their own power, of which, when the majority are once sensible, they never
desist from defending.

Numberless, therefore, were the disputes between the King and his parliament,
during this whole reign; one attempting to keep the royal splendour unsullied,
the others aiming at lessening the dangerous part of his power; the one
laboring to preserve the laws and institutions of former reigns, the other
steadfast in asserting the inherent privileges of mankind. Thus we see virtue
was the cause of the dissension on either side; and the principles of both,
though seemingly opposite, were, in fact, founded either in law or in reason.
When the parliament would not grant a subsidy, James had examples enough, among
his predecessors, to extort a benevolence. Edward IV, Henry VIII, and others,
had often done this, and he was entitled, undoubtedly, by precedent, to the
same privilege. The house of commons, on the other hand, who began to find
themselves the protectors of the people, and not the passive instruments of the
crown, justly considered that this extorted benevolence might, at length, make
the Sovereign entirely independent of the parliament, and therefore complained
against it, as an infringement on their privileges. These attempts of the
crown, and those murmurings of the people, continued through this whole reign,
and first gave rise to that spirit o^ party, which has ever since subsisted in
England; the one side declaring for the King's prerogative, the other for the
people's liberty.

Whenever the people, as I have already observed, get sight of liberty, they
never quit the view: the commons, as may naturally be expected in the present
juncture, gained ground, even though defeated; and the Monarch, notwithstanding
his professions and resolutions to keep his prerogative untouched, was every
day losing some small part of his authority. Historians are apt to charge this
to his imbecility, but it, in reality, arose from the spirit of the times: the
clergy, who had returned from banishment during the last reign, had
disseminated republican principles among their hearers, and no art nor
authority could check its growth; so that, had the most active, or the most
diligent Monarch upon earth, been then seated on the throne, yet could he not
have preserved the ancient privileges of English monarchy unimpaired.

The clemency and the justice of this Monarch's reign early appeared from that
spirit of moderation which he showed to the professors of each religion: the
minds of the people had been long irritated against each other, and each party
persecuted the rest, as it happened to prevail; James wisely observed, that men
should be punished only for actions, and not for opinions: each party murmured
against him, and the universal complaint of every sect was the best argument of
his moderation toward all.

Yet, mild as he was, there was a project contrived, in the very beginning of
his reign, for the re-establishment of Popery, which seemed to be even of
infernal extraction: a more horrid, or a more terrible scheme, never entered
into the human mind; the massacre of St. Bartholomew, in France, in which sixty
thousand Protestants were murdered in cold blood, was, in reality, not so
dreadful. The Catholics of England had expected some condescensions from the
King, which he was unwilling to grant: this refusal determined them to take
different measures for the establishment of their religion and their party;
they were resolved to cut off the King and both houses of parliament at one
blow: the house, where the parliament of England sits, is built on arched
vaults, and in these the Papists were determined to lay gunpowder, in order to
blow up the King and all the members of both houses at their next sitting. For
this deed of desperation a number of persons united, among which were Robert
Catesby, Thomas Percy, kinsman to the Earl of Northumberland; John Grant,
Ambrose Rookwood, Christopher Wright, Francis Tresham, Guy Fawkes, and Everard
Digby. How horrid soever the contrivance, yet every member seemed faithful and
secret in the league, and, about two months before the sitting of parliament,
they hired the cellar under the Parliament House, and bought a quantity of
coals with which it was then filled, as if for their own use: the next thing
done was to convey, privately, thirty-six barrels of gunpowder, which had been
purchased in Holland, and which were covered under the coals and faggots. The
day for the sitting of the parliament approached; never was treason more
secret, or ruin more apparently inevitable: the conspirators expected the day
with impatience, and gloried in their meditated guilt. A remorse of private
friendship saved the kingdom, when all the ties, divine and human, were too
weak to save it: Sir Henry Piercy conceived a desire of saving the life of the
Lord Monteagle, his inmate friend and companion. About ten days before the
sitting, this nobleman, upon his return home, received a letter from a person
unknown, the messenger making off as soon as he had delivered it: the letter
was to this effect: Stay away from this parliament, for God and man have
concurred to punish the wickedness of the times. Think not slightly of this
warning, though the danger does not appear, yet they shall receive a terrible
blow, without knowing from whence it comes. The danger will be past as soon as
you have burnt this letter, and this counsel may do you good, but cannot do you
harm. The contents of this mysterious letter surprised and puzzled the nobleman
to whom it was addressed: he communicated it instantly to the Secretary of
State, and the Secretary showed it to the council; none of them were capable of
comprehending the meaning of it, and it was resolved to communicate it to the
King. In this universal agitation between doubt and apprehension, the King was
the first who penetrated the meaning of its fatal contents; he concluded that
some sudden danger was preparing, by means of gunpowder. The Lord Chamberlain
sent proper persons, the very night before the sitting of parliament, to
examine the vaults abovementioned: there the whole train of powder was
discovered, and a man in a cloak and boots, with a dark lanthorn in his hand,
preparing the dreadful attempt; this was Guy Fawkes, who passed for Piercy's
servant. The atrociousness of his guilt inspired him with resolution; and, with
an undaunted air he told them, that had he blown them and himself up together,
he had been happy. He obstinately refused to name his accomplices; the sight of
the rack, however, at length brought him to a confession. No nation fears death
less than the English, but none dread torments more.

The conspirators, who had prepared all things to second the mine at
Westminster, finding their plot discovered, fled different ways to assemble
their Catholic friends, whom they expected to rise in their defense: but, the
country being everywhere alarmed against them, they were at last forced, to
the number of about an hundred, to stop at an house in Warwickshire, where they
were resolved to sell their lives dearly. A spark of fire happening to fall
among some gunpowder that was laid to dry, it blew up, and so maimed the
principal conspirators, that the survivors resolved to open the gate and sally
through the multitude that surrounded the house. Some instantly were slain with
a thousand wounds; Catesby, Piercy, and Winter, standing back to back, fought
long and desperately, till, in the end, the two first fell covered with blood,
and the other was taken alive. Such as survived the slaughter were tried and
convicted; several fell just victims to justice, and others experienced the
King's mercy. Two Jesuits, Garnet and Oldcorn, who were privy to the plot,
suffered with the rest: the King maintained, that they were punished justly;
but, by their own party, they were regarded as martyrs to religion, though
without ground, for James was too humane to condemn any upon such slight
motives, as those of opinion.

The discovery and extinction of this conspiracy, which was entirely owing to
the wisdom of the King, gained him the love of his subjects, though it had but
little influence over his parliament, in extoring supplies. His desire of peace
with foreign states diminished his authority at home; for, though he talked
boldly of his prerogative in parliament, yet, unlike some of his predecessors,
he had no standing army to back his pretensions: his speeches, which were
rather arguments in favor of royal authority than directions or advice, only
put both houses upon arguing with him in his own way, but not upon complying
with his requests; and they refused him supplies, when they knew it could be
done with impunity. His liberality and his indigence often forced him to
condescensions, which, when once granted, could never be again recalled; thus,
while he thought himself enlarging the royal prerogative, he was, in reality,
abridging it on every side.

Perhaps the opposition this King met with from his parliament, was the motive
of his encouraging favorites, who might help him to reduce them to his
measures: his first choice was fixed upon Robert Carr, who, from a private
gentleman, was brought up, through all the gradations of preferment, till
created Earl of Somerset. An amor between this gentleman and the Countess of
Essex, one of the lewdest, yet finest, women of her time, at last terminated in
his disgrace: his friend, Sir Thomas Overbury, had declared against his
marrving this lady, who was espoused to another: this advice procured the
resentment of Somerset, and the hatred of the Countess. The King, by false
pretenses, was instigated to confine Sir Thomas in the Tower, and here the Earl
and the Countess caused him to be poisoned. When this transaction came to the
King's knowledge, he delivered him to public justice, by which he was
condemned; but he received the royal pardon, though he ever after continued in
disgrace.

His next, and greatest favorite, was George Villars, afterward Duke of
Buckingham, whose person and beauty first drew the King's attention and regard.
This nobleman was the first who was ever created a Duke in England, without
being allied to the royal family: it may be reckoned among the most capricious
circumstances of this reign, that a King, who was bred a scholar, should choose,
for his favorites, the most illiterate of his courtiers; that he, who trembled
at a drawn sword, should lavish favors on one who promised to be the hero of a
romance. Buckingham first inspired young Prince Charles, who was afterward
famous for his misfortunes and death, with a desire of going disguised into
Spain, to court the Infanta: their adventures in this romantic expedition could
fill novels, and have actually been made the subject of many. Charles was the
knight errant, and Buckingham served under him as 'squire: they set out post,
and traveled through France under the names of Jack and Tom Smith; they
appeared at Paris in large bushy perriwigs, which shadowed their faces. They
were received in Spain with all possible respect, but Buckingham filled the
whole court with intrigues, adventures, serenades, and jealousy. To make the
folly complete, he fell in love with the Duchess of Olivarez, the prime
minister's wife, and insulted the prime minister. These levities were not to be
endured at such a court as that of Spain, where jealousy is so prevalent, and
decorum so necessary; the match was broke off, and the Prince was permitted to
return in safety.

A match for this Prince was soon after negotiated with Henrietta, the daughter
of Henry IV. of France, and this met with better success than the former:
Charles had seen this Princess, when he passed through that kingdom in
disguise; he admired her beauty, and from every quarter was informed of her
senfe and discretion. A dispensation was got from the Pope for her marrying a
Protestant Prince, but King James died before the consummation of the nuptials.

Were we to take the character of this Monarch as described by Rapin, we should
consider him as one of the worst of Princes, even while he pretends to defend
him. It is this injudicious historian's method, wherever he finds a good
character among our Kings, to load it with reproach; wherever he meets a bad
one, to extenuate its guilt, so that every Monarch is levelled by him to one
common standard of indifference. His remarks upon particular facts are similar
to his characters: whatever other historians have laid down as motives, he
undertakes to contradict, and fancies that he thus acquires an air of
impartiality. In the present instance, he strongly insinuates throughout, that
James was a Papist, with no better proofs than his being ever a favourer of
toleration: he had but just before blamed Mary, and with reason, for her
implacable partiality, yet he condemns James only because he was impartial. To
this Monarch the English are indebted for that noble freedom of opinion they
have since enjoyed; a benefit, of which narrow-minded bigots have too often
strove to deprive them.

With regard to foreign negotiations, James neither understood nor cultivated
them; and perhaps, in the government of such a kingdom as England, domestic
politics alone are requisite. His reign was marked with none of the splendors
of triumph, nor no new conquests or acquisitions; but the arts were
nevertheless silently and happily going on to improvement: reason was extending
its influence, and showing mankind a thousand errors in religion and
government, that had been rivetted by long prescription. People now no longer
joined to some popular leader, but each began to think for himself: the
reformation had introduced a spirit of liberty, even while the constitution and
the laws were built upon arbitrary power. James taught them, by his own
example, to argue upon these topics; he set up the divine authority of Kings
against the natural privileges of the people: the subject began in controversy,
and it was soon found that the Monarch's was the weakest side.

I am, etc.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

