AN HISTORY OF ENGLAND, IN A SERIES of LETTERS FROM A NOBLEMAN to his SON.

VOL. II.

Nec minimum meruere decus, vestigia Graeca
Aust deserere, and celebrare domestica facta.
HOR. LONDON, Printed for J. NEWBERY, at the Bible and Sun, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCCLXIV.

BOOKS printed for, and sold by, J. Newbery, at the Bible and Sun, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, LONDON.
1. A New and Accurate SYSTEM of NATURAL HISTORY: Containing, 1. The History of
Quadrupedes, including amphibious Animals, Frogs, and Lizards, with their
Properties and Uses in Medicine. 2. The History of Birds, with the Method of
bringing up those of the Singing Kind. 3. The History of Fishes and Serpents,
including Sea-Turtles, Crustaceous and Shell-Fishes, with their Medicinal Uses.
4. The History Insects, with their Properties and Uses in Medicine. 5. The
History of Waters, Earths, Stones, Fossils, and Minerals, with their Virtues,
Porperties, and Medicinal Uses: To which is added, the Method in which Linnaeus
has treated these Subjects. 6. The History of Vegetables, as well Foreign as
Indigenous, including an Account of the Roots, Barks, Woods, Leaves, Flowers,
Fruits, Seeds, Resins, Gums, and concreted Juices; as also their Properties,
Virtues, and Uses in Medicine: Together with the Method of cultivating those
planted in Gardens. By R. Brooks, M. D. In 6 Vol. Price 18s. sewed, or 1l. 1s.
bound. 2. The GENERAL GAZETTEER: Or, Compendious Geographical Dictionary.
Containing a Description of all the Empires, Kingdoms, States, Republics,
Provinces, Cities, Chief Towns, Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Citadels, Seas,
Harbors, Bays, Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, Capes, and Promontories in the known
World; together with the Government, Policy, Customs, Manners, and Religion of
the Inhabitants. The Extent, Bounds, and natural Productions of each Country;
and the Trade, Manufactures, and Curiosities of the Cities and Towns; their
Longitude, Latitude, Bearing, and Distances in English Miles from remarkable
Places; as also the Sieges they have undergone, and the Battles that have been
fought near them, down to this present Year. Including an authentic Account of
the Counties, Cities, and Market Towns in England and Wales; as also the
Villages, with Fairs, the Days on which they are kept, according to the New
Style, as well as the Cattle, Goods, and Merchandises that are sold thereat. By
R. Brooks, M. D. Price 6s. bound. 3. New PRINCIPLES of GEOGRAPHY and
NAVIGATION. In two Parts. Part I. Containing the Theory of the true Figure and
Dimensions of the Earth, deduced from actual Mensuration, and applied to a just
Construction of Maps and Charts for Land and Sea Use, exemplified in a new
geographical Chart for Europe, and a large Sea Chart to seventy Degrees of
Latitude. Part II. Containing a Table of Meridional Parts, calculated for the
Spheriod to every Minute of Latitude, from the Measure of a Degree at the
Equator. Also, new astronomical Principles of Navigation. By Benjamin Martin.
Price 10s. 6d. half bound. 4. PHILOSOPHIA BRITANNICA: Or, A New and
Comprehensive System of the Newtonian Philosophy, Astronomy, and Geography, in
a Course of twelve Lectures, with Notes: Containing the Physical, Mechanical,
Geometrical, and Experimental Proofs and Illustrations of Natural Science. Also
a particular Account of the Invention, Structure, Improvement, and Uses of all
the confiderable Instruments, Engines, and Machines; with new Calculations
relating to their Nature, Power, and Operation. The whole collected and
methodized from all the principal Authors, and public Memoirs, to the present
Year. By B. Martin. The second Edition. In 3 Vol. Price 18s. bound. 5. The
English Works of Roger Ascham, Preceptor to Queen Elizabeth: Containing, 1. A
Report of the Affairs of Germany, and the Emperor Charles's Court. 2.
Toxophilus, or the School for Shooting. 2. The Schoolmaster, or perfect Way of
bringing up Youth, illustrated by the late learned Mr. Upton. 4. Letters to
Queen Elizabeth and others, now first published from the Manscripts, with Notes
and Observations, and the Author's Life. By James Bennet, Master of the
Boarding-School at Hoddesdon in Hertfordshire. Price 10s. 6d. sewed. In 4to.
FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, IN A SERIES of LETTERS.
LETTER I.
NEVER did Monarch come to the throne of England with a greater variety of
favorable concurrences than Charles I. He found himself possessed of a
peaceful and flourishing kingdom, his right undisputed by any rival claimant,
strengthened by an alliance with one of the most powerful Monarchs that ever
reigned in France, whose sister he had married; and, to add to all this, he was
loved by his subjects, whom he had won by his virtues and address.

But this was but a flattering prospect; the spirit of liberty was rouzed, and
was resolved to oppose the ancient claims of Monarchs, who usurped their power
in times of ignorance or danger, confirmed it by laws, and continued it by long
prescription. Charles had been, from his infancy, taught to consider the royal
privileges as sacred pledges, which it was his duty to defend: his father had
implanted the doctrines of hereditary and indefeasible right early upon his
mind. James only defended those doctrines by words, and it was soon the fate of
Charles to assert them by action. It is the duty of every Sovereign to consider
the genius and disposition of his people, as a father does that of his
children, and to adapt his government to each conjuncture. Charles mistook that
genius; he wanted to govern a people who had, for some time, learned to be free
by maxims and precedents, that had their origin in times of ignorance and
slavery.

He therefore began his reign with two of the most difficult projects that
could be conceived; the one to succor the Protestants in Germany against the
Emperor and Duke of Bavaria; the other to keep the royal prerogatives entire,
without a national standing army. In order to effect these purposes, the house
of commons was to be managed, who, as I have already described, from being the
oppressed party, were now willing, in turn, to become oppressors; who, from a
detestation of Popery, had now overshot the mark, and were become Puritans. His
first demand for the necessary supplies to carry on the war of the Palatinate
in Germany, though undertaken at their own request, was answered with a
petition for punishing Papists, and for an examination into the grievances of
the nation. Buckingham, who had been the late King's favorite, and who was
still more caressed by the present Monarch, did not escape their censures:
instead of granting the sums requisite, they employed the time in vain
disputations and complaints, till the season for prosecuting the intended
campaign was elapsed. The King, therefore, at length wearied with their delays,
and offended at their contempt of his demands, thought proper to dissolve a
parliament which he could not bring to reason. In fact, the commons, at this
time, complained of imaginary grievances, but the time was approaching when
their complaints were to become real.

The ministers of the King had not yet forgot that kind of tax which was called
a benevolence, and which had been often exacted from the subject in former
reigns. Charles thought to avail himself of this method of procuring money, but
at the same time colored it over with a greater appearance of justice than any
of his predecessors. He therefore determined to borrow money of such persons as
were best able to lend, to whom, for this purpose, he directed letters,
mentioning the sum. With this the people reluctantly complied; it was, in fact,
a grievance, though authorized by a thousand precedents; but no precedent can
give sanction to injustice. With this money a fleet was equipped and sent
against Spain, but which returned without procuring either glory or advantage.

This ineffectual expedition demanded to be repaired by a new supply greater
than what extorted loans could produce, and another parliament was called for
this purpose. The new parliament, upon this occasion, seemed even more
refractory than the former, and appeared more willing to make or to complain of
grievances than to grant money: but chiefly their resentment was directed
against Buckingham, the royal favorite. Whenever the subjects attack the royal
prerogative, they begin with the favorites of the crown; and wise Princes,
sensible of this, seldom have any. Charles was not possessed of the art of
making a distinction between friends and ministers; whoever was his favorite
him he always entrusted with the administration of affairs; he loved
Buckingham, and undertook to defend him: to defend this nobleman was to share
his reproach; two members of the house of commons, Diggs and Elliot, undertook
to accuse him. The purport of the charge amounted to little more than that he
had engrossed too much power for himself and his relations, and that he had
applied a plaster to the late King's side which was supposed to be poisonous.
They inveighed against the Duke from this frivolous accusation, and the King,
in a passion, ordered them both to the Tower. This was an open act of violence,
and should have been supported, or ever performed. The commons exclaimed, that
their privileges were infringed; they protested that neither of the members had
spoken any thing disrespectful of his Majesty, and began to publish their
vindication. The King, who was ever ready to enter upon harsh measures, but not
to support them, released the two members, and this compliance confirmed that
obstinacy which his former injury had contributed to raise. The Earl of
Arundel, for being guilty of the same offense in the house of Lords, was
imprisoned and dismissed in the same manner by the King. The two houses having
in this manner answered the royal demands for money, the King, rather than give
up the Duke, chose to be without the supply, and therefore once more dissolved
the parliament.

He had now a war to maintain, which he was engaged in by the advice of those
very members who refused to contribute to its support; besides this, he was to
put the kingdom in a proper posture of defense, and he wanted money to execute
these purposes. To furnish the proper supplies he again had recourse to loans,
and to granting protections to the Papists, for stipulated sums of money: such
as refused had soldiers billetted upon them, contrary to the customs of
England; and even some were enrolled for soldiers themselves. Persons of birth
and rank were summoned to appear before the council, and, upon their persisting
in a refusal, were put into confinement. We now once more perceive the seeds of
discord beginning to shoot forth: we now see, as in every other civil war, both
parties guilty of injustice, yet on either side that injustice arising from
principles of virtue; the one actuated by the inherent liberties of mankind,
the other by the prescriptive privileges of the crown: such is the general lot
of humanity, to have their actions degenerate from the producing motives.

The King, now finding that nothing but the prospect of immediate danger could
induce some future parliament to provide necessary supplies, was resolved to
make a rupture with France, a war against which had ever been an expedient of
producing unanimity at home. With this view he sent out Buckingham with a fleet
to relieve Rochelle, a maritime town in that kingdom, which had long enjoyed
its privileges independent of the French King, and which he was now actually
preparing to deprive them of. This expedition was equally fruitless with that
to the coasts of Spain; the Duke knew nothing of the art of war, and consumed
his time in besieging a little fort in the isle of Rhee, from whence he was
driven with the loss of half his army. The bad success of this served to render
the unfortunate Duke still more obnoxious, and the King more needy; another
parliament was therefore called, and a supply demanded in the usual form. The
commons, in the first parliament, had begun with fictitious grievances, but
their refusing then to contribute the supplies soon introduced an actual abuse
of power, and rendered the King unjust, who, probably, only desired to be easy.
He extorted supplies, and imprisoned the refractory. The complaints of the
commons were now real; their members had been imprisoned, loans had been
extorted; a tax upon merchandise, called tonnage and poundage, had been exacted
without parliamentary authority; and, last of all, the Duke of Buckingham was
still suffered to rule the councils of the King, and inflame every proceeding.
In this situation they seemed, as usual, resolved to grant no money till their
grievances were redressed, and till the King had given a positive assurance to
maintain the liberties of the subject. The King promised both, and they voted
him a liberal supply, upon which they were prorogued, as was customary. This
fresh supply enabled his Majesty to make another attempt to relieve Rochelle,
and the Duke of Buckingham was again to have the command: Buckingham had ever
behaved with some haughtiness, as being secure of the King's protection; but
his greatest fault seemed to be too large a share of power, which gave offense
to every order. It is the aim of all malcontents in a state rather to bring
the great down to their own level, than to exalt the inferior order to theirs:
and this might be a motive to the lords and commons for attempting to retrench
Buckingham's power. The clamor raised against him in the house was not lost
among the people; they re-echoed it from one to the other, and the Duke had a
million of foes only from his seeming prosperity. Among this number was one
John Felton, an Irishman, a lieutenant in the army; this man was naturally
melancholy, courageous, and enthusiastic; he felt for his country as if
laboring under a calamity which he thought it in the power of his single arm
to remove: he resolved to kill the Duke, and thus to do a service both to God
and man. Animated with mistaken patriotism and gloomy zeal, he reached
Portsmouth, where the Duke was then, surrounded with his levee, giving the
necessary orders to embark. Felton came up among the crowd and stabbed him with
a long knife to the heart; the Duke instantly fell dead, and Felton walked
composedly away; but his hat had fallen off while he was striking the blow, and
this produced his discovery. He disdained denying a murder in which he gloried,
and averred that he looked upon the Duke as an enemy to his country, and, as
such, deserving to suffer. We shall see through the course of this reign
several instances of great virtues and enormous vices, for the genius of
England was at this time arrived at its highest pitch.

The expedition to Rochelle again returned without success, as if it had been
ordered by fate that nothing was to put the people into good humor. The
contest therefore between privilege and prerogative was now carried on with the
same acrimony as before. Tonnage and poundage was exacted by the King as a
right belonging to the crown, and refused by the merchants as a tax that could
only be granted by the people. The parliament was called to determine the
dispute, but, instead of discussing that argument, they entered upon disputes
about religion. The house was mostly composed of Puritans, and such were for
abolishing Episcopacy, and persecuting Papists. They were freed from
Buckingham; but there was another favorite whom they dreaded still more, Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, a great favourer of the opinion of Divine right, and
firmly attached to the rites of the church as then established. They seemed
willing to allow the King no favorite, and therefore loudly murmured against
this Bishop. Their indignation, however, was, for a while, called off to
another object, which was considered as a new act of violence in the King. His
customhouse officers had seized upon the goods of one or two merchants who
refused to pay tonnage and poundage. The Judges, in the former reign of James
I, had adjudged this tax to belong to the crown without consent of parliament.
The former reign therefore had been the proper time for disputing the King's
right, but the commons had then not so much power, or such a spirit of
resistance as now. They were now perfectly sensible of their own strength, and
were resolved to fix the limits between the King and the people. They therefore
boldly and warmly remonstrated against the King's proceeding; and he in return
imprisoned four of the members, and dissolved the parliament. These were the
causes which soon after overturned the state, and laid the throne in blood.

I am, etc.

LETTER II.
AMonarchical government has ever been looked upon as best, when wisely
administered. We are so constituted by nature that some are born to command,
and others to obey. In a republic, how free soever, the people cannot govern
themselves, and their leaders must be tyrants over their own narrow circle of
subjects. In a monarchy the Governor is placed at a distance from the many, as
he is but one; in a republic the tyrants are near, because they are many. In
the former the people are subject to oppression from errors of will; in the
latter, to be harrassed by the rigours of the law: in a monarchy the redress of
grievances is speedy; in a republic, dilatory and uncertain: in the one,
punishments are few; in the other, severe and numerous, from the debility of
the constitution.

The present parliament, seemed not so intent upon abridging the King's power,
as upon entirely abolishing it; they were Calvinists, and it is the spirit of
Calvinism to throw off the restraints of royalty. The English had lately seen
this happily effected in Switzerland and Holland, and, influenced by such
examples, seemed desirous of imitation.

You have seen the King and the English parliament now almost prepared for an
open rupture; still, however, the commons kept within the bounds of humble
remonstrance, and, while they refused his Majesty's demands, asked pardon for
their delay. They had still a respect for their Monarch, which even their
republican principles could not entirely efface; and, though they were willing
to wound, yet they feared to strike an open blow. The Scotch soon set them an
example of resistance; they had, in that kingdom, long embraced the
Calvinistical doctrines; and, though they still had Bishops, these were reduced
to poverty, and treated with contempt. James I. attempted to exalt the Bishops,
and to introduce the rites and the liturgy of the church of England among them,
but died in the midst of his endeavors. Charles, therefore, was resolved to
complete what his father had begun. This unnecessary and illjudged attempt
alienated the affections of his Scotoh subjects. The sedition past from city to
city; the Calvinists formed a league, as if all the laws, divine and human,
were infringed; while the desire in the court party of supporting their
commands, and, in the people, of defending their religion, soon, excited,
actually, in Scotland, those dangers which in England were, as yet, only
apprehended.

In such a situation the King could only repress the presumption of his Scotch
subjects by the assistance of those of England; but he had lately dissolved his
parliament, and seemed no way disposed to call another; he had cut off the
sources of every supply in cases of emergency, and fondly hoped he could govern
by merely the terror of royalty. His favorites helped to confirm his errors;
they were fond of arbitrary power, because they shared its indulgences; the
privy council considered itself as absolute; the Star Chamber, as it was
called, severely punished all who denied the prerogative royal; the High
Commission court now turned from defending the Papists against the Puritans,
whom they justly feared, as tinctured with the spirit of resistance. The very
Judges also, being chosen by the court, were entirely devoted to the King; so
that all conspired to lift him above justice, and induced him to call
parliaments no more, whose maxims of government he found diametrically opposite
to his own.

He was therefore resolved to fix upon other methods of raising money: methods
indeed which were practiced by his predecessors, but at times when they had
power to control even justice, and force to compel their subjects to obey.
Charles, in the midst of a civil war in Scotland, and the discontents of his
people at home, at a time when one half of his subjects were preaching
sedition, and the other half were learning to despise Kings; without army, and
without treasures; resolved to reign with arbitrary power.

With the taxes which he levied without parliaments in England, he undertook to
bring about the reformation in Scotland; and therefore began, as his parliament
was now no more, to collect a tax upon the subject called Ship Money. This is
that famous tax which first rouzed a whole nation, after an unsettled
constitution of more than a thousand years, at length to fix and determine the
bounds of their own freedom, and the King's prerogative.

To give a sanction to the royal orders, this tax was backed by the opinion of
all the Judges, who voted it to be customary and legal. Their opinion will, at
once, serve to explain the nature of this tax, and what they judged concerning
it. It ran thus, We, every man by himself, and all of us together, have taken
into serious consideration the case and question concerning Ship Money; and it
is our opinion, that when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is
concerned, and the Kingdom in danger, that your Majesty may, by writ under the
great seal of England, command all your subjects of this your kingdom, at their
charge, to provide and furnish such number of ships with men, victuals, and
ammunition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit, for the defense
and safety of this Kingdom from such danger and peril: And that, by law, your
Majesty may compel the doing thereof, in case of refusal or refractoriness: And
we are also of opinion, that in such case your Majesty is the sole judge both
of the danger, and when and how the same is to he prevented and avoided, etc.

An order from the throne, thus backed by the opinion of all the Judges, it was
thought, would be, at once, complied with; but the King was deceived. A private
man, of courage and integrity, one John Hampden, stood forth as a champion for
the people, and refused to pay a tax not authorized by parliament. The sum at
which he was rated amounted to but twenty shillings, yet he refused to
contribute even this, and brought his cause before the court of Exchequer.
Never was a greater cause argued in any court before. The Judges, by their
sentence, were to determine whether the nation, and their posterity, were to be
subject to arbitrary power, or to enjoy freedom. The Judges determined in
favor of servitude; Hampden was cast; and this only served to increase the
discontents of the people.

The discontent and opposition the King found among his English subjects, one
would have thought, might serve to repress his ardour for reformation in the
religion of Scotland. Having published an order for reading the liturgy in the
principal church in Edinburgh, the people received it with clamours and
imprecations; the court-party blamed their obstinacy, as the innovations were
trifling; but this was retorted against themselves with still greater force,
for laboring so earnestly at the establishment of trifles. The sedition in
that kingdom, which had hitherto been secret, was now kept concealed no longer;
rebellion had, as it were, set up its standard amongst them. Yet still the King
could not resolve to desist from his design; and so prepossessed was he in
favor of royal right, that he thought the very name of a King would influence
them to return to duty. He was soon undeceived; the Scotch Calvinists, whose
principles were republican, entered into a covenant to suppress the Bishops,
and resist the King's authority. This was judged an open declaration of war,
and Charles summoned the Nobility of England, who held lands of the crown, to
furnish a proper number of forces to suppress them. To add to his supplies, he
demanded a voluntary contribution from the Clergy, and by means of his Queen
the Catholics also were pressed for their assistance. By these methods he found
himself at the head of an undisciplined and reluctant army, amounting to about
twenty thousand men, commanded by Generals more willing to negotiate than to
fight. However, his superiority of number gave him a manifest advantage over
the malcontents, who were not slow in marching to oppose him. Charles had
inherited the peaceful disposition of his father; he was unwilling to come to
extremities, although a blow, then struck with vigor, might have prevented
many of his succeeding misfortunes. Instead of fighting, he entered upon a
treaty; a suspension was concluded upon, and terms agreed to, that neither side
intended to preserve. This suspension, and disbanding the armies, was a fatal
step to the King; the Scotch forces could be again mustered at pleasure; the
English troops, not without time, difficulty, and expense. Of this the
malcontents were sensible, and the negotiations met with obstructions in
proportion as they were confident of their power. In short, after much
altercation, and many treaties signed, and broken, both parties once more
resolved upon a war.

War being resolved on, the King now took every method to raise money for
maintaining it. Ship Money was levied as before; some other arbitrary taxes
were exacted with great severity; but one method of increasing supplies
reflects immortal honor upon those who granted them. His counselors and
servants lent the King whatever sums they could spare, and distressed their
private fortunes to serve the state. Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Marquis of Hamilton, contributed very large sums; but particularly Thomas
Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, gave his Majesty twenty thousand pounds.
Wentworth was one of those great characters which marked those celebrated
times. Upon his first appearance in the state he was foremost in the opposition
to the crown; but, finding his confederates had mixed a spirit of enthusiasm
with their regards for liberty, he left their side to take that of the King,
which he fancied in greatest danger. He was brave, wise, and loyal, and
followed the King from principle, yet without entirely approving his conduct.

These were the resources of the crown to prepare for a Scotch war, but they
were still insufficient; and there was but one method more to furnish larger
supplies, namely, by calling a parliament. It was now eleven years since
Charles had called any. The ungovernable spirit of the last had taught him to
hate and to fear such an assembly. His wants, however, at length, induced him
to constrain his indignation, and, by the advice of his Council, he called
another, the members of which were still more turbulent than the former, as
they now had still stronger reasons for their discontent. The house of commons
could not be induced to treat the Scotch, who were of the same principles, and
contended for the same cause, as their enemies. They looked upon them as
friends and brothers, who only rose to teach them how to defend their
privileges. The King could reap no other fruits, therefore, from this assembly,
but murmurings and complaints; every method he had taken to supply himself with
money was declared an abuse. Tonnage and poundage, shipmoney, the sale of
monopolies, the billetting soldiers upon the citizens were all voted stretches
at arbitrary power. The Star Chamber gave particular offense, and instead of
subsidies the house presented the King with nothing but their grievances.
Charles once more dissolved this parliament, and thus aggravated the
discontents of the people.

He had now made enemies of the Scotch nation, and of the commons of England;
it remained to offend the city of London; upon their refusing to lend him a sum
of money to carry on the war, he sued them in the Star Chamber for some lands
in Ireland, and made them pay a considerable fine. He continued to exact all
the taxes against which the parliament had so frequently remonstrated; even had
he been despotic, such a conduct would have shook him on the throne; but,
limited as he was, it served to complete his overthrow. He could expect little
assistance from England; and the Scotch, sensible of their own influence in
that part of his dominions, led an army of twenty thousand men as far as
Newcastle upon Tyne, in order to seize upon, or to dethrone him. Having thus
prepared his misfortunes, he found himself again obliged to call the last
parliament, which completed his ruin.

Instead of granting money, this new parliament, as all the rest had done,
began by demanding to have their grievances redressed; they desired an
abolition of the Star chamber; exclaimed against arbitrary taxes, and
particularly ship money; and, in fine, demanded that a new parliament should be
called every three years. Charles was now obliged to grant those demands from
necessity, which in the beginning of his reign he might have bestowed as a
favor. He expected to regain his authority by complying, but he was deceived;
nothing could satisfy the commons but the total abolition of his power. He
expected that his English subjects would repress the insolence of those of
Scotland, but had the mortification to find the house of commons approve their
conduct, and repay their irruption with a reward of three hundred thousand
pounds. He hoped to repress the Puritanical party in England, but found, to his
surprise, almost the whole house of commons of that persuasion. He loved the
Earl of Strafford with tenderness, and esteemed his wisdom; and the house of
commons, conscious of his regards, accused the Earl of high treason. When we
attempt innovation, we seldom know how far our schemes will extend at last.
This parliament began with redressing grievances; they proceeded to reform the
state, and ended in totally destroying the constitution.

I am, etc.

LETTER. III.
IN treating of a subject, in which almost every Englishman is partial, it is
no easy matter to avoid falling into their errors; but, I have labored to view
this part of our history, without receiving any biass from party; and our
constitution is now sufficiently established, whatever we may think of this
Monarch's equity, or his subjects resolution. Our laws, at present, differ both
from what Charles endeavored to maintain, and what his parliaments pretended
to enact: we now are all agreed, that the unlimited power arrogated on one
side, and the tumultuous freedom introduced on the other, are both intolerable;
yet, of the two, perhaps, despotism is superior. In a republic, the tyrant is
in our village, in our family; perhaps, in a monarchy, he lives at a distance:
the oppressions of a Monarch are generally exerted only in the narrow sphere
round him; the oppressions of the governors of a republic, though not so
flagrant, are more universal: the Monarch is apt to commit great enormities,
but they seldom reach the multitude at humble distance from the throne; the
republican Despot oppresses the multitude that lies within the circle of his
influence: the Monarch terrifies me with great evils which I may never feel;
the Despot actually loads me with submissions, which I am constantly obliged to
sustain; and, in my opinion, it is much better to be in danger of having my
head chopped off, with an ax, once in my life, than to have my leg gauled with
a continual fetter.

Whatever were the reasonings of the King, upon this subject, it is certain,
his actions were intended for the benefit of his subjects; but he continued to
rule them, upon the maxims of former princes, at a time that the principles of
the subjects were totally changed. The house of commons seemed now to have
thrown off all subordination; they not only arraigned and attained almost all
the King's ministers; particularly Laud, Strafford, Finch, and Windebanck; but
passed an act to make that parliament continual, until all grievances should be
redressed. The King complied with every measure, yet all his compliance only
served to increase their demands. The Earl of Strafford first fell a victim to
their popular fury: the commons exhibited an accursation, of twenty-eight
articles against him; the substance of which was, That he had attempted to
extend the King's authority at home, and had been guilty of several exactions
in Ireland. These received the name of high treason, and the people without
demanded justice. The managers for the house of commons pleaded, with
vehemence, against him at the bar of the house of Lords, who were his Judges:
they insisted, that, though each article seperately did not amount to a proof,
yet, the whole taken together carried conviction. This is a method of arguing
frequently used in the English courts of justice, even to this day; and,
perhaps, none can be more erroneous; for almost every falsehood may thus be
defended by a multiplicity of weak reasons. In this tumult of aggravation and
clamor, the Earl himself, whose parts and wisdom had long been respected and
acknolwedged, stood unmoved. He defended his innocence with all the presence of
mind, judgment, and temper, that could be expected from innocence and ability.
His little children were placed near him, as he was thus defending his own
cause, and that of his master: after he had, with a long and eloquent speech,
delivered extempore, confuted the accusation of his enemies, he thus drew to a
conclusion, But, my Lords, I have troubled you too long; longer than I should
have done, but, for the sake of those dear pledges, a saint, in heaven, has
left me. -- Upon this he paused, dropped a tear, looked upon his children, and
then proceeded. -- What I forfeit, for myself, is a trifle; that my
indiscretions should reach my posterity, wounds me to the heart. Pardon my
infirmity. -- Something I should have added, but am not able; therefore, let it
pass. And now, my Lords, for myself, I have long been taught, that the
affictions of this life are overpaid by that eternal weight of glory, which
awaits the innocent; and so, my Lords, even so, with the utmost tranquillity I
submit myself to your judgment. Whether that judgment be life, or death. TE
DEUM LAUDAMUS. His eloquence and innocence seemed to influence his Judges: the
King himself went to the house of Lords, and spoke in his defense; but the
spirit of the people was excited, and nothing, but his blood, would give them
satisfaction. He was condemned by both houses, and nothing now remained, but
for the King to give his consent to the bill of attainder. But his consent
seemed of little consequence; the limits of royalty were long since broken
down, and imminent dangers might attend his refusal. While he continued in this
agitation of mind, not knowing how to behave, he received a letter from the
unfortunate Nobleman himself, desiring that his life might be made the
sacrifice of a mutual agreement between the King and the people; adding, that
to a willing mind there could be no injury. This noble instance of generosity
was but ill repaid; the King was persuaded to give his consent; he signed the
fatal bill; Strafford was beheaded; and this taught his subjects soon after to
spill blood that was still more precious.

The whole kingdom now seemed to be in a ferment; all the petitions of
parliament, which were in reality calculated to abase the King, were
notwithstanding drawn up with the most seeming affection and obedience; they
were constantly complaining in each of these of their fears for the church, at
the very time that they were themselves laboring its overthrow. Faction ran
high. In the King's party there was an ill-projected and worse conducted design
of keeping the prerogative as much untouched as ever it had been in the reigns
of the most fortunate and formidable Monarchs; in the opposite party a fixed
resolution of turning the state into a republic, and changing the government,
of the church into that of presbytery.

In the midst of these troubles, the Papists of Ireland fancied they found a
convenient opportunity of throwing off the English yoke. Religion and liberty
often inspire the most attrocious actions; and they did so now. The Papists
took a resolution, of which we find many horrid examples in history. They
attempted to cut off all the Protestants in that kingdom at one blow. Not less
than forty thousand persons fell a sacrifice upon this occasion. In such a
number of murders cruelty put on a thousand different shapes; rapes, burnings,
and tortures were practiced in every part of that miserable island; and all the
Protestants perished who had not the good fortune to make early provision for
their safety. Such was the state of Ireland then, and such was England shortly
to be. The parliament took this opportunity to blacken the King, as if he had
given sanction to the Papists, and encouraged their barbarous design; he
vindicated himself with a zeal that nothing but innocence could inspire; and
tried every method of assisting his Protestant subjects of Ireland. He even
demanded succors from the parliament of Scotland to relieve the Irish
Protestants; but they remitted him to the parliament of England, as Ireland lay
more immediately under their protection. The English house of commons sent but
feeble succors to a people they pretended to deplore, and gave it as a
pretext, that the government at home was in danger.

They now proceeded to what they long labored at, to establish a republic, and
destroy the rites of the church of England. They signified to the King, that it
was fit to have a privy council only of their appointing. Three members of the
house of commons presented this request on their knees. The King was pleased to
grant all. Oliver Cromwell, who was then in the house of commons, was heard to
declare, that, if this request was rejected, he would sell his estate, which
was then but small, and retire out of the kingdom.

Hitherto, it is probable, both sides were actuated rather by principle than
ambition. The Bishops had hitherto adhered closely to the King; they were not
only expelled the house of Lords, but, upon remonstrating against this
unconstitutional measure, were accused by the house of commons of high treason,
and ten of them sent to the Tower. This spirit of epidemic rage was not
confined to both houses of parliament alone; the populace daily surrounded the
place of sitting, and, with tumultuous cries, demanded justice. The
apprentices, the common council, and the citizens of London were foremost in
this struggle for liberty, as they thought it; their principles were sincere;
for the motives of a mob, though often wrong, are always honest. In this
contest the Presbyterians, and Cardinal Richelieu of France, were ever
intriguing; both desired a civil war, the one willing to depress the great, the
other to humble the kingdom.

In this decline of the royal authority, the King was persuaded to take a step
which was fatal to his interests. By the advice of Lord Digby, one of his
ministers, he went himself to the house of commons, and accused five of its
members of high treason. These were the leading members of the house, whom he
thus ventured to call in question; namely, Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir
Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strode. He sat, for some time,
in the speaker's chair, to see if the accused were present; but they had
escaped a few minutes before his entry; and the house of commons was resolved
to support the cause. Disappointed, perplexed, unknowing whom to rely on, the
King went next to the common council of the city, and made his complaint to
them; the common council only answered by aggravating his former misconduct.
From thence he went to Windsor, where, reflecting upon the rashness of his
former proceeding, he wrote to the parliament, informing them, that he desisted
from his proceedings aginst the accused members, and assuring the parliament,
that upon all occasions he would be as careful of their privileges as of his
life or his crown. His violence (as a fine writer remarks) had first rendered
him hateful to his common,s and his submission now contemptible.

The commons had already stripped the King of almost all his privileges; the
power of appointing governors, generals, and levying armies, still remained.
They therefore proceeded to petition, that the Tower might be put into their
hands; that Hull, Portsmouth, and the fleet, should be commanded by persons of
their choosing. These requests were, at first, contested, and then complied
with; at last the commons desired to have a militia raised, and governed by
such officers and commanders as they should nominate, under a pretext of
securing them from the Irish Papists, whom they affected to be in dread of.
This was depriving the King of even the shadow of his former power; but they
had gone too far now to recede, and feared leaving him any power, as knowing
themselves the first objects on which its vengeance might be exercised. He was
willing to grant the raising a militia, but insisted upon giving it commanders;
the parliament desired to command it for an appointed time; but the King, at
last provoked to resentment, cried, they should not command it, no not for an
hour. This peremptory refusal broke off all further treaty, and both sides were
now to have recourse to arms.

Charles retired to York, and the Queen went over to Holland, to raise money
upon the crown jewels, and provide ammunition and forces. The parliament, in
the mean time, were not idle; they knew their strength and popularity, and
published proposals for bringing in money or plate for the defense of the
kingdom. But, though each side were prepared for war, yet they took every
precaution to lay the blame of the first infraction of peace on each other. The
King offered proposals to the commons which he knew they would not accept; and
they, in return, offered him nineteen propositions, which, if complied with,
would render him entirely subservient to their commands. Their import was, that
the privy council, the principal officers of state, the governors of the King's
children, forts, castles, fleet, armies, should be all appointed or governed by
parliament; that Papists should be punished by their authority; that the church
and liturgy should be reformed by their discretion; and that such member^ as
had been displaced for former offenses should b^ restored. These proposals,
which, if they had bee^ accepted, would have molded the government into an
aristocratical form, were, happily for posterity^ rejected; and the King and
his parliament continue^ to reproach each other for a civil war, of which bot^
were actually guilty.

I am, etc.

LETTER IV.
IN this detail of public calamities you are not (...) expect any great
strokes, either in politics (...) war; each party was too sincere to give much
a^tention to any thing but the dictates of passion, e^thusiasm, or zeal. The
parliament was convinced that it drew the sword in defense of liberty; and the
King was equally steadfast in believing, that he had the authority of Heaven for
opposing their pretensions. They therefore took the field with little conduct;
and courage alone in the troops generally decided the fortune of the day.

The parliament, from its own authority, constituted Sir John Hotham, a sitting
member of the house of commons, governor of Hull. In this city there was a
large magazine of arms, ammunition, and provisions. The King, sensible of the
importance of the place, was desirous of securing it for himself; he therefore
approached the gates with three hundred horse, and demanded entrance. Hotham
still preserved some appearance of respect to his sovereign, land, on his
knees, refused to admit him. Disloyalty is ever timid in the beginning.

Manifestoes, on one side and the other, were now dispersed through the whole
kingdom, and the people were universally divided into two factions, that went
by the names of Royalists and Roundheads. The King ordered the Nobility to
attend his person; he procured the great seal from London, and erected his
standard at Nottingham. The people, in general, seemed to have lost all respect
to his person and government; the laws promulgated by parliament, without the
sanction of the great seal, were observed with due obedience; and the royal
standard was scarce followed by any except a few militia. At length, however,
with the succors furnished by his Queen, and the presents of the university of
Oxford, and his Clergy, he raised an army of about fourteen thousand men,
commanded by Prince Rupert, a man of courage and some experience. The
parliament, which disposed of the money of the nation, had one still more
numerous, commanded by the Earl of Essex, who fought from principle, and who
only wished to bring the King to reason.

When the King advanced from Nottingham, and approached near Shrewsbury, he
drew up his little army, and made them a speech: " I promise, said he to the
soldiers, in the presence of Almighty God, and as I hope for his blessing and
protection, that I will ever defend the Protestant religion, and in that
religion am resolved to live and die. The laws of the land, and the rights of
my subjects, shall ever be the measure of my government; and, if Heaven
prospers this little army raised for their King's defense, I promise to rule by
parliaments alone, and by every equitable administration. When I fail in these
particulars, then let me be abandoned of men; and in this resolution I hope for
the assistance of all good men, end am confident of the protection of
Providence.

Essex, on the other hand, was resolved to set up his headquarters at
Worcester, and await the King; where, in a few days, a skirmish ensued in
favor of the Royalists; and the battle of Edgehill, fought some time after,
seemed to confirm the King's superiority. The Queen had brought him soldiers
from Holland, with ammunition and arms, and immediately departed in order to
furnish more. Yet still the parliament was not discouraged; their demands
seemed to increase in proportion to their losses; and, as they were defeated in
the field, they grew more obstinate in the cabinet. They condemned of high
treason such governors of towns as gave up their fortresses to the King; while
he, on the contrary, offered new terms of peace upon every advantage. But,
though his desire to spare his subjects was laudable, as a man, yet his long
negotiations were faulty, as a warrior; he wasted that time in altercation and
proposal, which should have been employed in vigorous exertions in the field.
Upon the whole, his first campaign seemed to promise him success; his generals
were mostly victorious, and his army far superior to the enemy in point of
discipline. On the side of the parliament, the great Hampden was slain in the
battle of Chaldgrave-field; and on the other hand, on the King's part, the
gallant Lord Faulkland was killed at the battle of Newbury. These were the two
greatest, bravest, and wisest men of their time, who thus fell, as if, by the
kindness of Providence, to prevent their seeing the miseries, and the slaughter
in which their country was shortly to be involved.

Hampden was the person who had refused paying ship money, and withstood the
power of the crown; his inflexible integrity gained him the esteem even of his
enemies; and his humanity and benevolence, the affection of all that knew him
more intimately.

But Faulkland was still a greater character than he. He added to Hampden's
severe principles all the politeness and elegance then known in Europe. He had
withstood the King while he saw him making an ill use of his power; but, when
he perceived the design of the parliament to change religion, he changed his
side, and steadfastly attached himself to the crown. From the beginning of the
civil war his natural cheerfulness and vivacity grew clouded, and he became
sad, pale, and negligent of his person; the morning of the battle it was seen
he desired to die, and he professed that the miseries of his country had
already almost broken his heart. He added, that he was weary of the times, and
should leave them before night. He was shot with a musket in the belly, and
his body was the next morning found among an heap of the slain. His writings,
his justice, and his courage, deserved such a death of glory; and they lound
it. If there be happiness in death, it must be in such an end, falling in
battle for our King and our principles.

Each battle served only to weaken the royal party, and to unite the parliament
more strongly together; the King and his followers were held together only by
secular motives; the parliament had long been actuated by one still stronger,
that of religion; this had hitherto been the secret spring of all their
commotions, and now they fairly threw by the mask, united themselves to the
church of Scotland, and signed the solemn league and covenant, which
established Puritanism, and laid the foundation of a new republic. The King, to
oppose the designs of the Westminster parliament, called one at Oxford, where
it assembled; and England now saw what it had never before seen, two
parliaments sitting at one and the same time. From this partial parliament he
received some supplies; after which it was prorogued, and never after convened.
The war went on with its usual fury, and skirmishes on both sides were
frequent, which served to desolate the kingdom without deciding victory. Each
county joined that side to which it was addicted from motives of conviction,
interest or fear; while some observed a perfect neutrality. Several frequently
petitioned for peace, the wise and the good were most earnest in this cry; but
what particularly deserved remark was, the attempt of the women of London, who,
to the number of two or three thousand, went in a body to the house of commons,
earnestly demanding a peace: Give us those traitors, said they, that are
against peace; give them, that we may tear them in pieces. The guards found
some difficulty in quelling this insurrection, and one or two women lost their
lives in the fray.

It is both tedious and unimproving to describe all the combats, the battles,
the skirmishes, that every day passed between either side. What towns were
besieged and taken, how many killed in fight, or what numbers died by the hand
of the executioner; every civil war presents the same picture to the
imagination; and this was aggravated with all the miseries of rage, resentment,
and despair. All were from principle earnestly employed in destroying the
constitution; there were none of those refined understandings, who, disengaged
from the prejudices of party, improved the universal prejudice of the time to
acquire dominion for themselves; all were seriously, earnestly, and blindly
engaged in the favorite pursuit. The genius of the times was great but
irregular.

Among the number who most severely felt the indignation of the commons, was
the famous William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury; he had been imprisoned in
the Tower, at the time when nine more of the Bishops were sent there upon
remonstrating to the Lords against the severity of the lower house. When he was
brought to the bar, in order to make his defense, he spoke several hours with
that courage which is the result of innocence and integrity. The Lords, his
Judges, were willing to acquit him; but the commons were determined upon his
death, and overruled all remonstrances made in his favor. When brought to the
scaffold, this noble divine, without any apparent terror, made the people a
long speech; he told them, "that he had examined his heart, and thanked God
that he found no sins there which deserved the death he was going to suffer.
The King had been traduced by some, as laboring to introduce Popery; but that
he believed him as sound a Protestant as any man in the kingdom; and as for
parliaments, though he disliked the conduct of one or two, yet he never
designed to change the laws of the country, or the Protestant religion." After
he had prayed for a short space, the executioner did his office at ^e blow.
This man seemed born for a better on fate and better times; but all
distinctions of right and wrong were now lost in mutual animosity; and in
general the best characters on both sides were those who fell victims to civil
fury. He was learned, upright, and sincere; humble in his private deportment,
but attached to trifling ceremonies, and ready to lose his life rather than
give them up.

The liturgy was, by a public act, abolished the day he died, as if he had been
the only obstacle to its former removal. The church of England was rendered
completely Presbyterian, to the great satisfaction of the Scots, and numbers of
the citizens of London. An ordinance was established, by which there should be
one day in the week appointed as a fast, and the money which was thus spared to
the family, was to be paid in support of the common cause. Thus strengthened,
the parliament seemed capable of carrying on their designs in an arbitrary
manner; they had the Scotch to assist them; they professed only one religion,
and were united with the bonds of mutual danger. However, from the moment they
came to be all ranked under the denomination of Presbyterians, they began again
to separate into new parties, as if divisions were necessary to the existence
of this parliament; one part of the house were Presbyterians, strictly so
called; the other Independants, a new sect that had lately been introduced, and
gained ground surprisingly. The difference between these two sects would hardly
be worth mentioning, did not their religious opinions influence their political
conduct. The church of England, which was now totally abolished, had appointed
Bishops and a book of common prayer; the Presbyterians exclaimed against both;
they were for having the church governed by clergymen elected by the people.
The Independants went yet still farther, and excluded all clergy; they
maintained that every man might pray in public, exhort his audience, and
explain the scriptures; but their chief difference lay in acknowledging no
subordination in secular employments, and attempting to maintain an ideal
equality, to which they justly observed that every man was born. Were such a
plan of government practicable, it would no doubt be the most happy; but the
wise and powerful must ever govern over ignorance and debility, and the bad
success of their schemes, soon after carried into execution, showed how ill
adapted they were to human infirmity. Possessed, however, with an high opinion
of their speculative scheme, they behaved with that morose and sullen carriage
which is ever the result of narrow manners and solitary thinking. They secretly
labored the abasement of the Presbyterians, yet joined them in their efforts
to depress the King.

Charles, now perceiving the parliaments of England and Scotland united against
him, and fearing to fall under their united efforts, thought proper to make a
truce with the Papists of Ireland, in order to bring ever the English troops
who served in that kingdom. By this means he not only had many of the English
troops that served there, but also several of the native Irish who came to
increase his army. It was then the parliament complained with truth of his
employing Papists in his service, and still farther extended their reproach by
saying that he encouraged them to rebel. These troops, however, only served to
procure the hatred of his subjects, without strengthening his army. They were
totally routed by Fairfax, one of the generals of the parliament army, and
slaughtered without mercy after a submission. It was said, that several Irish
women were found among the slain, who with long knives did considerable
execution; but the animosity of the English against those wretches, at that
time, might have given rise to the calumny.

One misfortune now seemed to follow close upon another: Prince Rupert, who had
long sustained the honor of the royal arms, was defeated at York, and his army
dispersed by Fairfax. Charles had retired to Oxford; his present danger excited
his friends to new efforts; he levied new forces, and had some slight success.
But this appearance of good fortune did not continue. His army was turbulent
and seditious; that of the parliament every day improved in discipline, and
obeyed from principle. Among instances of this nature was that act called the
self-denying ordinance, by which it was resolved, that no member of the house
of commons should have a command in the army. The reasons assigned for this
were specious, and perhaps sincere. It was done to prevent the parliament's
wishing for a continuance of the war, in order to enjoy a continuing share of
authority. The former generals were therefore changed; the Earl of Essex,
Denbigh, and Manchester gave up their commissions, and Fairfax, with the
assistance of Cromwell, new-modelled the army without any opposition.

It was the general opinion, that this new alteration would enfeeble the
parliament army, but the event proved otherwise; they were, after this,
everywhere victorious. Both armies met near Naseby. The King, who commanded
the main body of his own troops, showed himself upon this occasion a courageous
general, encouraging his soldiers where giving way, and rallying them in person
when broken. The enemy, however, was victorious; wherever Cromwell fought, he
brought conquest and terror; and the defeat of the royal army was principally
owing to him. This fatal blow the King could never after recover. All his
infantry were so scattered that the enemy took as many prisoners as they
pleased; his baggage, and cabinet in which his most secret papers were
contained, fell into the hands of his pursuers; and yet, after all, there were
not above six hundred men slain upon the field of battle.

It was now that Cromwell's courage and genius began to appear; he had hitherto
been only a turbulent speaker in the house of commons, and the leader of a
regiment in the army. But he now discovered talents greater than his
employments, and his present success opened to him the prospects of ambition,
which he never after lost sight of. Historians seldom distinguish properly in
the changes to be found in the same character; it is probable Cromwell began to
act in the state with principles of conviction and sincerity; but, new
occurrences arising, his soul was not proof to the allurements of fortune; he
gave way to her seducing call. Had he been on the oppressed side, he might have
displayed surprising instances of constancy and integrity; but, happening to be
victorious, he became a tyrant and usurper, and bathed his country with royal
blood.

Cromwell was possessed of apparent humility and internal pride. This is just
the character which Machiavel describes for a successful usurper. He was
originally the son of a private gentleman of a moderate fortune, who had some
years before attempted leaving the kingdom upon a principle of religion, but
was prevented by the King. This religious deportment Cromwell ever inviolably
preserved; it secured him an ascendancy in the house of commons, where the
majority were enthusiasts; it gained him the affections of Fairfax the general,
who was courageous, ignorant, and sincere. It acquired him the love of the
army, where his presence was coveted; and he alone was permitted to unite the
military and civil employments in his person, for he had a seat in the house
while he was a colonel in the field. But he was still resolved farther to
strengthen his interests by attaching the Independants privately to his side;
they increased in numbers and power by his means, and he, in return, found them
resolute and persevering friends.

The battle of Naseby seemed fatal to the interests of the King; and Fairfax
and Cromwell availed themselves of the circumstances that offered. Every city
that they appeared before capitulated. The young Prince of Wales, afterward
Charles II, participated in the misfortunes of his father, and fled to the
island of Scilly. The King drew the shattered remains of his army into Oxford,
and once more demanded peace. But, if he could not obtain it in the prosperous
state of his affairs, it was not likely that he could now succeed in his
desires after a defeat. The house of commons insulted his misfortunes. His
letters to the Queen were published, with those illnatured remarks and
railleries which none but the vicious are capable of making. To be at once
merry and malicious is the sign of a corrupt heart and mean understanding.

The King, after having taken every measure that he thought could procure
peace, without effect, now saw himself shut up in Oxford, a place almost
without any fortifications, and every day in danger of falling into the power
of a fierce and exasperated party. In such a situation he therefore was obliged
to choose the least of two evils, and to deliver himself up to the Scotch army,
rather than the English, as he expected to find less animosity in the former.
The Scotch officers had made him some general promises, grounded, probably,
upon their hopes of his compliance with every request they should make. He sent
them word of his intention to come to their army; and they promised to receive
him, and provide for his safety. Upon this precarious assurance the King left
Oxford, and, traveling through byways and obscure places, arrived at the
Scotch army in nine days. From that moment he ceased to be free. The Scotch
began to negotiate with the English army, carried their royal prisoner about
from one place to another, and, at length, upon consideration of being paid the
arrears due for their service in England, which amounted to two hundred
thousand pounds, they delivered up their King, and returned home laden with the
reproaches of all good men, and the internal conviction of their own baseness.
From this period till the usurpation of Cromwell, the constitution was
convulsed with all the distractions of guilt and party. When the kingly power
was abolished, the parliament then took up the authority; but they were soon to
lay it down in turn, and submit to a military democracy; a new form of
government, which, like all other democracies, was turbulent, feeble, and
bloody.

I am, etc.

LETTER V.
THE civil war was now over; the army of Scotland, being paid the reward of
perfidy, returned to its own country. The parliament had now no enemy to fear,
except those very troops which had fought their battles with success. You have
been already informed, that this army, by a political stroke of Cromwell, was
rendered independent of the parliament, and all its generals disabled from
sitting there. The commons therefore were now willing to get rid of it as soon
as possible, well knowing that, if the army continued, instead of receiving
laws, it would presume to dictate. They therefore passed a vote, by which it
was ordained, that a part of it should be disbanded, and another part of it
sent over into Ireland. It may easily be imagined that Cromwell would not
suffer this. Now was the crisis of his greatness, and he seized the
opportunity; he formed a council of officers, and another of common soldiers,
called Agitators, who were appointed to enquire into the grievances of the
army, and lay them before the parliament. The very same conduct which had
formerly passed between the parliament and King was now put in practice between
the army and parliament. As the commons granted every request the army rose in
their demands; these accused the army of mutiny and sedition, and those
retorted the accusation, by alleging a manifest design in the parliament to
rule alone.

The King had been confined since he came into the power of the English, at
Holmby castle; the army were resolved to be possessed of his person, and sent
one Joyce, a cornet, who from a tailor was become an officer, to take the King
by force, and bring him a prisoner to Newmarket. This commission he executed
with intrepidity and dispatch. It was in vain that the commons, now without
power, complained of this insolence; the army, instead of being awed by their
menaces, marched toward London; and now, in turn, prescribed laws to their
employers. Cromwell, willing to give all his injustice the appearance of
rectitude, caused eleven members of the house of commons to be accused. These
were the most powerful and leading speakers, which so astonished the members,
that, willing to appease the army at any rate, they writ to the general, that
they were ready to receive any particular charge against such as fell under his
displeasure.

This was an overture for peace, but pre-eminence was what the army aimed at;
instead therefore of being pleased at this condescension, the general turned
their accusation into a general complaint, and tried every method to provoke a
quarrel, which the others endeavored to evade. The citizens of London, at
length, opened their eyes; they now saw the constitution effectually destroyed;
they saw an oppressive parliament now subjected to a more oppressive army; they
perceived their religion abolished, their King a captive, and their people
exposed to the worst of slavery.

In this exigence the common council assembled the militia of the city, the
works were manned, and a manifesto published, aggravating the hostile
intentions of the army. The house of commons was not less divided than the
state: one part was for encouraging the citizens to proceed, while the rest,
with the two speakers at their head, was for the army. The slightest divisions,
in such a situation, are soon attended with violent consequences. The commons
separated, the speakers, with sixty-two members, quitted the house to seek
protection from the army, while those who remained behind gave orders, and
established laws, as if they had power to enforce obedience.

Their assumed power, however, continued but a short time, for the army, with
the speakers at their head, soon approached the city. Fear, therefore,
compelled the common council to concur in measures which they tacitly
disapproved. They opened their gates to the general, who, attended by the two
speakers and the rest of the members, repaired to their respective habitations.
The parliament, thus overawed, gave up the command of the Tower to general
Fairfax, and ordered him the thanks of both houses for having disobeyed their
commands.

It still remained to dispose of the King, who had been sent prisoner to
Hampton Court. The Independants, at the head of whom was Cromwell, and the
Presbyterians, in the name of either house, treated separately with him in
private; he even had hopes that in these struggles for power he might be chosen
mediator in the dispute, and expected that the state, at last, sensible of the
miseries of anarchy, like a froward child, hushed by its own importunities,
would settle under its former tranquil constitution. But he was soon
undeceived, when he found the army and the generals maste^ in the dispute; and
when, as he had hitherto been used with some degree of respect, upon their
prevailing, he saw himself treated with very little deference or consideration.
He therefore resolved to seek safety by flight, and, attended by two of his
courtiers, fled from his confinement, and traveled on horseback all night to
the seaside, in order to embark for France, leaving behind him a letter to
both houses of parliament. His usual fortunes, however, still attended him
here; no ship was in readiness at the place appointed, and he had no other
method left, but to trust to the generosity of the Governor of the Isle of
Wight for protection. Colonel Hammond was then in that command; a creature of
Cromwell, who had been placed there by the interest of John Hampden, whom we
have seen such an opposer of the King. His Majesty's attendants, whose names
were Ashburnham and Berkeley, went to talk with the Governor upon this
important occasion, who, instead of promising the protection required, only
returned an evasive answer, and desired to be conducted to the King. Upon this
all three went together to the house, where the unfortunate Monarch expected
their arrival; but Hammond staid below. When Ashburnham informed his Majesty
that Hammond was come to wait upon him, but that he had given no promise for
protection, the King, who had now found almost all the world unfaithful, could
not help crying out, O Jack, thou ha^ undone me. Ashburnham burst into a shower
of tears, and offered to kill Hammond that moment with his own hand. The humane
Monarch would not permit this. Hammond was brought up, and the King being
compelled to follow him to Carisbrook castle was once more made a prisoner, and
treated by Hammond with only the outward appearances of respect.

In the mean time the parliament continued every day to grow more feeble, and
more factious; the army more powerful, and better united among each other.
Cromwell had taken every precaution to establish such a subordination among his
troops, as was necessary to conduct them with ease, and invigorate his
proceedings. But his views were in some danger of being controverted, at this
juncture, by a new and unheard of confederacy. The Independants were for having
no subordination in government. A set of men called Levellers now arose, who
declared against any other governor than Christ. They declared that all degrees
should be levelled, and an equality universally established in titles and
estates. They presented several petitions, and carried their insolence to an
immeasurable pitch. Cromwell at once saw that he was now upon the point of
losing all the fruits of his former schemes and dangers, and dreaded this new
faction still the more, as they turned his own pretended principles against
himself: thus finding all at stake, he was resolved, by one resolute blow, to
disperse the faction, or perish in the attempt. Having intimation that the
Levellers were to meet at a certain place, he unexpectedly appeared before the
terrified assembly, at the head of his red regiment, which had been hitherto
invincible. He demanded, in the name of God, what their assembly and murmurings
would be at; and, receiving an insolent answer, he laid two of the most
remarkable dead upon the ground with his own hands. The guards dispersing the
rest, he caused several of them to be hanged upon the spot, sent others
prisoners to London, and thus dispersed a faction, no otherwise criminal than
in having followed his own example.

This action served still more to increase his power in the camp, in the
parliament, and in the city. Fairfax, now become a Lord, was nominally general,
but Cromwell was invested with all the power of the army. The King, a prisoner
in the Isle of Wight, still continued to negotiate a peace; while the
parliament saw no other method of destroying the military power which
themselves had raised, but by opposing to it that of the King. Frequent
propositions therefore passed between the captive Monarch and the commons; but
the great obstacle, their insisting upon destroying Episcopacy, still defeated
every measure.

In the mean time the Scotch, ashamed of having been thought to have sold their
King, raised an army in his favor. Many of the young nobility in England
seconded their intentions; the King's desperate affairs once more began to wear
a favorable aspect, which Cromwell perceiving, led his veteran army to certain
victory. Success still seemed to back his crimes; he defeated their forces
entirely at Preston, and took the Duke of Hamilton, their general, prisoner.
Fair-fax, on the other hand, was equally successful in Kent and Essex; the
insurgents having retired into the city of Colchester, which declared for the
King, he blocked them up, and, having compelled them to surrender at
discretion, he treated them with that inhumanity for which the republican army
was at that time remarkable.

The parli meant still continued to treat with the King, and, apprehending more
from the designs of their generals than the attempts of their Monarch, seemed
in earnest, for the first time, in their negotiations; but it was now too late;
the army soon returned crowned with their accustomed success, and with furious
remonstrances demanded justice upon the King. They accused him as the cause of
all the misfortunes of the kingdom, and insisted that his partisans and
favorites should share with him in his public punishment. This remonstrance
was soon after backed by petitions from the garrisons dispersed over different
parts of the kingdom, and the counties of Somerset and Norfolk concurred in the
same demand. Fairfax, being influenced by Cromwell, and not perceiving that he
was the tool of his crafty colleague, transferred his royal prisoner from the
Isle of Wight to Hurst castle. The parliament complained of this arbitrary
proceeding, but their remonstrances were now but empty sound. They began to
issue ordinances for a more effectual opposition; but they received a message
from Cromwell, that he intended paying them a visit next day with his army, and
in the mean time ordered them to raise him upon the city of London forty
thousand pounds. Affrighted at the approaching danger, they complied with his
demand; and, in the mean time, the general with his army came and took up his
quarters in the skirts of the city. The commons still proceeded in the treaty
with the King, but this Cromwell was resolved to oppose: they voted, that the
carrying the King prisoner to Hurst castle was without the advice or consent of
the house. To punish them for this, Cromwell placed guards round their house,
and made those members prisoners whom he judged most opposite to his designs.
One of his colonels, whose name was Pride, having a paper of names in his hand,
seized upon one-and-forty, and sent them to the Court of Wards, where they were
kept under guard. These were Presbyterians, the original authors of all the
troubles, and who now fell victims to the side they had espoused. The next day
an hundred more of the members were denied entrance; and that part of the house
which now remained was entirely composed of a small body of Independants,
ludicrously called the Rump. These soon voted, that the transactions of the
house, a few days before, were illegal; and that the general's conduct was just
and necessary.

This parliament, if it now deserves the name, was nothing but a medley of the
most obscure citizens, the slaves of the army, the officers of which, being
themselves members, ruled all their proceedings. It was now therefore
unanimously resolved in this seditious assembly to erect an High Court of
Justice, with power to try the King for treason against the kingdom. For
form-sake they desired the concurrence of the few remaining Lords in the other
house; but even here there still was virtue enough left unanimously to reject
so horrid a proposal. This no way abated the ardour of the commons; they voted
that the concurrence of the house of Lords was unnecessary; they declared that
all power was originally derived from the people; a declaration true in itself,
but which they wrested to the most detestable purposes. Colonel Harrison, the
son of a butcher, was commanded to conduct the King from Hurst castle to
Windsor. When he arrived there, the council of war ordained, that he should be
no longer treated with the deference due to royalty. All ceremony was laid
aside, and he now saw himself deprived of his servants, and exposed to the
contempt of low-bred insolence. From the sixth to the twentieth of January, the
time was employed in making preparations for this astonishing scene of guilt.
One hundred and forty-five persons were appointed Judges upon this occasion;
and one Bradshaw, a practitioner of the law, was elected as President of this
detestable synod.

The King was now conducted from Windsor to St. James's, and was next day
produced before the High Court at Westminster Hall to take his trial. He still
remembered the dignity he owed to himself before such an inferior court; and,
taking his place with his hat on, with a stern air, surveyed his Judges, who
were also covered. When his charge was read, importing that he had been the
cause of all the blood that was shed since the commencement of the rebellion,
he could not repress a smile at once of contempt and indignation. He then
demanded by what authority he was brought to such a trial? To which Bradshaw
replied, that he was tried in the name of the commons of England. The King then
objected to the legality of the tribunal, since the sanction of the Lords and
his own were wanting to complete it; and refused to plead to the articles of
the impeachment Being desired to answer several times; and persisting in his
refusal, he was remanded to his confinement, and the court adjourned. At their
second sitting the president again summoned the King to answer to his charge;
and the King again demurred to the legality of his Judges, and began to open
his objections, when he was interrupted by Bradshaw, and sent back to prison,
as before. At his third appearance he continued firm to his purpose, and
refused to reply, until he should be convinced that their proceedings were not
contrary to the fundamental laws of the kingdom. The fourth and last time he
appeared before this self-created court of justice, as he was going thither, he
was insulted by the soldiers, and the mob, who exclaimed, Justice, justice,
execution, execution. He appeared before the court with the same firm composure
as usual, with his hat on; and while his fentence was reading, in which he was
branded with all the odious appellations that malice could suggest, he
discovered no other emotions than those of pity. In walking back from this
horrid tribunal, the rabble renewed the cry of Justice, execution; and among
other insults one miscreant presumed to spit in the face of his King. He
patiently wiped his face: Poor souls, said he, they would treat their generals
in the same manner for sixpence. A soldier more compassionate than the rest
could not help imploring a blessing upon his royal head; an officer overhearing
it struck the pious sentinel to the ground in presence of the Monarch, who
could not help saying, that the punishment exceeded the offense. The day of
execution was fixed to be the third after his sentence; which when it arrived,
he was conducted on foot through St. James's Park to Whitehall, accompanied by
Doctor Juxon, and guarded by a regiment of foot, under the command of Colonel
Tomlinson. The scaffold was covered with black, in the middle of which were
seen the block and ax, with two executioners in masks. The soldiers were
placed round it, and an infinite concourse of spectators waited with silent
horror at a greater distance. The King surveyed all their solemn preparations
with calm composure; he assured the persons who stood with him upon the
scaffold, that he thought himself guiltless of any crime but that of having
given up the Earl of Strafford to the fury of his enemies; and that he had
confidence in the mercy of Heaven. While he thus avowed his innocence, the
Bishop who attended him warned him that he had but one stage more to heaven; at
which the King cried out, I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible crown,
where no disturbance can arrive. "You are exchanged, replied the Bishop, from a
temporal to an eternal crown; a good exchange!" Having now taken off his cloak,
he delivered his George to the Prelate, emphatically pronouncing the word,
Remember. He then laid his head on the block, and stretched forth his hands as
a signal. One of the men in a masque severed his head from his body at a blow;
and the other, holding it up streaming with gore, cried out, This is the head
of a traitor. Such was the death of Charles, who lived long enough to see the
laws and constitution of his country expire before him. He had the misfortune
to be bred up in high notions of the prerogative which he thought his duty to
sustain. He lived at a time when the spirit of the law was in opposition to the
genius of the people; and governing by old rules, instead of endeavoring to
accommodate himself to the changes of the times, he fell in the universal
convulsion. Many Kings before him expired by treasons, plots, or assassination;
but never since the times of Agis the Lacedemonian were any but him sacrificed
by their subjects with all the formalities of justice. Upon the whole, it must
be confessed, that, though the nation was branded by foreigners with reproach
upon this occasion, yet these struggles at length ended in domestic happiness
and security; the laws became more precise, and the subject more ready to obey,
as if a previous fermentation in the constitution was necessary to its
subsequent refinement.

I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
CROMWELL, who had secretly solicited the King's death, now began to feel
wishes to which he had been hitherto a stranger; he perceived himself not far
removed from the object of his most unbounded ambition. His views expanded with
success, and his first principles of liberty shrunk when opposed to the
unbounded prospect of power. The parliament, which was still permitted to enjoy
the shadow of authority, voted it high treason to acknowledge Charles Stewart,
son of the murdered King, as successor to the throne. They likewise voted the
house of Lords useless and dangerous, and passed an act for the abolition of
all kingly power. A great seal was made, on one side of which were engraved the
arms of England and Ireland, with this inscription, The great seal of England;
on the reverse was represented the house of commons sitting, with this motto,
The first year of freedom, by God's blessing, restored, 1648.

They next proceeded to try those gallant men whose attachment to their late
Sovereign had been most remarkable. The Duke of Hamilton and Lord Capel were
accused, condemned, and beheaded; several others shared the same fate. The Earl
of Norwich and Sir John Owen were condemned, but reprieved. The Scotch were not
a little displeased at the death of the Duke, who was executed not only
contrary to the laws of war, but the law of nations; they were therefore
determined to acknowledge the young Prince for their King. But their love of
liberty, in some measure, seemed to combat their resentment; they called him to
the throne indeed, but, at the same time, abridged his power with every
limitation which they had formerly attempted to impose on their late Sovereign.
The second Charles had neither the virtue, the constancy, nor the principles of
his father. Attached to no religion, he agreed to all their proposals, and was
contented to accept the formalities without the power of a King. He was
received at Edinburgh with demonstrations of profound respect, and entered the
city by that very gate on which the limbs of the brave Montrose, one of his
most faithful adherents, were still exposed; but he soon found that the life he
was likely to lead would be an insupportable bondage to one of his volatile
disposition. He was surrounded and incessantly importuned by the Scotch
fanatical clergy, who came to instruct him in religion, and obliged him to
listen to long sermons, in which they seldom failed to stigmatize the late King
as a tyrant, to accuse his mother of idolatry, and himself of an untoward
disposition. Upon appointed days he was obliged to hear six sermons without
intermission. They insisted upon his observing Sunday with a Jewish strictness.
They even watched his looks; and, if he happened to smile at any part of their
absurd enthusiasms, he was reprimanded for his profaneness. Charles for a while
bore this insolence with hypocritical tranquillity, and even pretended to be
highly edified by their instructions; but, notwithstanding this, he only wished
for an opportunity of escaping from such a variety of disgusting impertinence.

In the mean time the English parliament, alarmed at the King's restitution in
Scotland, sent to recall Cromwell from Ireland, where he had carried on the war
with his usual success. He had reduced Kilkenny and many other places, and
prosecuted his conquests with surprising rapidity. However, he now left the war
in that kingdom to be carried on by Ireton, his deputy-lieutenant; and returned
to England, in obedience to the mandate of the parliament. When he took his
seat in the house, the speaker thanked him for the services he had done the
commonwealth. They then proceeded to deliberate upon the war with Scotland.
They desired to know if Fairfax would conduct the enterprise. Fairfax, a rigid
Presbyterian, who had all along fought from principle, declined opposing a
nation which he considered as cooperating in the same good work for which he
had first drawn the sword; he therefore declined the command, sent his
commission to the commons, and retired to spend the remainder of his life in
privacy and peace.

This was an inlet to Cromwell's subsequent power; he was appointed general of
the forces of the commonwealth, and soon marched into Scotland at the head of
an army of eighteen thousand men, long accustomed to conquer. He found general
Lesly at the head of an army far more numerous than his own, but undisciplined
and mutinous. After some previous skirmishing, Cromwell saw himself in a very
disadvantageous post near Dunbar, and his antagonist ready to take advantage of
his incommodious situation. However, perceiving the Scots preparing to give him
battle, he assured his soldiers that the Lord had delivered the enemy into his
hands, and ordered his army to sing psalms, as already assured of victory. The
ministers of the Scotch army were not less sanguine in their assurances of
victory than he; they boldly promised success in the name of the Lord, and
excited a spirit of impatience among the soldiers. Victory, as always before,
again declared for Cromwell, who routed the enemy with great slaughter, while
he did not lose on his side above forty men in all.

Charles, who hated the Scotch army, and only dreaded Cromwell, was well enough
pleased at this defeat. It served to introduce him to a greater share in the
command than he was before permitted to enjoy. He therefore put himself at the
head of that remnant which survived the defeat, and strengthened it by the
royalists, who had been before excluded from his service. And now, instead of
following Cromwell, who led his victorious troops to Perth, he resolved to
seize this opportunity of penetrating into England, where he expected to be
joined by numbers there still attached to his interests. His hopes in this were
frustrated; his army, on their march, was lessened by continual desertion and
disease. Few volunteers repaired to the royal standard; and he at length saw
his vigilant enemy overtaking him at Worcester. Both armies fought with equal
intrepidity, but Cromwell was again victorious. Never was so complete a victory
obtained by him before. Two thousand perished by the sword, and four times that
number, being taken, were sold as slaves to the American planters. The
conqueror became master of all Scotland, and set a price of a thousand pounds
upon the head of the King.

Imagination can scarce conceive dangers more romantic, or distresses more
severe, than those which attended the young King's escape from Worcester^ After
his hair was cut off, the better to effect hi^ escape, he worked for some days,
disguised as a peasant, at wood-cutting. He next made an attemp^ to retire into
Wales, under the conduct of one Pendrell, a poor but faithful companion in his
distress. But in this attempt he was disappointed, every pass being guarded to
prevent his escape. Being obliged to return, he met one Colonel Careless, who,
like himself, had escaped the carnage at Worcester; and it was in his company
that he was obliged to climb a spreading oak, among the thick branches of which
they passed the day together, while the soldiers of the enemy went underneath
in pursuit of him. From thence he passed with imminent danger, feeling all the
vicissitudes of famine, fatigue, and pain, to the house of one Mr. Lane, a
worthy subject of his, in Staffordshire. Here he deliberated about the means of
escaping to France. They agreed that he should ride before this gentleman's
daughter, on a visit to one Mrs. Horton, who lived in the neighborhood of
Bristol. During this journey he every day met people whose persons he knew, and
once passed through a whole regiment of the parliament army.

When they arrived at the house of Mr. Norton, the first person they saw was
one of his own chaplains, sitting at the door, amusing himself with seeing
people play at bowls. The King, after having taken proper care of his horse in
the stable, was shown to an apartment which Mrs. Lane had provided for him,
upon pretense of indisposition. The butler, being sent to him with some
refreshment, no sooner beheld his countenance, which was now very pale with
anxiety and fatigue, than he recollected the visage of his King and Master, and
falling upon his knees, while the tears streamed down his cheeks, he cried out,
"I am rejoiced to see your Majesty." The King enjoined him secrecy, and the
honest servant punctually kept his word. Having staid some days in this place,
he repaired to the house of Colonel Wyndham, where he was cordially received,
that gentleman's family having ever been noted for loyalty. Pursuing his route
to the seaside, he once more had a very providential escape from the little
inn at which he lodged. It happened to be a solemn fast, and a fanatical
weaver, who had fought in the parliament army, was preaching against the King,
in a chapel fronting the house. Charles was actually one of the audience, A
farrier of the same principles, who had been examining the horses belonging to
the passengers, came to assure the preacher, that he knew by the fashion of the
shoes that one of the stranger's horses came from the North. The preacher
instantly affirmed, that this horse could belong to no other than Charles
Stewart, and went immediately with a constable to the house; but the King, in
the mean time, found means to escape. Thus, at length, after inexpressible
hardships, and having experienced the fidelity of forty different persons of
all ranks, who had power to betray him, he embarked at Brighthelmsted, and
landed safely in Normandy.

Cromwell, in the mean time, returned to London in triumph, where he was met by
the speaker of the house, accompanied by the mayor and magistrates in their
formalities. His first care, upon his return, was to take the advantage of his
successes, by depressing the Scotch. An act was passed for abolishing royalty
in Scotland, and annexing it as a conquered province to the English
commonwealth, impowering it, however, to send a certain number of
representatives to the British parliament. It was now seen with astonishment,
that a parliament composed of obscure and weak members could govern at once
with unanimity and success. Without any acknowledged subordination they levied
armies, maintained fleets, and gave laws to their neighbors. Never was England
more powerful than at this period. The finances were managed with economy and
exactness. No private person became rich by public extortions. The revenues of
the crown, the lands of the Bishops, and a tax of an hundred and twenty
thousand pounds each month, supplied the wants of the government, and
invigorated all their proceedings.

Having reduced the British dominions to perfect obedience, the parliament next
resolved to chastise the Dutch, who had given but very slight causes of
complaint. Dorislaus, one of the late King's Judges, being sent thither by the
commons as envoy, was assassinated by the royal party that had taken refuge
there; St. John, appointed English ambassador. was also insulted by the friends
of the Prince of Orange. These were grounds sufficient to incense the republic
of England to a war. Its success, however, was doubtful; Blake commanded the
English, and Van Tromp was Admiral of Holland; both equally experienced,
courageous, and active. Several engagements served only to show the excellence
of the Admirals, without determining the balance of naval power. The
parliament, however, was willing to continue the war, rightly judging that,
when the force of the nation was exerted by sea, it would diminish Cromwell the
general's power upon land.

Cromwell was not behind them in penetration; he saw they dreaded his growing
power, and wished to diminish it; all his measures were conducted with a bold
intrepidity that marked his character; and he was now resolved to make another
daring effort. He persuaded his officers to present a petition for payment of
arrears and redress of grievances, which he knew would be rejected with
disdain. The house, upon receiving it, appointed a committee to prepare an act,
that all persons who presented such petitions for the future should be deemed
guilty of high treason. This was what Cromwell wished for. He was sitting in
council with his officers, when informed of the subject on which the house was
deliberating. Turning to major general Vernon, I am compelled, cried he, to do
a thing that makes the very hair of my head stand on end; and, starting up with
marks of violent indignation in his countenance, he hastened to the parliament,
with a body of three hundred soldiers. Upon entering the house, he took his
place, and sat some time to hear the debates; and, when the speaker was about
to put the question, he suddenly rose up, and, reviling them for their ambition
and cruelty, he stamped with his foot, and instantly the house was filled with
armed men. Then addressing himself to the members, Get you gone, said he; give
place to honest men; you are no longer a parliament; I tell you, you are no
longer a parliament; the Lord has done with you. He then accused one as a
drunkard, another as a whoremaster, a third of adultery, and a fourth of
extortion. It is you, added he, that have forced me upon this; I have sought
the Lord night and day, that he would rather slay me than put me upon this
work. Then pointing to the mace, Take away, cried he, that bauble; and, turning
out all the members, he ordered the door to be locked, and, putting the key in
his pocket, retired to Whitehall. Thus by one daring exploit the new republic
was abolished, and the whole power, civil and military, centered in him alone.
The present unsteady form of the English government, is the strongest proof of
a late philosopher's opinion, that every country is possessed of a set of laws
and constitutions best adapted to the nature of the inhabitants, the climate,
and the soil, which when once broken through, the government must continue weak
and unsteady, until the natural constitution is restored; as in mechanics all
bodies continue to waver till their center of gravity is supported.

I am, etc.

LETTER VII.
THAT parliament, which had long gloried in resisting violence, was now
dissolved by an act of the most flagrant oppression. The people, however,
expressed no dislike at their dissolution. Cromwell received congratulatory
addresses from the fleet, the corporations, and the army; but he was unwilling
to put forth all his power at once; he resolved to amuse them with the form of
a commonwealth, and familiarize them by degrees to arbitrary government. He
decreed, that the sovereign power should be vested in one hundred and
forty-four persons, under the denomination of a parliament; and he undertook
himself to make the choice. The persons he pitched upon were the lowest,
meanest, and most ignorant among the citizens; he foresaw, that, during the
administration of such, he alone must govern; or that they would soon throw up
the reins of government, which they were unqualified to guide. To excel in
fanaticism seemed a necessary qualification in this new parliament. Several,
with long names borrowed from scripture, were members; but a man, whose name
was Praise God Barebones, was one of the most remarkable; and by his name the
assembly was afterward called in ridicule.

To this assembly was committed the care of making peace with the Dutch; but,
being utterly unskilled in such negotiations, the ambassadors of the States
were quite at a loss how to treat with them. The people exclaimed at so foolish
a legislature, and they themselves seemed not insensible of the contempt and
ridicule which they every day failed not to incur. They had now sat five months
without doing any thing of importance; when at length Rouse, their speaker,
rose up, and proposed that, as they were unable to bear the burden that was
laid upon them, they should resign their authority ^im from whom they had
received it. Cromwell accepted their resignation with pleasure, and sent
Colonel White to clear the house of the few fanatics who persisted in
continuing to sit. White, entering with a detachment of soldiers, asked, What
they did there! To which replying, that they were seeking the Lord: Then you
may go elsewhere, cried he, for to my certain knowledge the Lord has not been
here these many years.

The officers now, by their own authority, declared Cromwell Protector. He was
possessed of that which is the original of all command, namely, force; for the
strong ever give laws to the feeble. The mayor and aldermen were sent for; the
usurper was installed at Whitehall, in the palace of the English Kings; he
assumed the office of Protector; was honored with the epithet of Highness, and
proclaimed in London, and other parts of the kingdom. Thus an obscure
inhabitant of Wales, at length, rose to unlimited power, far beyond that of
former Kings, by his courage and his hypocrisy.

He was about fifty-three years of age when he began to reign, which he did
with equal conduct, moderation, and success. He, in the beginning, chose among
the officers, the former companions of his dangers and victories, twenty-one
counselors of state, to each of whom he assigned a pension of one thousand
pounds a year. The troops were always paid a month in advance; the magazines
were well provided; the public treasure, of which he had the disposal, was
managed with frugality and care. The Dutch were compelled to sue for peace, and
he dictated the terms. He insisted upon their paying deference to the British
flag. They were compelled to abandon the interest of the King; they engaged to
pay eighty-five thousand pounds, as an indemnification for former expenses; and
to restore the English East India company a part of those dominions of which
they had unjustly deprived them in the East.

Every nation with whom the English had any connection, now courted their
Protector's alliance. Among the number France solicited his aid against Spain:
Cromwell, though capable of conducting the internal parts of government, had no
skill in foreign policy. He lent his assistance to humble Spain, at a time when
the interests of Europe required her exaltation. Cardinal Mazarine gave him up
Dunkirk. His fleet, under the conduct of the famous Blake, took the island of
Jamaica. The kingdom of Ireland was entirely reduced to obedience, and treated
by him as a conquered country; many thousands of the wretched natives strove to
find, in banishment, an alleviation of their miseries; numbers died of famine,
and by the hands of the executioner not a few.

Cromwell, to give the greater appearance of justice to his usurpation, was
resolved to govern by parliament, yet by such a parliament alone as he could
govern. He assembled them, and dissolved them at pleasure; the house of Lords
was entirely discontinued; but he set up a new chamber of parliament, composed
of his own creatures, to oppose that elected by the voices of the people. Thus,
ever active, vigilant, and resolute, he discovered every conspiracy against his
person, and every insurrection among the people, before they took effect. He
had the address to prevail upon his parliament to make him an offer of the
crown, merely to have the seeming magnanimity of refusing it, and thus to
confirm his real power.

His private life was no less worthy our observation; he led an obscure life in
the palace assigned for his habitation, without pomp, without luxury. When he
sent his son Henry into Ireland, he allowed him but one servant in his retinue.
His manners were naturally austere, and he preserved the dignity and distance
of his character in the midst of the coarsest familiarity. He was cruel from
policy; just and temperate from inclination; laborious and exact in all his
designs; without eloquence he had the talent of persuading; and without
sincerity the art of making sincere adherents: his dexterity equally satisfied
every sect; with Presbyterians, a Presbyrian; with Deists a Deist; only an
Independent in principle. It was by these arts he continued his authority,
first cemented by blood, and maintained by hypocrisy and usurpation.

Yet, notwithstanding this conduct, which contributed to render him truly
formidable at home, he was, after a few years reign, become truly miserable to
himself. He knew that he was detested by every party in the kingdom; he knew
the fierce spirit of the people whom he had made slaves; and he was incessantly
haunted by the terrors of an assassination. To increase his calamity, a book
was published, entitled, Killing no murder; in which it was proved to be just
to destroy him at any rate. Shall we, said this popular declaimer, who would
not suffer the lion to invade us, tamely stand to be devoured by the wolf?
Cromwell read this spirited treatise, and it is said was never seen to smile
afterward. He wore armor under his clothes, and always kept a loaded pistol
in his pocket; his aspect became cloudy, and he regarded every stranger with a
glance of timid suspicion. He always traveled with hurry and precipitation,
and never slept two nights successively in the same apartment. A tertian ague
came at last to deliver him from a life of horror and misery. He died at
Whitehall, after having nominated his son Richard Cromwell as his successor.
Notwithstanding the evident approaches of death, his fanatical chaplains
affirmed that he would recover, and thanked God for the undoubted assurances
they had received of his safety. He was even of the same opinion himself. I
tell you, cried he to the physicians that attended him, I shall not die of this
distemper; favorable answers have been returned from Heaven, not only to my
own supplications, but likewise to those of the godly, who carry on a more
intimate correspondence with the Lord. This behavior, at his death, is an
undeniable proof that he was in reality more the enthusiast than an hypocrite;
and, in fact, we are more frequently deceived ourselves, than we attempt to
deceive others.

Whatever were the differences of interest after the death of the Usurper, the
influence of his name was still sufficient to get Richard his son proclaimed
Protector. The parties, however, were now grown too headstrong to be controlled
by greater abilities; what then could Richard do who had nothing active in his
disposition, no talents for business, no knowledge of government, no ambition,
no importance? Oliver, by means of the army, had long governed the kingdom;
they were now left to govern alone. They first therefore presented a petition
to the new Protector, demanding that no member of the army should be subject to
the civil power, and that the officers should enjoy the privilege of choosing
their own general. Richard, shocked at their presumption, rejected their
requests, and even threatened to dismiss them the service. The parliament
attempted to support these measures of Richard, but the army prevailed; the
parliament was dissolved by their menaces, and the Protector again reduced to a
private station. The officers, once more being thus left to themselves,
determined to replace the remnant of the old parliament which had beheaded the
King, and which the late Protector had so disgracefully dismissed. This was
called The good old cause; and such of the higher officers as seemed unwilling
to give up their authority to this parliament, were intimidated by their
subalterns into a compliance.

The Rump parliament, as it was called, being thus once again established,
began by vigorously attempting to lessen the power of that very army which had
just now given them all their authority. They new-modelled a part of the
forces, cashiered such officers as they feared, and placed others in their
room. These attempts, however, did not pass without vigorous efforts in the
principal officers who were at London to oppose them. They held several
conferences together to strengthen their power, and lessen that of their
opposers. They at length came to the usual resource of these turbulent times;
they first presented a seditious petition; and, upon finding it rejected,
conducted by general Lambert, they entered the house, excluded the members,
dissolved the parliament by their own authority, and formed a council of ten to
provide for the safety of the commonwealth. During these transactions, general
Monck was at the head of twelve thousand veterans in Scotland. Monck had begun
his fortunes under the command of the late King, and was taken prisoner in his
service. Upon the death of his Master he was released from his long confinement
to command under Cromwell, for whom he always fought with conduct and success.

In this anarchy and confusion he seemed agitated by different designs, between
loyalty to his lawful King, ambition to advance himself, and the apprehensions
he was under from the governing part of the nation; his loyalty at length
prevailed; he resolved to restore the royal family, but to use all the
precautions that were requisite for their safety and his own. He soon had an
opportunity of embarrassing the affairs of the nation still more, to prepare
the way for her meditated revolution. The officers, now formed into a council
of ten, had sent to treat with him; he consented to a negotiation only in order
to gain time; and after a treaty had been actually signed by those he employed
in this business, he refused to ratify it upon frivolous pretenses. The deposed
parliament, finding that Monck had disapproved of the proceedings of the
officers at London, were resolved to avail themselves of his friendship, in
order to be reinstated in their former authority; and sent him a private
commission, appointing him commander in chief of all the forces in England,
Scotland, and Ireland. He now therefore resolved to march towar^s London, and
upon his approach the officers wh^ had deposed the parliament found themselves
almost deserted, and at length compelled to resign the authority they had
usurped. When he reached St. Alban's, he sent a letter to the house, desiring
that London should be cleared of all other troops to make way for his approach.
This demand awakened the suspicion of the parliament, but they were reluctantly
obliged to comply. He entered London in triumph at the head of his army, and
repaired to the council of state, but refused taking the oath of abjuration,
shrewdly observing that the fewer oaths were taken, the cleaner would the
consciences be. He next examined his officers, and, having secured their
concurrence, he restored those members to the parliament which long since had
been secluded before the trial of the King.

The Independants, who had voted for the trial of Charles, were now greatly
out-numbered; and it was soon seen that the royal party was likely to prevail.
The republicans, who, though they hated a Protector, still more feared the
royal resentment, endeavored to persuade Monck to assume the sovereign power,
in imitation of Cromwell. He rejected their advice, and in the mean time gave
the King private intimations of his designs, new-modelled the army, quelled an
incipient insurrection, and prepared all things for his restoration.

Nothing now was wanting, but the authority and consent of a free parliament,
to settle the fluctuating constitution. On the twenty-fifth of April 1660, the
new parliament met in both houses, after the manner of their ancestors. They
immediately voted that the government ought to be vested in a King, Lords, and
Commons. On the eighth of May Charles II. was proclaimed in London; on the
twenty-sixth he arrived at Dover; on the twenty-ninth he reached Whitehall
through an innumerable multitude of people, who rent the air with their
acclamations. The wretched kingdom, long torn with faction, and oppressed by
its own struggles for freedom, once more began to respire; fanaticism, with all
its train of melancholy terrors and cruelties, was now dispelled; the arts of
peace began to return; but, unhappily, the arts of luxury entered in their
train.

I am, etc.

LETTER VIII.
IT will undoubtedly astonish posterity, when they find a whole nation making
these sudden changes from absolute liberty to the most submissive obedience; at
one time almost unanimously declaring against monarchy, and soon after, with
the most unbounded flattery, soliciting the shackles of arbitrary power. The
parliament, which had before so vehemently opposed the late Monarch, possessed
of every virtue, were now profuse in their submissions to his successor, whose
character stood in no manner of competition with that of his father.

They first ordained to have the bodies of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, dug
from their graves, and dragged to the place of execution; here they continued
hanging the whole day, and then were interred under the gallows. Of those who
sat in judgment on the late Monarch's trial, some were dead, and some were
thought worthy to find pardon; ten only out of fourscore were devoted to
immediate destruction. These were enthusiasts, who had all along acted from
principle, and bore their fate with all the confidence of martyrs. They had
been formerly cruel themselves, and they were now in turn treated with shocking
inhumanity; the executioners, not content with performing the office of death,
added insult to their tortures; the sufferers, to a man, thanked God for being
permitted to die for his cause, and braved the fury of their oppressors with
manly contempt.

Their deaths seemed to inspire a few desperate enthusiasts with the most
strange confidence that ever deluded a poor ignorant party. One Venner, who
expected the immediate coming of Christ upon earth, appeared in the streets of
London in arms, at the head of threescore enthusiasts like himself, and
declared against any other Monarch but King Jesus. They had been wrought into
such a pitch of phrenzy as to believe themselves invulnerable, and fought as
men confident of victory. The few survivors of their defeat were taken, tried,
condemned, and executed: they affirmed to the last, that, if they had been
deceived, the Lord himself concurred in the imposture.

It was now feared that the tide of loyalty would bear down all the sormer
mounds of freedom; the parliament seemed to concur in all the designs of the
court, and even to anticipate its wishes; but, though the King was established,
his old faithful friends, and the followers of his family, were left
unrewarded. There were numbers who had fought for his father, and for him, and
had lost their all in his service, still pining in want and misery; while their
persecutors, who, prefiting by the troubles of their country, had acquired
fortunes during the civil war, were still permitted to enjoy them without
molestation. The sufferers petitioned in vain; Charles was no way remarkable
for gratitude; his pleasures, his flatterers, and concubines engrossed all his
attention, and exhausted his finances; the unhappy Cavaliers murmured without
redress; he fled from their gloomy expostulations to scenes of mirth, riot, and
festivity.

The kingdom now seemed to be converted into a theater of debauchery, which had
before been a scene of blood. The Independants were no longer to be seen; the
Puritans were restrained; the horrors of the late war were the subject of
ridicule; the formality and the ignorance of sectaries were displayed upon the
stage, and even laughed at in the pulpit. The King had no religion; and, though
he permitted the persecution of sectaries, it was merely from political
motives. The late miseries of the nation were not sufficient to deter a few
desperate fanaties from attempting to excite them afresh; they laid a scheme
for surprising several towns in the North, and raising a general insurrection;
the ministry discovered the plot, before it was ripe for execution; thirty of
the conspirators were taken and executed; and this plot was a pretext for
continuing the parliament then sitting, and repealing the act for triennial
parliaments, as being dangerous in times of commotion.

The English parliament seemed willing to make the King reparation for their
former disobedience, and the Scotch were still more sanguine in the expressions
of their attachment. Had Charles been an active Monarch, he might have now
become an absolute one. They confirmed the doctrine of passive obedience by a
solemn act; they assigned him a revenue of twelve hundred thousand pounds,
exclusive of the expense necessary for sitting and supplying the fleet. None of
his predecessors were ever possessed of such a large revenue; nevertheless, his
prodigality rendered him indigent, and, instead of desiring an ascendancy over
his parliament, he was content to be an humble and continual dependant on their
bounty.

His prodigality, his libertinism, and the familiarity with which he permitted
himself to be treated by his subjects, soon began to alter their sentiments
from a veneration for royalty to a contempt of his person and administration.
He declared war against Holland, merely to have an opportunity of spending upon
his pleasures. a part of those sums granted him by parliament for the support
of a fleet and army. This war was carried on with doubtful success; but the
alarm which the nation received from Ruyter the Dutch Admiral's attempting to
sail up the river Thames, still more disgusted them against their governor.
Immediate dangers, though small, influence the mind with greater force than
distant, though terrible calamities. They now called to mind the administration
of Cromwell, when the people enjoyed security at home, and were respected
abroad; they recollected that vigorous Usurper's labors for the good of the
nation, and compared them with those of the present effeminate and unsuccessful
reign.

Natural and accidental calamities seemed to unite themselves to those brought
on by bad management. A plague ravaged the city, which swept away more than one
hundred thousand of its inhabitants; and soon after the city was almost
entirely destroyed by a conflagration, which raged for three days without
intermission. The spirit of the people soon surmounted these calamities; London
soon rose more beautiful from its ashes; the streets were built anew more
spacious and convenient than before; and their distress soon became their
advantage.

But neither war, nor accident, nor the murmurs of the people could abate the
passion for gallantry, pleasure, and expense, that reigned through the court
through the King's example. He had imbibed all that spirit of levity, during
his residence in France, for which that kingdom is remarkable. Though he had
been married soon after his restoration to the Infanta of Portugal, he kept
several mistresses, by whom he had natural issue. Among this number were
mademoiselle Querouaille, a French woman, whom he created Duchess of
Portsmouth; Mrs. Palmer, whom he made a Countess; and Nel Gwyn and Mrs. Davis,
actresses taken from the theater.

But, though the court was thus lost to decency, the passion for uniformity in
religion in the nation seemed to revive. The parliament was equally set against
the Presbyterians and the Papists; an act was made called the Test act,
importing that every person in office and employment should take the oaths of
aliegiance and supremacy, receive the sacrament in some parish church before
competent witnesses, and subscribe a declaration, renouncing the doctrine of
transubstantiation. This was levelled against the Duke of York, the King's
brother, who had professed himself a Papist, and whom the parliament secretly
aimed at excluding from the throne. The fears and discontents of the nation
were vented without restraint; the apprehensions of a Popish successor, an
abandoned court, a parliament that had continued, without a new election, for
seventeen years; an alliance cemented with France, the secret enemy of England
and the Protestant religion; and an unsuccessful and expensive war with
Holland, their natural allies; all gave cause to kindle a spirit of indignation
among the people. The court tried every method, but in vain, to satisfy these
murmurs, or appease them. Even the coffee-houses were suppressed where such
topics were generally debated.

This universal ferment, as may easily be imagined, broke out into an alarm.
When the spirit of the English is once excited, they either find objects of
resentment, or they make them. A rumor of a Popish conspiracy was first
propagated, and one Titus Oats soon appeared to give it confirmation. Titus
Oats had been from his youth an indigent and infamous adventurer. He was
abandoned, illiterate, and shameless. He had been once indicted for perjury,
afterward chaplain of a man of war, and dismissed for unnatural practices. He
then professed himself a Roman Catholic, went to the Jesuits College at St.
Omer, but was dismissed, after some residence there, with infamy. He then
returned to London, filled with projects of revenge; and the animosities of
this unhappy nation soon appeared a proper place of nourishment to give this
viper's virulence effect. He deposed upon oath, that the Jesuits, several of
whom he named, and who were soon after taken up, had tried the King under the
name of the Black Bastard, condemned him as an heretic, and resolved to deprive
him of life: that several attempts had been made without success, and that not
only the King's brother, but even the Queen were privy to the design. The house
of commons immediately took fire at this pretended conspiracy; they petitioned
for removing the Queen, rewarded Oats with a pension of twelve hundred pounds,
and immediately ordered the conspirators to be tried in the courts of justice.
Several Jesuits were tried; their very profession was at that time sufficient
to destroy them; before a partial Judge and an exasperated Jury, no mercy could
be expected, and several, though apparently innocent, were executed as traitors
upon this miscreant's information. Coleman, the Duke of York's secretary,
Ireland, Pickering, Grove, Fenwick, and White-bread were among the first that
fell; they died declaring their innocence to the last moment of their lives.

While the Protestants were laboring to humble both the Puritans and the
Papists, those two parties were at the same time mutually employed in ruining
each other. Plot was set against plot; that contrived by Oats was called the
Jesuits; that set to oppose it was called by the name of the Mealtub Plot, as
the scheme of the conspiracy was found hidden in a meal-tub. This was a design
against Oats, for his perjuries had drawn upon him the furious resentment of
the Catholic party; they were determined to take away his life by the same
false evidence by which he had taken the lives of so many others.

Of all these plots tending to disturb the peace of the kingdom, it is said the
Earl of Shaftesbury was at the bottom; he had been a member of the Long
Parliament in the civil wars, and had gained great influence among the
Presbyterians; he had insinuated himself into the confidence of Cromwell, and
afterward employed his credit in forwarding the restoration. He had been made
one of the privycouncil in the present reign, but was ejected thence for the
duplicity of his conduct. He was possessed of uncommon abilities, joined with
turbulence, dissimulation, and unbounded ambition. It was thought that this
nobleman, in revenge for his disgrace at court, headed the demagogue faction,
and alarmed the King with unceasing dangers.

He artfully increased the people's apprehensions of a Popish successor, and,
by his interest, brought a bill into the house of commons for the exclusion of
James Duke of York from the succession. In the national animosity raised
against Papists it was no difficult matter to have it passed through the house
of commons; but, being presented to the house of peers, it was thrown out by a
great majori^y.

The commons were greatly incensed at this repulse, but particularly their
anger fell upon the Earl of Halifax, who exerted himself in the opposition.
Halifax disregarded their anger, secure in conscious innocence. But their rage
fell with more weight upon Lord Stafford, who had long been a prisoner in the
Tower, upon the deposition of Oats. Notwithstanding his age, his weak
intellects, and the justness of his defense, he was arraigned, condemned, and
executed for a plot which had its only foundation in perjury and subornation.
All things threatened a renewal of the former troubles from which the kingdom
had been but lately set free. The commons presented petition after petition to
the King, desiring the punishment of Papists, and the abridgment of the royal
prerogative. They seemed willing to intimidate the King, or to inflame the
nation. At length Charles showed a degree of fortitude that surprised even his
friends; he rejected their petitions with contempt, and dissolved the
parliament that had abused their power.

The state of the nation at that time, with regard to religion, was thus: The
principal men at court, if they professed any, were of the established church;
so were all the men of great property, as well as the dregs of the people; but
that body of men who voted at elections, placed between a state of opulence and
penury, were in general Presbyterians. They were therefore willing to return
representatives only of that persuasion.

Charles, however, was resolved to try one parliament more, and appointed them
to meet him at Oxford, the city of London having long been displeasing, by
reason of their republican principles. The new parliament, however, seemed
still more turbulent than the former; the members came armed, and attended by
their friends and adherents, as if they expected to fight, and not deliberate.
The representatives of London were in particular attended by a numerous body of
horsemen, wearing cockades, inscribed, No Popery, no Slavery. To declaim
against Popery was the voice of faction in the last reign, and such it was in
the present. The same spirit that had animated the former parliament, seemed
redoubled in this. They insisted on the bill for excluding the Duke of York
from the succession; they persisted in declaring that all Papists should be
banished, and their children educated in the Protestant religion; that the
doctrine of passive obedience was injurious to the rights of society. In a
word, the leaders of the opposition were resolved to be displeased with every
measure the King could propose, and prepared to recall the former aristocracy
into the kingdom. Charles, seeing that nothing could be expected from counsels
managed by party, and not deliberation, once more dissolved this parliament,
with a steadfast resolution of never calling another.

This was a stroke they had never expected, and which the times alone could
justify. From the moment the royal and parliamentary commotions were ended,
Charles seemed to rule with despotic power, and was resolved to leave to his
successor the faults and the misfortunes of his administration. His temper,
which had been always easy and merciful, became arbitrary, and even cruel; he
entertained spies and informers round the throne, and imprisoned all such as he
thought most daring in their designs. He resolved to humble the Presbyterians;
all such were divested of their employments, and their places filled with such
as approved the doctrine of non-resistance. The clergy testified their zeal to
the court by their writings and sermons; the partisans of the King were most
numerous; but those of the opposite faction were more enterprising; the mutual
animofity of each was inflamed into rage and rancour, and the King openly
declared himself at the head of a faction. The city of London particularly fell
under his resentment; he deprived them of their charter, and only restored it
when he had subjected the election of their magistrates to his immediate
authority.

Such an arbitrary administration could not fail of exciting new insurrections;
several noblemen, among whom were the Duke of Monmouth, the King's natural son,
the Lord Shaftesbury, Russel, Gray, and others, entered into a combination to
destroy the King, which was called after the Rye-house plot. The conspirators
met at the house of one Shepherd, a wine-merchant, where they proposed a rising
in London, Bristol, Devonshire, and Cheshire. They agreed upon a declaration
for justifying their design, but the scheme was at first delayed from the
difficulty of the preparations previous to taking the field, and soon after
discovered by one Keiling, who expected to earn a pardon for himself by
impeaching his associates. As the plot began to open, new informers came in;
Monmouth absconded, Gray escaped the messenger who had been sent to arrest him,
Russel was committed to the Tower, and Shaftesbury, who foresaw the danger, had
taken refuge in Holland. Lord Essex, Sidney, the great philosopher and
lawgiver, and Hampden, grandson of the famous man of that name, were informed
against, and committed to confinement.

The principal informer upon this occasion was Lord Howard, a man every way
debauched, and who was willing to accept infamy for safety: by his evidence
Russel and Sidney were condemned, and died with that intrepidity which was
worthy a better cause. While these men were thus executed, Monmouth was in the
mean time soliciting his pardon; and he who was most culpable, as his crime was
most unnatural, easily obtained it.

The severities exercised in the latter part of this reign arose merely from
the influence of the Duke of York, who was as much inclined to cruelty by
nature, as his brother Charles was prone to forgiveness. His authority was
become terrible even to the ministry; by his advice the King seized upon all
the charters of the corporations, in order to extort money for having them
renewed. Partiality and oppression were the instruments of his power, and
bigotry and innovation the objects of his aim. At this period the reign of
Charles was as absolute as that of any Monarch in Christendom, and new
discontents and treasons were secretly diffusing their poison, the spirit of
liberty still struggling hard against the spirit of obedience, which the clergy
attempted to inculcate. Another civil war threatened the nation, still more
dreadful than the former, as the forces were more equally divided. But Charles
happily died before those calamities could return; he was suddenly seized with
an apoplectic fit, in the fifty-fourth year of his age, and the twenty-fifth of
his reign. The people, though they despised his administration, loved his
person; they were willing to bear with the faults of one whose whole behavior
was a continued instance of goodnature and affability; but they were by no
means willing to grant the same indulgence to his successor, whom they hated
for his pride, his religion, his cruelty, and connections. He was unfit to walk
in the irregular steps of his predecessor; and, when he pursued the same route,
fatal experience soon convinced him that he had at once mistaken himself and
the people he attempted to command.

But, though England, during the reign of Charles, seemed still, in some
measure, agitated like the ocean after a storm, yet commerce continued to
increase with its usual celerity and success. The manufacture of certain
stuffs, glass, copper, steel, paper, hats, and stockings, were now brought to
perfection. Upon the banishing the Protestants from France, numbers came and
settled here, and brought their arts with them. This application to arts and
commerce gave England great weight in the balance of Europe; Britain became the
center of politics and arms. Though literature was but little encouraged by the
Sovereign, yet the learned made great proficiency in every department of
science; and the philosophers of England began to take the lead. Newton,
Tillotson, Burnet, Hobbes, and Shaftesbury enlarged the landmarks of human
knowledge; Butler, Dryden, Otway, gave strength and propriety to the language.
In a word, the character of the nation now began to alter; the natural rudeness
of the inhabitants began to take a polish from good breeding, and British
ferocity to meliorate into charity and humanity.

I am, etc.

LETTER IX.
AS we descend, we find the materials for English history increase; the
minutest transactions are recorded with prolixity; and these, however dry and
unimproving to some, are yet both interesting and satisfactory to others. In
such a profusion of materials I must be content rather to give the spirit of
the following reigns, than pretend to exhibit an historical detail of
particular interests and intrigues. It will be enough to mark those strong
out-lines that may probably escape the wreck of time, when the internal
coloring shall fade. As history increases in time by the addition of new
events, an epitome becomes more necessary to abridge its excrescences.

The Duke of York, who succeeded his brother, with the title of King James the
Second, had been bred a Papist, and was strongly bigoted to his principles. It
is the property of that religion, almost ever, to contract the sphere of the
understanding; and, until people are, in some measure, disengaged from its
prejudices, it is impossible to lay a just claim to extensive views, or
consistency of design. The intellects of this Prince were naturally weak, and
his bigoted principles still rendered them more feeble; he conceived the
ridiculous project of reigning in the same arbitrary manner of his predecessor,
and changing the established religion of his country, at a time when his person
was hated, and the established religion was universally approved.

The people of England were now entirely changed from what they had been in the
times of Henry, Mary, and Elizabeth, who had altered religion at will. Learning
was now as much cultivated by the laity as by the priesthood; every man now
pretended to think for himself, and had rational grounds for his opinion. In
the beginning of the reformation the Monarchs had only to bring over the
clergy, in order totally to change the modes of belief, for the people were
entirely guided by their pastors. To influence the priesthood was an easy task.
The hopes of preferment, or the fears of degradation, entirely subjected the
consciences of the clergy to the royal will. Such it was then; but the
circumstances of the nation were, at present, entirely altered; and, to make a
change in religion, it would have been necessary to tamper with every
individual in the state. But James had no idea of the alteration of
circumstances; his situation, he thought, supplied him with authority, and his
zeal furnished him with hope of accomplishing this chimerical design.

The success he met with in crushing a rebellion, in the opening of his reign,
seemed to promise a favorable omen toward the completion of his wishes. The
Duke of Monmouth, who had long been at the head of faction, and inflamed all
the discontent that molested the late King's reign, was now resolved to aim at
the crown. He was the darling of the people; and some averred that the King had
married his mother, and owned his legitimacy at his death. The Earl of Argyle
seconded his views, and they formed a scheme of a double insurrection. Argyle
first landed in Scotland, published his manifestoes, put himself at the head of
two thousand five hundred men, and attempted to influence the nation; but, a
formidable body of the King's forces coming against him, his army fell away,
and he himself, after being wounded in attempting to escape, was taken by a
peasant, standing up to his neck in water. Being brought to Edinburgh, he
prepared for death, well knowing that it was not in the King's nature to
forgive an enemy.

The Duke of Monmouth was not more fortunate; he sailed from the Texel with
three vessels, and arrived on the coasts of Dorsetshire with about fourscore
followers. The country soon flocked in to his standard, and in two days his
army was increased to two thousand men. The Earl of Feversham was sent to
oppose him, and took post at Sedgemore, a village in Somersetshire. Monmouth
resolved to fight him, and began his march about eleven in the night, with
profound silence; but the Royalists were prepared for his reception. The action
began at daybreak; Lord Gray, who commanded the Duke of Monmouth's horse, was
routed at the first onset. The Duke, at the head of his infantry, bravely
maintained his ground until he was charged in flank by the enemy's horse, who
had been just now victorious. A total rout ensued; three hundred were killed in
the engagement, and a thousand in the pursuit. The Duke escaped the carnage,
and, in a shepherd's disguise, fled on foot, attended by a faithful companion,
who had followed his fortunes into England. Thus they traveled onward toward
Dorsetshire, till, quite exhausted with hunger and fatigue, they lay down in a
field, and covered themselves with stubble. In this forlorn situation he was
found, with some pease in his pocket, which he had gathered in the fields to
sustain life. His spirit sunk with his misfortunes; he wrote to the King;
implored his mercy; the King gave him an audience, as if willing to satisfy his
vengeance with the sight of a rival's misery. But his death was determined, and
no entreaties could extort royal clemency. On the seaffold he resumed his
former courage, handled the ax, declared that he meant well to the nation, and
his head was cut off, but not till after the third blow.

But it were happy for the nation, and fortunate for the King, if the blood
that was already shed had been thought a sufficient explation for the late
offense. The victorious army behaved with the most savage cruelty to the
prisoners taken after the battle. Their inhumanity was properly seconded by
Jefferies, who was sent on the western circuit to try the insurgents. His
furious thirst of blood being inflamed by continual intoxication, he
threatened, calumniated, and threw aside even the appearance of clemency. Men
and women indiscrimately felt the effects of his savage zeal; and not less than
two hundred and fifty persons expired under circumstances of wanton cruelty.
Cruel Kings ever find cruel ministers.

It was not to be expected, that these butcheries could acquire the King the
love or the confidence of his people, or tend to alter their opinions, as they
rather excited the secret abhorrence of every honest man. Yet he thought this a
time favorable for the carrying on his scheme of religion and arbitrary
government. An attempt at arbitrary power in Charles was, in some measure,
excusable, as he had a republican faction to oppose; and it might have been
prudent, at that time, to overstep justice, in order to attain security; but
the same designs in James were as unnecessary as impracticable, since there
were few republicans remaining, and the people were satisfied with limited
monarchy. But this weak and deluded Monarch was resolved to imitate one or two
Princes of Europe, who had just before rendered themselves absolute; and he was
incited to this project by Lewis XIV, who secretly desired his destruction.
Thus instigated, he began his designs with the measures which he should not
have used till their completion. He sent a splendid embassy to Rome, to
acknowledge his obedience to the Pope. Innocent, who then filled the chair, was
too good a politician to approve those childish measures, and gave his
ambassador a very cool reception. He was sensible that the King was openly
striking at those laws and opinions which it was his business to undermine in
silence and security. The Cardinals were even heard facetiously to declare,
that the King should be excommunicated for thus endeavoring to overturn the
small remains of Popery that yet subsisted in England.

James, notwithstanding his discouragements, was yet resolved to prosecute his
favorite scheme with vigor. Upon every occasion the Catholics shared his
confidence and favor. Hugh Peter's, his confessor, ruled his conscience, and
drove him blindly forward to attempt innovation. He became every day more and
more ambitious of making converts; the Earl of Sunderland sacrificed his
religion to his ambition; the Earl of Rochester lost his employment of
treasurer for refusing to alter his religion. The King stooped so low as to his
officers; a rough soldier one day answered his remonstrances by saying that he
was pre-engaged, for he had promised the King of Morocco, when he was quartered
at Tangiers, that, should he ever change his religion, he would turn Mohammedan.

An Ecclesiastical Court was erected, with power to punish all delinquents, or
such so reputed by the court, with all manner of ecclesiastical censures.
Before this court was summoned the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, for having
refused to admit one Francis, a Benedictine Monk, to the degree of master of
arts; the Vice Chancellor was deprived of his office, but the university
persisted in their refusal, and the King thought proper to desist from his
purpose. The Vice President and fellows of Magdalen-college in Oxford were
treated with more severity. They refused to admit one Farmer, a new convert,
and one of a profligate life, who was nominated by the King to the place of
President, now become vacant. The King next nominated Parker, Bishop of Oxford;
but he was equally obnoxious for the same reasons. The King repaired in person
to Oxford; he reproached the fellows with insolence and disobedience; but
neither he, nor his ministers, could prevail to alter the resolutions of this
society. The fellows were expelled by his order, and their places filled with
Papists, who he knew would be more obedient to his commands.

His designs hitherto were sufficiently manifest; but he was now resolved
entirely to throw off the mask. By his permission the Pope's Nuncio made his
public entry into Windsor in his pontificals, preceded by the cross, and
attended by a great number of monks in the habit of their respective orders. He
next published a declaration for liberty of conscience, by which all restraints
upon Popery were taken away. The Church of England took the alarm; the peculiar
animosity of the people against the Catholic religion proceeded not less from
religious than temporal motives. It is the spirit of that religion to favor
arbitrary power, and its reproach to encourage persecution. The English had too
osten smarted under both to be willing again to submit to either. Seven
Bishops, who had received the King's express orders to cause this declaration
of liberty of conscience to be read in their churches, refused to comply. They
drew up a modest petition to excuse their refusal, which only served to
increase the King's resentment and rage. They were cited before the council,
and still adhered to their former resolution with that firmness which is the
characteristic of virtue. The Attorney General was ordered to prosecute them
for publishing sedition, and abridging the King's prerogative. They were
committed prisoners to the Tower, conducted thither amidst the prayers and
condolence of an incredible multitude of the populace, who regarded them as
sufferers for truth. The day appointed for their trial arrived; this cause was
looked upon as the crisis of English freedom; the council managed the debate on
both sides with learning and candor; the jury withdrew into a chamber, where
they passed the whole night, but next morning returned into court, and declared
the Bishops not guilty. The joy of the people, on this occasion, was
inexpressible; the whole city, and the country around, seemed at once to catch
the shouts of exultation; they even reached the camp, where the King was then
sitting at dinner, who heard them with indignation and amazement.

If the Bishops testified the readiness of martyrs, in support of their
religion, James showed no less obstinacy in his attempts toward the
establishment of his own. Finding the clergy averse to his designs, he next
tried what he could do with the army. He thought, if one regiment would promise
implicit obedience, their example would soon induce others to the same
compliance. He ordered one of the regiments to be drawn up in his presence, and
desired that such as were against his late declaration of liberty should lay
down their arms. He was surprised to see the whole battalion ground their arms,
except two officers and a few Roman Catholic soldiers.

Opposition only served to increase the infatuated Monarch's zeal; he was
continually stimulated by his Queen and his priests to proceed rashly onward.
But he was particularly urged on by the Jesuit Peter's, his confessor, an
ambitious and intriguing priest, whom some historians have even accused of
being the creature of the Prince of Orange, the King's son-in-law, who had long
since conceived hopes of seizing the crown. James now, therefore, issued orders
for prosecuting all those clergymen who had forborne to read his declaration.
He placed one Gifford, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, at the head of Magdalen
College, and likewise nominated him to the sea of Oxford, lately become vacant.
Every member of the Church of England now saw their danger; and Whigs and
Tories united their efforts to oppose it.

William, Prince of Orange, had married Mary the daughter of King James. This
Prince had been early immersed in danger, calamities, and politics; the designs
of France, and the turbulence of Holland, had served to sharpen his talents,
and given him a propensity for intrigue. This great politician and soldier
concealed beneath a phlegmatic appearance, a most violent and boundless
ambition, all his actions were levelled at power, while his discourse never
betrayed the wishes of his heart. His temper was cold and severe, his genius
active and piercing; he was valiant without ostentation, and politic without
address; disdaining the pleasures, or the elegancies of life, yet eager after
the phantom of pre-eminence. He was no stranger to the murmurs of the English,
and was resolved to turn them to his interest. He therefore accepted the
invitations of the nobility and others, and still more willingly embarked in
the cause, as he found the malcontents had concerted their measures with
prudence and secrecy.

A fleet was equipped sufficient to transport fifteen thousand troops; and it
was at first given out that this armament was designed against France. James,
at length, began to see his own errors and the discontents of the people; he
would now have retracted his measures in favor of Popery, but it was too late;
the fleet of the Prince was already sailed, and had landed thirteen thousand
troops at the village of Broxholme in Torbay.

The expectations of the Prince of Orange seemed, at first, to be frustrated;
very few Englishmen offered him their services, though the people were, in
general, well affected to his design. Slight repulses were not sufficient to
intimidate a general who had, from early youth, encountered adversity; he
continued ten days in expectation of being joined by the malcontents without
success; but, just when he began to deliberate about reimbarking his forces, he
was joined by several persons of consequence, and the country people came
flocking to his standard. From this day his numbers began to increase; the
nobility, which had composed the court and council of King James, now left
their old Master to solicit protection from the new.

Lewis XIV. had long foreseen this defection, and had formerly offered the King
thirty thousand men for his security. This was then refused by James, by the
advice of Sunderland, his favorite, who was secretly in the interests of the
Prince of Orange. James, however, now requested assistance from France, when it
was too late for his service: he wrote in vain to Leopold, Emperor of Germany,
who only returned for answer, that what he had foreseen had happened. He had
some dependence on his fleet, but they were entirely disaffected. In a word,
his interests were deserted by all; for he had long deserted them himself. He
was at the head of an army of twenty thousand men, and it is possible that, had
he led them to the combat without granting them time for deliberation, they
might have fought in his favor; but he was involved in a maze of fears and
suspicions; the defection of those he most confided in took away his power of
deliberation, and his perplexity was increased, when told that the Prince of
Denmark and Anne, his favorite daughter, had gone over to the Prince of
Orange. In this exigence he could not repress his tears, but in the agony of
his heart was heard to exclaim, God help me, my own children have forsaken me.

He now hung over the precipice of destruction! invaded by one son-in-law,
abandoned by another, hated by his subjects, and detested by those who had
suffered beneath his cruelty. He assembled the few noblemen who still adhered
to his interests, and demanded their advice and assistance. Addressing himself
to the Earl of Bedford, father to Lord Russel, who was beheaded by James's
intrigues in the preceding reign, My Lord, said he, you are an honest man, have
great credit, and can do me signal service. Ah, Sir, replied the Earl, I am old
and feeble, I can do you but little service; but I once had a son that could
have assisted you, but he is no more. James was so struck with this reply, that
he could not speak for some minutes.

The King was naturally timid; and some counselors about him, either sharing
his fears, or bribed by the Prince, contributed to increase his apprehensions.
They reminded him of the fate of Charles I, and aggravated the turbulence of
the people. He was, at length, persuaded to think of flying from a nation he
could no longer govern, and of taking refuge at the court of France, where he
was sure of finding assistance and protection. Thus instructed, he first sent
away his Queen, who arrived safely at Calais; and soon after, disguising
himself in a plain dress, he went down to Feversham, and embarked on board a
small vessel for France. His misfortunes still continued to follow him; the
vessel was detained by the common people, who not knowing their Sovereign,
robbed, insulted, and abused him. He was now persuaded by the Earl of
Winchelsea to return to London, where he was once more received amidst the
acclamations of the people.

The return of James was by no means agreeable to William, though he well knew
how to dissemble. It was his interest and his design to increase the forsaken
Monarch's apprehensions, so as to induce him to fly. He therefore received the
news of his return with a haughty air, and ordered him to leave Whitehall, and
retire to Richmond. The King remonstrated against Richmond, and desired that
Rochester might be appointed as the place of his abode. The Prince perceived
his intention was to leave the kingdom; nor did one wish for flight more
ardently than did the other desire him away. The King soon concurred with his
designs: after staying but a short time at Rochester, he fled to the seaside,
attended by his natural son the Duke of Berwick, where he embarked for France,
and arrived in safety, to enjoy, for the rest of life, the empty title of a
King, and the appellation of a Saint, a title which still flattered him more.
Here he continued to reside among a people who pitied, ridiculed, and despised
him. He enrolled himself in the order of Jesuits; and the court of Rome, for
whom he had lost all, repaid him only with indulgences and pasquinades.

From this moment the constitution of England, that had fluctuated for so many
ages, was fixed. The nation, represented by its parliament, determined the long
contested limits between the King and the people; they prescribed to the Prince
of Orange the terms by which he was to rule; they chose him for King, jointly
with Mary, who was the next Protestant heir to the crown. They were crowned
with titles of William III. and Mary, King and Queen of England. The Prince saw
his ambition, at length, gratified; and his wisdom was repaid with that crown
which the folly of his predecessor had given away.

I am, etc.

LETTER X.
THOUGH William was chosen King of England, his power was limited on every
side; and the opposition he met with from his parliaments still lessened the
regal authority. His sway in Holland, where he was but the Stadtholder, was far
more arbitrary; so that he might, with greater propriety, have been called the
King of the United Provinces, and the Stadtholder of England. He was not
sufficiently acquainted with the difficulty of governing the nation by which he
was elected; he expected in them a people ready to second the views of his
ambition in humbling France; but he found them more apt to fear for the
invasion of their domestic liberties from himself.

His reign commenced, however, with the same attempt which had been the
principal cause of all the disturbances in the preceding reign, and had
excluded the Monarch from the throne. William was a Calvinist, and naturally
averse to persecution. He therefore began by attempting to repeal those laws
that enjoined uniformity of worship; and, though he could not entirely succeed
in his design, yet a toleration was granted to such Dissenters as should take
the oaths of allegiance, and hold no private conventicles. The Papists also
enjoyed the lenity of his government; and, though the laws against them
continued to subsist, yet they were seldom put into rigorous execution. What
was criminal in James was virtuous in his successor: James only wanted to
introduce persecution by pretending to disown it; William was averse to
persecution from principle; and none suffered for religious opinions during his
reign.

But, though William was acknowledged in England, Scotland was still
undetermined. The parliament of that country, however, soon recognized his
authority, and took that opportunity to abolish episcopacy, which had been long
disagreeable to the nation. Nothing now remained to the deposed Monarch, of all
his former dominions, but Ireland. His cause was espoused by all the Catholics
of that country, who were much more numerous there than those of the Protestant
persuasion. The King of France, either touched with compassion for his
sufferings, or willing to weaken a rival kingdom by internal dissensions,
granted James a fleet and some troops, to assert his claims there. On the
seventh day of May this unhappy Monarch embarked at Breast, and on the
twenty-second arrived at Kinsale. He was received by the Catholics of Ireland
with open arms. The Protestants, who were unanimously attached to King William,
had been previously disarmed by Tyrconnel, their Lord Lieutenant, and a Papist.
James made his public entry into Dublin amidst the acclamations of the
inhabitants. He was met by a Popish procession, bearing the host, which he
publicly adored; and this served to alienate the few Protestants of that
kingdom, who still adhered to his cause. A small party of that religion were
resolved to defend their lives and religion in the little city of Londonderry.
They were besieged by the forces of King James, and suffered all the
complicated miseries of war, famine, and bigoted cruelty; but, determined
never to yield, they rejected capitulation, and always repulsed the besiegers
with considerable loss. At length, supplies and succors arriving from England,
King James's army thought proper to raise the siege.

The cruelties exercised upon the Protestants were as shocking as unnecessary;
soldiers were permitted to pillage them without redress; and they were
compelled to accept base money in exchange for those commodities they were
forced to sell. But their sufferings were soon to have a period. The Duke of
Schomberg was sent over, with assistance; and William himself soon after
followed, and landed at Carrickfergus. He was met by numbers of the
Protestants, who had fled from persecution; and now, at the head of
six-and-thirty thousand men, he was resolved to go in quest of the enemy.
Having marched to Dundalk, and then to Ardee, he, at length, came in sight of
the Irish army. The river Boyne lay between the two armies, the front of the
Irish being secured by a morass and a rising ground. These obstacles were
insufficient to prevent the ardour of William, who, when his friend the Duke of
Schomberg expostulated upon the danger boldly, replied, That a tardy victory
would be worse than a defeat. The Duke, finding his advice not relished,
retired to his tent in a melancholy manner, as if he had a prescience of his
own misfortune. Early in the morning, at six o'clock, King William gave orders
to pass the river; the army passed in three different places, and the battle
began with unusual vigor. The Irish troops, which have been reckoned the best
in Europe abroad, have always fought indifferently at home; they fled, after a
long resistance, with precipitation, and left the French and Swiss regiments,
who came to their assistance, to make the best retreat they could. William led
on his horse in person, and contributed, by his activity and vigilance, to
secure the victory. James was not in the battle, but stood aloof, during the
action, on the hill of Dunmore, surrounded with some squadrons of horse; and,
at intervals, was heard to exclaim, when he saw his own troops repulsing the
enemy, O spare my English subjects. The Irish lost about fifteen hundred men,
and the English about one third of that number; but the death of the Duke of
Schomberg, who was shot as he was crossing the water, seemed to outweigh all
the numbers of the enemy. He had been long a soldier of fortune, and fought
under almost every power in Europe. His skill in war was unparalleled, and his
fidelity equal to his courage. The number of battles in which he had been
personally engaged, was said to equal the number of his years; and he died aged
eighty-two. James fled, regardless of the safety of his soldiers. William rode
round the scene of slaughter, relieving the wounded, as well of the enemy's
troops as his own. O Regan, an old Irish captain, was heard to say upon this
occasion, That, if the English would exchange generals, the conquered army
would fight the battle over again.

This blow totally depressed the hopes of James; he fled to Dublin, advised the
magistrates to get the best terms they could from the victor, then set out for
Waterford, where he embarked for France, in a vessel prepared for his
reception. Had he possessed either conduct or courage, he might still have
headed his troops, and fought with advantage; but prudence forsook him with
good fortune.

His friends were still resolved to second his interests, though he had
abandoned them himself. After his retreat, another desperate battle was fought
at Aughrim, in which his adversaries were again victorious; Limeric, a strong
city in the southern part of the kingdom, still held out in his favor. This
city was besieged, and made a brave defense; but, despairing of the King's
fortunes, the garrison, at length, capitulated; the Roman Catholics, by this
capitulation, were restored to the enjoyment of such liberty in the exercise of
their religion, as they had possessed in the reign of Charles II; and about
fourteen thousand of those who had fought in favor of King James, had
permission to go over to France, and transports were provided for their
reception.

The conqueft os Ireland being thus completed, the only hopes of the fugitive
King now depended on the assistance of Lewis XIV, who promised to make a
descent upon England in his favor. The French King was punctual; he supplied
the fugitive Monarch with an army consisting of a body of French troops, some
English and Scotch refugees, and the Irish regiments which had been transported
from Limeric into France, by long difcipline, now become excellent soldiers.
This army was assembled between Cherbourg and La Hogue; King James commanded it
in person; and more than three hundred transports were provided for landing it
on the English shore. Tourville, the French admiral, at the head of sixty-three
ships of the line, was appointed to favor the descent, and had orders to
attack the enemy, if they should attempt to oppose him. All things conspired to
revive the hopes of the hitherto unfortunate King.

These preparations on the side of France were soon known at the court of
England, and precautions were taken for a vigorous opposition; all the secret
machinations of the banished King's adherents were early discovered to the
English ministry by spies; and they took proper measures to defeat them.
Admiral Russel was ordered to put to sea with all possible expedition; and he
soon appeared with ninety-nine ships of the line, besides frigates and
fireships. Both fleets met at La Hogue. On the success of this engagement all
the hopes of James depended; but the victory was on the side of the English,
and of numbers; the fight continued ten hours, and the pursuit two days;
fifteen French men of war were destroyed; and the blow was so decisive, that
from that time France seemed to relinquish her claims to the ocean.

James was now reduced to the lowest ebb of despondence; his designs upon
England were quite frustrated; nothing was now left his friends but terrors and
despair, or the hopes of assassinating the Monarch on the throne. These base
attempts, as barbarous as they were useless, were not entirely disagreeable to
the temper of James: it is said, he encouraged and proposed them; but they all
ended in the destruction of their undertakers. He passed the rest of his days
at St. Germains, a pensioner on the bounties of Lewis, and assisted by
occasional liberalities from his daughter, and friends in England. He died in
1700, at St. Germains. Some pretend that miracles were wrought at his tomb. We
have seen few deposed Kings that have not died with a reputation for sanctity.

The defeat at La Hogue confirmed King William's safety and title to the crown:
the Jacobites were now a feeble and a disunited faction; new parties therefore
arose among those who had been friends of the revolution, and William found as
much opposition from his parliament at home, as from the enemy in the field.
His chief motive for accepting the crown was to engage England more deeply in
the concerns of Europe. It had ever been his ambition to humble the French,
whom he considered as the most formidable enemies of that liberty which he
idolized; and all his politics lay in making alliances against them. Many of
the English, on the other hand, had neither the same animosity against the
French, nor the same terrors of their increasing power; they therefore
considered the interests of the nation as sacrificed to foreign connections,
and complained, that the war on the continent fell most heavily on them, though
they had the least interest in its success. To these motives of discontent was
added his partiality to his own countrymen, in prejudice of English subjects,
together with his proud reserve and sullen silence, so unlike the behavior of
all their former Kings. William heard their complaints with the most phlegmatic
indifference; the interests of Europe alone employed all his attention; but,
while he incessantly waked over the schemes of contending Kings and nations, he
was unmindful of the cultivation of internal polity. Patriotism was ridiculed
as an ideal virtue; the practice of bribing a majority in parliament became
universal. The example of the great was caught up by the vulgar; all principle,
and even decency, was gradually banished; talents lay uncultivated; and the
ignorant and profligate were received into favor.

William, upon accepting the crown, was resolved to preserve, as much as he was
able, the privileges of a Sovereign. He was, as yet, entirely unacquainted with
the nature of a limited monarchy, which was not then thoroughly understood in
any part of Europe, except England alone. He therefore often controverted the
views of his parliament, and was directed by arbitrary councils. One of the
first instances of this was, in the opposition he gave to the bill for
triennial parliaments; it had past the two houses, and was sent up to receive
the royal assent, which William refused to grant; the commons then voted, that
whoever advised the King to this measure, was an enemy to his country. The
bill, thus rejected, lay dormant for another season; and, being again brought
in, the King found himself obliged, though reluctantly, to comply. The same
opposition, and the same success, attended a bill for regulating trials in
cases of high treason, by which the accused was allowed a copy of his
indictment, and a list of the names of his jury, two days before his trial,
together with council to plead in his defense. That no person should be
indicted, but upon the oaths of two faithful witnesses. This was one of the
most salutary laws that had been long enacted; but, while penal statutes were
mitigated on one hand, they were strangely increased by a number of others.

The great business of the parliament, from this period, seemed to consist in
restraining corruption, and bringing such to justice, as had grown wealthy from
the plunder of the public. The number of laws that were now enacted every
session, seemed calculated for the safety of the subject; but, in reality, were
symptoms of the universal corruption. The more corrupt the commonwealth, the
more numerous are the laws.

William was willing to admit all the restraints they chose to lay on the royal
prerogative in England, upon condition of being properly supplied with the
means of humbling the power of France. War, and foreign politics, were all he
knew, or desired to understand. The sums of money granted him for the
prosecution of this war were incredible; and the nation, not contented with
furnishing him with such supplies as they were immediately capable of raising,
involved themselves in debts, which they have never since been able to
discharge. For all this profusion England received, in return, the empty reward
of military glory in Flanders, and the consciousness of having given the Dutch,
whom they saved, frequent opportunities of being ungrateful.

The treaty of Ryswick, at length, put an end to a war, in which England had
engaged without interest, and came off without advantage. In the general
pacification her interests seemed entirely deserted; and, for all her blood and
treasure, the only equivalent she received, was, the King of France's
acknowledgment of King William's title to the crown.

The King, now freed from a foreign war, laid himself out to strengthen his
authority at home. He conceived hopes of keeping up the forces that were
granted him, in time of war, during the continuance of the peace; but he was
not a little mortified to find that the commons had passed a vote, that all the
forces in English pay, exceeding seven thousand men, should be forthwith
disbanded; and that those retained should be natural English subjects. A
standing army was this Monarch's greatest delight; he had been bred up in
camps, and knew no other pleasure but that of reviewing troops, or dictating to
generals. He professed himself therefore entirely displeased with the proposal;
and his indignation was kindled to such a pitch, that he actually conceived a
design of abandoning the government. His ministers, however, diverted him from
this resolution, and persuaded him to consent to passing the bill. Such were
the altercations between the King and his parliament; which continued during
his reign. He considered his commons as a set of men desirous of power, and
consequently resolved upon obstructing all his projects. He seemed but little
attached to any party in the house; he veered from Whigs to Tories, as
interest, or immediate exigence, demanded. England he considered as a place of
labor, anxiety, and altercation. He used to retire to his seat at Loo in
Holland, for those moments which he dedicated to pleasure or tranquillity. It
was in this quiet retreat he planned the different successions of Europe, and
labored to undermine the politics of Lewis XIV, his insidious rival in power,
and in fame. Against France his resentment was ever levelled, and he had made
vigorous preparations for entering into a new war with that kingdom, when death
interrupted the execution of his schemes. He was naturally of a very feeble
constitution, and it was now almost exhausted by a life of continual action and
care. He endeavored to conceal the defects of his infirmities, and repair his
health by riding. In one of his excursions to Hampton Court, his horse fell
under him, and he himself was thrown off with such violence that his
collar-bone was fractured. This, in a robust constitution, would have been a
trifling misfortune, but to him it was fatal. Perceiving his end approach, the
objects of his former care still lay next his heart; the interests of Europe
still filled him with concern. The Earl of Albemarle arriving from Holland, he
conferred with him in private on the posture of affairs abroad. Two days after,
having received the sacrament from Archbishop Tennison, he expired, in the
fifty-second year of his age, after having reigned thirteen years.

William left behind him the character of a great politician, though he had
never been popular; and a formidable general, though he was seldom victorious;
his deportment was grave and sullen, nor did he ever show any fire, but in the
day of battle. He despised flattery, yet loved dominion. Greater as the general
of Holland, than the King of England; to the one he was a father, to the other
a fuspicious friend. He scrupled not to employ the engines of corruption to
gain his ends; and, while he increased the power of the nation he was brought
to govern, he contributed, in some measure, to corrupt their morals.

I am, etc.

LETTER XI.
THE distresses occasioned by the death of Princes are not so great, or so
sincere, as the sufferers would fondly persuade us. The loss of King William
was, at first thought, irreparable; but the prosperity of the kingdom seemed to
acquire new vigor under his successor Queen Anne. This Princess was the second
daughter of King James by his first wife; she was, by the mother's side
descended from Chancellor Hyde, afterward the Earl of Clarendon; and had been
married to the Prince of Denmark, before her accession to the crown. She
ascended the throne in the thirty-eighth year of her age, having undergone many
vicissitudes after the expulsion of her father, and many severe mortifications
during the reign of the late King. But, naturally possessed of an even serene
temper, she either was insensible of the disrespect shown her, or had wisdom to
conceal her resentment.

She came to the throne with the same hostile dispositions toward France, in
which the late Monarch died. She was wholly guided by the Countess of
Marlborough, a woman of masculine spirit, and remarkable for intrigue, both in
politics and gallantry. This lady advised a vigorous exertion of the English
power against France, as she had already marked the Earl, her husband, for
conducting all the operations both in the cabinet and the field. Thus
influenced, the Queen took early measures to confirm her allies, the Dutch,
with assurances of union and assistance.

Lewis XIV, now grown familiar with disappointment and disgrace, yet still
spurring on an exhausted kingdom to second the views of his ambition, expected,
from the death of King William, a field open for conquests and glory. The
vigilance of his late rival had blasted his laurels, and circumscribed his
power; for, even after a defeat, William still was formidable. At the news of
his death therefore the French Monarch could not suppress his joy, and his
court at Versailles seemed to have forgotten its usual decorum in the sincerity
of their rapture. But their pleasure was soon to determine; a much more
formidable enemy was now rising up to oppose them; a more able warrior, one
backed by the efforts of an indulgent mistress and a willing nation.

Immediately, upon the Queen's accession, war was declared against the French
King, and that Monarch was accused of attempting to unite the crown of Spain to
his own dominions, by placing his grandson upon the throne of that kingdom;
thus attempting to destroy the equality of power among the states of Europe.
This declaration was soon seconded with vigorous efforts; an alliance was
formed between the Imperialists, the Dutch, and the English, who contributed
more to the support of the war than the other two united. Marlborough was sent
over to command the English army, and the allies declared him generalissimo of
all their forces. Never was a man better calculated for debate and action than
he; serene in the midst of danger, and cool in all the fury of battle. While
his Countess governed the Queen, his intrigues governed the kingdom. An
indefatigable warrior while in camp, and a skilful politician in courts; he
thus became the most fatal enemy to France that England had produced, since the
conquering times of Cressy and Agincourt.

This general had learned the art of war under the famous Marshal Turenne,
having been a voluntier in his army. He, at that time, went by the name of the
Handsome Englishman; but Turenne foresaw his future greatness. He now gave the
first proofs of his wisdom by advancing the subaltern officers, whose merit had
hitherto been neglected; he gained the enemy's posts without fighting, ever
advancing, and never losing one advantage which he had gained. To this general
was opposed, on the side of France, the Duke of Burgundy, grandson of the King,
a youth more qualified to grace a court, than conduct an army; the Marshal
Bouflers commanded under him, a man of courage and activity. But these
qualities in both were forced to give way to the superior powers of their
adversary; after having been forced to retire by the skilful marches of
Marlborough, after having seen several towns taken, they gave up all hopes of
acting offensively, and concluded the campaign with resolutions to prosecute
the next with greater vigor.

Marlborough, upon his return to London, received the rewards of his merit,
being thanked by the house of commons, and created a Duke by the Queen. The
success of one campaign ever spurs on the English to aim at new triumphs.
Marlborough next season returned to the field, with larger authority, and
greater confidence from his former success. He began the campaign by taking
Bonne, the residence of the Elector of Cologne; he next retook Huys, Limbourg,
and became master of all the Lower Rhine. The Marshal Villeroy, son to the King
of France's governor, and educated with him, was now general of the French
army. He was ever a favorite of Lewis, had shared his pleasures and his
campaigns. He was brave, virtuous, and polite; but unequal to the great task of
command; and still more so, when opposed to so great a rival.

Marlborough, sensible of the abilities of his antagonist, was resolved,
instead of immediately opposing him, to fly to the succor of the Emperor, his
ally, who loudly requested his assistance, being pressed on every side by a
victorious enemy. The English general was resolved to strike a vigorous blow
for his relief, took with him about thirteen thousand English troops, traversed
extensive countries with an hasty march, arrived at the banks of the Danube,
defeated a body of French and Bavarians stationed at Donavert to oppose him,
passed the Danube, and laid the Dukedom of Bavaria, that had sided with the
French, under contribution. Villeroy, who at first attempted to follow his
motions, seemed, all at once, to have lost sight of his enemy; nor was he
apprized of his route, till he was informed of his successes.

Marshal Tallard prepared, by another route, to obstruct the Duke of
Marlborough's retreat, with thirty thousand men. He was soon after joined by
the Duke of Bavaria's forces; so that the French army amounted to a body of
sixty thousand disciplined veterans, commanded by the two best reputed generals
at that time in France. Tallard had established his reputation by former
victories; he was active, penetrating, and had risen by the dint of merit
alone. But this ardour often rose to impetuosity; and he was so short-sighted
as to be unable to distinguish at the smallest distance; and the Duke was
remarkable for his resolution and personal bravery. On the other hand, the Duke
of Marlborough was now joined by the Prince Eugene, a general bred up from his
infancy in camps, and equal to Marlborough in intrigue and military knowledge.
Their talents were congenial; and all their designs seemed to flow but from one
source. Their army, when combined, amounted to about fifty-two thousand men;
troops that had been accustomed to conquer, and had seen the French, the Turks,
and the Russians fly before them. As this battle, both from the talents of the
generals, the improvements in the art of war, the number and discipline of the
troops, and the greatness of the contending powers, is reckoned the most
remarkable of this century, it demands a more particular detail.

The French were posted on an hill, their right being covered by the Danube,
and the village of Blenheim, and commanded by Marshal Tallard; their left was
defended by a village, and headed by the Elector and Marsin, an experienced
French general. In the front of their army ran a rivulet, the banks of which
were steep, and the bottom marshy. Marlborough and Eugene went together to
observe the posture of the French forces. Notwithstanding their advantageous
situation, they were resolved to attack them immediately. The battle began
between twelve and one in the afternoon. Marlborough, at the head of the
English troops, having passed the rivulet, attacked the cavalry of Tallard in
the right. This general was at that time reviewing the disposition of his
troops in the left; and the cavalry fought for some time without the presence
of their general. Prince Eugene, on the left, had not yet attacked the forces
of the Elector; and it was an hour before he could bring his forces up to the
engagement.

Tallard had no sooner understood that his right was attacked by the Duke, but
he flew to its head. He found a furious encounter already begun, his cavalry
thrice repulsed, and rallied as often. He had a large body of forces in the
village of Blenheim; he made an attempt to bring them to the charge. They were
attacked by a part of Marlborough's forces so vigorously, that, instead of
assisting the main body, they could hardly maintain their ground. All the
French cavalry, being now attacked in flank, was totally defeated. The English
army, thus half victorious, pierced up between the two bodies of the French,
commanded by the Marshal and the Elector, while at the same time the forces in
the village of Blenheim were separated by another detachment. In this terrible
situation Tallard flew to rally some squadrons, but, from the weakness of his
sight, mistaking a detachment of the enemy for his own, he was taken prisoner
by the Hessian troops, who were in English pay. In the mean time, Prince Eugene
on the left, after having been thrice repulsed, put the enemy into confusion.
The rout then became general, and the flight precipitate. The consternation was
such that the French soldiers threw themselves into the Danube, without knowing
where they fled. The officers lost all their authority; there was no general
left to secure a retreat. The allies were now masters of the field of battle,
and surrounded the village of Blenheim, where a body of thirteen thousand had
been posted in the beginning of the action, and still kept their ground. These
troops, seeing themselves cut off from all communication with the rest of the
army, threw down their arms, and surrendered themselves prisoners of war. Thus
ended the battle of Blenheim, one of the most complete victories that was ever
obtained. Twelve thousand French and Bavarians were slain in the field, or
drowned in the Danube; thirteen thousand were made prisoners of war. Of the
allies about five thousand men were killed, and eight thousand wounded or taken.

The loss of the battle is imputed to two capital errors committed by Marshal
Tallard; first weakening the center by detaching such a number of troops to the
village of Blenheim, and then suffering the confederates to pass the rivulet,
and form unmolested. The next day, when the Duke of Marlborough visited his
prisoner, the Marshal paid him the compliment of having overcome the best
troops in the world. I hope, Sir, replied the Duke, you will except those by
whom they were conquered.

A country of an hundred leagues extent fell, by this defeat, into the hands of
the victor.

Having thus succeeded beyond his hopes, the Duke once more returned to
England, where he found the people in a transport of joy; he was welcomed as an
hero, who had retrieved the glory of the nation; and the Queen, the parliament,
and the people were ready to second him in all his designs. The manor of
Woodstock was conferred upon him for his services; and the Lord Keeper, in the
name of the Peers, honored him with that praise he so well deserved.

The success of the last campaign induced the English to increase their
supplies for the next, and the Duke had fixed upon the Moselle for the scene of
action; but being disappointed by Prince Lewis, who promised his assistance, he
returned to the Netherlands to oppose Villeroy, who, in his absence, undertook
the siege of Liege. Villeroy, having received advice of the Duke's approach,
abandoned his enterprise, and retreated within his lines. Marlborough was
resolved to force them. He led his troops to the charge; after a warm but short
engagement the enemy's horse were defeated with great slaughter. The infantry,
being abandoned, retreated in great disorder to an advantageous post, where
they again drew up in order of battle. Had the Duke been permitted to take
advantage of their consternation, as he proposed, it is possible he might have
gained a complete victory; but he was opposed by the Dutch officers, who
represented it in such a light to the Deputies of the States, that they refused
to consent to its execution. This timidity was highly resented in England, and
laid the first foundation of suspecting the Dutch fidelity; they were secretly
accused of a desire to protract the war, by which they alone of all the powers
of Europe were gainers.

While the arms of England were crowned with success in the Netherlands, they
were not less fortunate in Spain, where efforts were made to fix Charles, Duke
of Austria, upon the throne. The greatest part of that kingdom had declared in
favor of Philip IV, grandson to Lewis XIV, who had been nominated successor by
the late King of Spain's will. We have already seen, that, by a former treaty
among the powers of Europe, Charles of Austria was appointed heir to that
crown; and this treaty had been guarantied by France herself, who now intended
to reverse it in favor of a descendant of the house of Bourbon. Charles,
therefore entered Spain, assisted by the arms of England; and invited by the
Catalonians, who had declared in his favor. He was furnished with two hundred
transports, thirty ships of war, nine thousand men, and the Earl of
Peterborough, a man of even romantic bravery, was placed at their head.

One of the first exploits of these forces was to take Gibraltar, which had
hitherto been deemed impregnable. A ledge of lofty rocks defended it almost on
every side by land, and an open and stormy bay took away all security for
shipping by sea. A few troops were therefore capable of defending it against
the most numerous armies. The security of the garrison proved their ruin. A
detachment of eighteen hundred marines were landed upon that neck of level
ground which joins it to the continent. These were incapable of attempting any
thing effectual, and even destitute of hopes of succeeding. A body of sailors,
in boats, were ordered to attack an half-ruined mole; they took possession of
the platform, unterrified by a mine that blew up an hundred men in the air;
with the utmost intrepidity they kept their ground, and, being soon joined by
other seamen, took a redoubt, between the mole and the town, by storm. The
governor was now obliged to capitulate; and the Prince of Hesse entered the
town, amazed at the success of so desperate an enterprise. This was a glorious
and an useful acquisition to the British dominions; their trade to the
Mediterranean was thus secured; and they had here a repository capable of
containing all things necessary for the repairing of fleets, or the equipment
of armies.

Soon after the taking this important garrison, the English fleet, now mistress
of the seas, attacked the French Admiral, who commanded fifty-two ships of war.
After an obstinate contest the English became victorious; the French fleet
sailed away, nor could it be brought again to the engagement, though the losses
on either side were equal. This may be reckoned the final effort of France by
sea: in all subsequent engagements their chief care was rather to consult means
of escape than of victory. Nor yet were the French and Spaniards willing to
suffer Gibraltar to be taken, without an effort for reprisal. Philip sent an
army to retake it, and France a fleet of thirteen ships of the line; both were
equally unsuccessful; part of the fleet was dispersed by a tempest, and another
part taken by the English; while the army, having made little or no progress by
land, was obliged to abandon the enterprise.

Nor were the English less successful in asserting the title of Charles to the
kingdom. Their army was commanded by the Earl of Peterborough, one of the most
singular and extraordinary men of the age. At fifteen he fought against the
Moors in Africa; at twenty he assisted in compassing the revolution. He now
carried on this war in Spain, almost at his own expense; and his friendship for
the Duke Charles was his strongest motive to undertake it. He was deformed in
person, but, of a mind the most generous and active that ever inspired an
honest bosom. His first attempt in Spain was to besiege Barcelona, a strong
city, with a garrison of five thousand men, while his own army amounted to but
seven thousand. Never was an attempt more bold, or more fortunate. The
operations began by a sudden attack on fort Monjuice, strongly situated on an
hill, that commanded the city. The outworks were taken by storm; a shell
chanced to fall into the body of the fort, and blew up the magazine of powder;
the garrison of the fort was struck with consternation, and surrendered without
farther resistance. The town still remained unconquered; the English general
erected batteries against it, and, in a few days, the governor capitulated.
During the interval of capitulation, the Germans and Catalonians in the English
army had entered the town, and were plundering all before them. The governor
thought himself betrayed: he upbraided the treachery of the general.
Peterborough flew among the plunderers, drove them from their prey, and
returned soon after cooly to finish the capitulation. The Spaniards were
equally amazed at the generosity of the English, and the baseness of their own
countrymen, who had led on to the spoil.

The conquest of all Valencia succeeded the taking of this important place; the
enemy, after a deseated attempt to retake Barcelona, saw themselves deprived of
almost every hope; the party of Charles was increasing every day; he became
master of Aragon, Carthagena, and Granada; the road to Madrid, their capital
city, lay open before him; the Earl of Galloway entered it in triumph, and
there proclaimed Charles King of Spain, without farther opposition.

The English had scarce time to rejoice at these successes of their arms, when
their attention was turned to new victories in Flanders. The Duke of
Marlborough had early commenced the campaign, and brought an army of eighty
thousand men into the field, and still expected reinforcements from Denmark and
Prussia. The court of France wa^ resolved to attack him before this junction.
Villeroy, who commanded an army consisting of eight^ thousand men, near
Tirlemont, had orders to engage. He accordingly drew up his forces in a stron^
camp; his right was flanked by the river Mehaigne, his left was posted behind a
marsh, and the village of Ramillies lay in the center. Marlborough, who
perceived this disposition, drew up his army accordingly. He knew that the
enemies left could not pass the marsh, to attack him, but at a great
disadvantage; he therefore weakened his troops on that quarter, and thundered
on the center with superior numbers. They stood but a short time in the center,
and, at length, gave way on all sides. The horse abandoned their foot, and were
so closely pursued, that almost all were cut in pieces. Six thousand men were
taken prisoners, and about eight thousand were killed or wounded. This victory
was almost as signal as that of Blenheim; Bavaria and Cologne were the fruits
of the one, and all Brabant was gained by the other. The French troops were
dispirited, and the city of Paris overwhelmed with consternation. Lewis XIV,
who, in the beginning of his reign, had long been flattered with conquest, was
now humbled to such a degree as might have excited the compassion of his
enemies; he entreated for peace, but in vain; the allies carried all before
them; and his very capital dreaded the approach of the conquerors. What neither
his power, his armies, nor his politics, could effect, a party in England
performed; and the dissension between the Whigs and the Tories saved the
dominions of France, that now seemed ready for ruin.

I am, etc.

LETTER XII.
QUEEN Anne's councils had hitherto been governed by a Whig ministry; they
still pursued the schemes of the late King; and, upon republican principles,
strove to diffuse freedom throughout Europe. In a government, where the
reasoning of individuals, retired from power, generally leads those who
command, the designs of the ministry must change, as the people happen to
alter. The Queen's personal virtues, her successes, her adulation from the
throne, contributed all to change the disposition of the nation; they now began
to defend hereditary succession, non-resistance, and divine right; they were
now become Tories, and were ready to controvert the designs of a Whig ministry,
whenever a leader offered to conduct them to the charge.

These discontents were, in some measure, increased by a meditated union
between the two kingdoms of England and Scotland. The treaty, for this purpose,
was chiefly managed by the ministry; and, although it was fraught with
numberless benefits to either kingdom, yet it raised the murmurs of both. The
English expected nothing from the union of so poor a nation, but a
participation of their necessities; they thought it unjust, that, while
Seotland was granted an eighth part of the legislature, it yet should be taxed
but a fortieth part of the supplies. On the other hand, the Scotch considered
that their independency would be quite destroyed, and the dignity of their
crown betrayed; they dreaded an increase of taxes, and seemed not much to
esteem the advantages of an increased trade. In every political measure there
are disadvantages on either side, which may be sufficient to deter the timid,
but which a bold legislator disregards. The union, after some struggles, was
effected; Scotland was no longer to have a parliament, but to send sixteen
Peers, chosen from the body of their nobility, and forty-five commoners. The
two kingdoms were called by the common name of Great Britain; and all the
subjects of both were to enjoy a commun iation of privileges and advantages.

This measure, which strengthened the vigor of government, by uniting its
force, seemed to threaten the enemies of Great Britain with dangers abroad; but
the discontents of the nation at home prevented the effects of its
newly-acquired power. The Tories, now become the majority, were displeased with
the Whig ministry; they looked with jealousy on the power of the Earl of
Godolphin and the Duke of Marlborough, who had long governed the Queen, and
lavished the treasures of the nation on conquests more glorious than
serviceable. To them the people imputed the burdens under which they now
groaned, and others which they had reason to fear. The loss of a battle near
Almanza in Spain, where the English army were taken prisoners, under the
command of the Earl of Galloway, with some other miscarriages, tended to
heighten their displeasure, and dispelled the inebriation of former success.
The Tories did not fail to inculcate and exaggerate these causes of discontent,
while Robert Harley, afterward Earl of Oxford, and Henry St. John, made soon
after Lord Bolingbroke, secretly fanned the flame.

Harley had lately become a favorite of the Queen; the petulance of the
Duchess of Marlborough, who formerly ruled the Queen, had entirely alienated
the affections of her mistress. She now placed them upon one Mrs. Masham, who
was entirely devoted to Lord Oxford. Oxford was possessed of uncommon
erudition; he was polite and intriguing; he had insinuated himself into the
royal favor, and determined to sap the credit of Marlborough and his
adherents. In this attempt he chose, for his second, Bolingbroke, a man of
exalted powers of thinking, eloquent, ambitious, and enterprising. Bolingbroke
was, at first, contented to act a subordinate character in this meditated
oppo^tion; but, soon perceiving the superiority of his own talents, from being
an inferior, he was resolved to become Lord Oxford's rival. The Duke of
Marlborough soon perceived their growing power, and resolved to crush it in the
beginning. He refused to join in the Privy Council, while Harley was secretary.
Godolphin joined his influence in this measure; and the Queen was obliged to
appease their resentment, by discharging Harley from his place: Bolingbroke was
resolved to share his disgrace, and voluntarily relinquished his employments.

This violent measure, which seemed, at first, favorable to the Whig ministry,
laid the first foundation of its ruin; the Queen was entirely displeased with
the haughty conduct of the Duke; and, from that moment, he lost her confidence
and affection. Harley was enabled to act now with less disguise, and to take
more vigorous measures for the completion of his designs. In him the Queen
reposed all her trust, though he now had no visible concern in the
administration.

The Whig party, in this manner, seemed to triumph for some time, till an
occurrence, in itself, of no great importance, served to show the spirit of the
times. Doctor Sacheverel, a minister of narrow intellects and bigoted
principles, had published two sermons, in which he strongly insisted on the
illegality of resisting Kings, and enforced the divine origin of their
authority; declaimed against the Dissenters, and exhorted the Church to put on
the whole armor of God. There was nothing in the sermons, either nervous, well
written, or clear; they owed all their celebrity to the complexion of the
times, and are at present justly forgotten. Sacheverel was impeached by the
commons, at the bar of the upper house; they seemed resolutely bent upon
punishing him; and a day was appointed for trying him before the Lords at
Westminster Hall. Mean while, the Tories, who, one and all, approved his
principles, were as violent in his defense as the parliament had been in his
prosecution. The eyes of the kingdom were turned upon this extraordinary trial;
the Queen herself was every day present as a private spectator. His trial
lasted some days; and vast multitudes attended him each day, as he went to the
hall, shouting, and praying for his success. The body of the people espoused
his cause. They destroyed several meeting houses, and plundered the dwellings
of Dissenters; and the Queen herself could not but relish those doctrines which
contributed to extend her prerogative. The Lords were divided; they continued
undetermined for some time; but, at length, after much obstinate dispute and
virulent altercation, Sacheverel was found guilty by a majority of seventeen
voices. He was prohibited from preaching, for the term of three years: his two
sermons were ordered to be burnt by the hands of the common hangman. The lenity
of this sentence was considered, by the Tories, as a victory; and, in fact,
their faction took the lead all the remaining part of this reign.

The King of France, long persecuted by fortune, and each hour fearing for his
capital, once more petitioned for peace. Godolphin and Marlborough, who had,
since the beginning of the war, enjoyed the double advantage of extending their
glory, and increasing their fortunes, were entirely averse to any negotiation
which tended to diminish both. The Tories, on the other hand, willing to humble
the general, and his partner Godolphin, were sincerely desirous of a peace, as
the only measure to attain their ends. A conference was, at length, begun at
Gertruydenberg, under the influence of Marlborough, Eugene, and Zinzendorf, all
three entirely averse to the treaty. The French ministers were subjected to
every species of mortification; their conduct narrowly watched; their master
insulted; and their letters opened. They offered to satisfy every complaint
that had given rise to the war; they consented to abandon Philip IV, in Spain;
to grant the Dutch a large barrier; they even consented to grant a supply
toward dethroning Philip; but even this offer was treated with contempt, and
at length the conference was broken off, while Lewis resolved to hazard another
campaign.

The designs of the Dutch, and the English general, were too obvious not to be
seen, and properly explained by their enemies in England. The writers of the
Tory faction, who were men of the first rank of literary merit, displayed the
avarice of the Duke and the self-interested conduct of the Dutch; they
insisted, that, while England was exhausting her strength in foreign conquests,
she was losing her liberty at home; that her ministers were not contented with
sharing the plunder of an impoverishing state, but were resolved upon
destroying its liberties also. To these complaints were added the real pride of
the then prevailing ministry, and the insolence of the Duchess of Marlborough,
who hitherto had possessed more real power than the whole privy council united.
Mrs. Masham, who had first been recommended to the Queen's favor by the
Duchess, now fairly supplanted her patroness; and, by a steady attention to
please the Queen, had gained all that confidence which she had reposed in her
former confidante. It was too late that the Duchess perceived this alienation
of the Queen's favor, and now began to think of repairing it by demanding an
audience of her Majesty, in order to vindicate her character from every
suspicion; but formal explanations ever widen the breach.

Mr. Hill, brother to the new favorite, was appointed by the Queen to be
colonel of a regiment; this the Duke of Marlborough could by no means approve.
He expostulated with his sovereign; he retired in disgust; the Queen, by a
letter, gave him ^eave to dispose of the regiment as he should think proper;
but, before it came to his hands, he had sent a letter to the Queen, desiring
she would permit him to retire from his employments. This was the conjuncture
which the Tories had long wished for, and which the Queen herself was
internally pleased with. She now perceived herself set free from an arbitrary
combination, by which she had been long kept in dependence. The Earl of
Godolphin, the Duke's son-in-law, was divested of his office; and the treasury
submitted to Harley, the antagonist of his ambition. Lord Summers was dismissed
from being president of the council, and the Earl of Rochester appointed in his
room. In a word, there was not one Whig left in any office of state, except the
Duke of Marlborough; he retained his employments for a short time, unsupported
and alone, an object of envy and factious reproach, till at length be found his
cause irretrievable, and was obliged, after trying another campaign, to resign,
as the rest of his party had done before.

As war seemed to have been the desire of the Whig party, so peace seemed to
have been that of the Tories. Through the course of English history, France
seems to have been the peculiar object of the hatred of the Whigs, and a
continual war with that nation has been their aim. On the contrary, the Tories
have not regarded that nation, with such opposition of principle; and a peace
with France has generally been the result of a Tory administration. For some
time therefore, a negotiation for peace had been carried on between the court
of France and the new ministers, who had a double aim in this measure; namely,
to mortify the Whigs and the Dutch, and to free their country from a ruinous
war which had all the appearance of becoming habitual to the constitution.

I am, etc.

LETTER XIII.
THE conferences for peace were first opened at London; and some time after the
Queen sent the Earl of Strafford as ambassador into Holland, to communicate the
proposals which the French King had made toward the re-establishment of the
general tranquillity. The spirit of the times was now changed; Marlborough's
aversion to such measures could now no longer retard the negotiation; Lord
Strafford obliged the Dutch to name plenipotentiaries, and to receive those of
France. The treaty began at Utrecht; but as all the powers concerned in this
conference, except France and England, were averse to every accommodation,
their disputes served rather to retard than accelerate a pacification. The
English ministry, however, had foreseen and provided against those
difficulties. Their great end was to free the subjects from a long unprofitable
war, a war where conquest could add nothing to their power, and a defeat might
be prejudicial to internal tranquillity. As England had borne the chief burden
of the war, it was but just to expect that it would take the lead in dictating
the terms of peace. There were, however, three persons of very great interest
and power, who labored, by every art, to protract the negotiation; those were
the Duke of Marlborough, Prince Eugene, and Heinsius the Dutch grand
pensionary. Prince Eugene even came over to London, in order to retard the
progress of a peace, which seemed to interrupt his career of glory; he found at
court such a reception as was due to his merits and fame; but, at the same
time, such a repulse as the proposals he made seemed to deserve.

This negotiation to London failing of effect, the allies practiced every
artifice to intimidate the Queen, and blacken the character of her ministers;
to raise and continue a dangerous ferment among the people, to obstruct her
councils, and divulge her designs. Her ministers were very sensible of their
present dangerous situation; they perceived her health was daily impairing, and
her successor countenanced the opposite faction. In case of her death, they had
nothing to expect but prosecution and ruin, for obeying her commands; their
only way therefore was to give up their present employments, or hasten the
conclusion of a treaty, the utility of which would be the best argument with
the people in their favor. The peace therefore was hastened; and this haste,
in some measure, relaxed the ministers obstinacy, in insisting upon such terms
and advantages as they had a right to demand. Seeing that nothing was to be
expected from the concurrence of the allies, the courts of London and
Versailles resolved to enter into a private treaty, in which such terms might
be agreed on as would enable both courts to prescribe terms to the rest of the
contending powers.

In the mean time the Duke of Marlborough having been deposed from his office
of general, the command of the English army in Flanders was given to the Duke
of Ormond; but, at the same time, private orders were given him not to act with
vigor against an enemy, which was upon the point of being reconciled by more
mild methods of treatment. The allies, thus deprived of the assistance of the
English, still continued their animosity, and were resolved to continue the war
separately; they had the utmost confidence in Prince Eugene, their general;
and, though lessened by the defection of the British forces, they were still
superior to those of the enemy, which were commanded by Marshal Villars, a man
who seemed to possess all the great qualities, and all the soibles of his
country, in a supreme degree; valiant, generous, alert, lively, boastful, and
avaricious. The loss of the British forces was soon severely felt in the allied
army. Villars attacked a separate body of their troops encamped at Denain,
under the command of the Earl of Albemarle. Their intrenchments were forced,
and seventeen battalions either killed or taken, the Earl himself, and all the
surviving officers, being made prisoners of war.

These successes of Marshal Villars served to hasten the treaty of Utrecht. The
British ministers at the congress, responsible at once for their conduct to
their Queen, their country, and all Europe, neglected nothing that might have
been serviceable either to the allies, or that might conduce to the public
safety. They first stipulated that Philip V, who had been settled on the throne
of Spain, should renounce all right to the crown of France, the union of two
such powerful kingdoms being thought dangerous to the liberties of the rest of
Europe. They covenanted that the Duke of Berry, his brother, the presumptive
heir to the crown of France, after the death of the Dauphin, should also
renounce his right to the crown of Spain, in case he became King of France. The
Duke of Orleans was to make the same resignation. To oblige men thus to
renounce their rights might have been injustice; but, for every good acquired,
some inconvenience must be endured; these resignations, in some measure, served
to calm the world temptsted up by long war, and have since become the basis of
the law of nations, to which Europe professes present submission.

By this treaty the Duke of Savoy had the island of Sicily, with the title of
King, with Fenestrelles, and other places on the continent; which increase of
his power seemed, in some measure, drawn from the spoils of the French
monarchy. The Dutch had that barrier granted them, which they so long sought
after; and, if the house of Bourbon seemed stripped of some dominion, in order
to enrich the Duke of Savoy, on the other hand, the house of Austria was taxed
to supply the wants of the Hollanders, who were put in possession of the
strongest towns in Flanders. With regard to England, its glory and interests
were secured. They caused the fortifications of Dunkirk to be demolished, and
its port to be destroyed. Spain gave up all right to Gibraltar and the island
of Minorca. France resigned Hudson's-Bay, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland; but
they were left in possession of Cape-Breton, and the liberty of drying their
fish upon the shore. Among the articles which were glorious to the English, it
may be observed, that the setting free those who had been confined in the
French prisons for professing the Protestant religion, was not the least. It
was stipulated, that the Emperor should possess the kingdom of Naples, the
Duchy of Milan, and the Spanish Netherlands; that the King of Prussia should
have Upper Gueldre; and a time was fixed for the Emperor's acceding to these
resolutions, for he had hitherto obstinately refused to assist at the
negotiations. Thus it appears, that the English ministry did justice to all the
world; but their country refused it to them; they were branded with all the
terms of infamy and reproach by the Whig party, and accused of having given up
the privileges and rights which England had to expect. Each party reviled the
other in turn; the kingdom was divided into opposite factions, both so violent
in their cause, that the truth, which both pretended to espouse, was attained
by neither; both were virulent, and both wrong. These commotions, in some
measure, served still more to impair the Queen's health. One fit of sickness
succeeded another; nor did the consolation of her ministry serve to allay her
anxieties; for they now had fallen out among themselves, the council chamger
being turned into a theater for the most bitter altercations. Oxford advised a
reconciliation with the Whigs, whose resentment he now began to fear, as the
Queen's health appeared to be impaired. Bolingbroke, on the other hand,
affected to set the Whigs at defiance; professed a warm zeal for the church,
and mixed flattery with his other assiduities. Bolingbroke prevailed; Lord
Oxford, the treasurer, was removed from his employment, and retired, meditating
schemes of revenge, or new projects for future re-establishment. His fall was
so sudden, and so unexpected, that no plan was established for supplying the
vacancy occasioned by his disgrace. All was confusion at court; and the Queen
had no longer force to support the burden; she sunk into a state of
insensibility, and thus found refuge from anxiety in lethargic slumber. Every
method was contrived to rouse her from this state, but in vain; her physicians
dispaired of her life. The privy council assembled upon this occasion; the
Dukes of Somerset and Argyle, being informed of the desperate state in which
she lay, entered that assembly without being summoned; the members were
surprised at their appearance; but the Duke of Shrewsbury thanked them for
their readiness to give their assistance at such a critical juncture, and
desired them to take their places. They now took all the necessary precautions
for securing the succession in the house of Hanover, sent orders to the Heralds
at Arms, and to a troop of life-guards to be in readiness to mount, in order to
proclaim the Elector of Brunswick King of Great Britain.

On the thirtieth of July the Queen seemed somewhat relieved by medicines, rose
from her bed, and, about eight, walked a little; when, casting her eyes on the
clock that stood in her chamber, she continued to gaze for some time. One of
the ladies in waiting asked her what she saw there more than usual? to which
the Queen only answered by turning her eyes upon her with a dying look. She was
soon after seized with a fit of the apoplexy, from which, however, she was
relieved by the assistance of Doctor Mead. In this state of stupefaction she
continued all night; she gave some signs of life between twelve and one next
day, but expired the next morning, a little after seven o'clock, having lived
forty-nine years five months and six days; and having reigned more than twelve
years with honor, equity, and applause. This Princess was rather amiable than
great, rather pleasing than beautiful; neither her capacity nor learning were
remarkable. Like all those of her family, she seemed rather fitted for the
private duties of life than a public station; a pattern of conjugal affection,
a good mother, a warm friend, and an indulgent mistress. During her reign none
suffered on the scaffold for treason; so that after a long succession of faulty
or cruel Kings, she shines with particular luster. In her ended the line of the
Stewarts; a family, the misfortunes and misconducts of which are not to be
paralleled in history; a family who, less than men themselves, seemed to expect
from their followers more than manhood in their defense; a family demanding
rather our pity than assistance, who never rewarded their friends, nor avenged
them of their enemies.

I am, etc.

LETTER XIV.
THE nearer we approach to our own times, in this survey of English history,
the more important every occurrence becomes; our own interests are blended with
those of the state; and the accounts of public welfare are but the transcript
of private happiness. The two parties which had long divided the kingdom, under
the names of Whig and Tory, now seemed to alter their titles; the Whigs being
styled Hanoverians, and the Tories branded with the appellation of Jacobites.
The former, desired to be governed by a King, who was a Protestant, though a
foreigner; the latter, by a Monarch of their own country, though a Papist. Of
two inconveniences, however, that seemed the least, where religion seemed to
be in no danger; and the Hanoverians prevailed.

The Jacobites had been long flattered with the hopes of seeing the succession
altered by the Earl of Oxford; but by the premature death of the Queen, all
their expectations at once were blasted; the diligence and activity of the
privy council, in which the Hanoverian interest prevailed, completed their
confusion, and they now found themselves without any leader to give consistency
to their designs, and force to their councils. Upon recollection they saw
nothing so eligible as silence and submission; they hoped much from the
assistance of France, and still more from the vigor of the pretender.

Pursuant to the act of succession. George I, son of Ernest Augustus, first
Elector of Brunswick, and Sophia, granddaughter to James I, ascended the
British throne. His mature age, being now fifty-four years old; his sagacity
and experience, his numerous alliances, the general peace of Europe; all
contributed to his support, and promised a peaceable and happy reign. His
virtues, though not shining, were solid; he was of a very different disposition
from the Stewart family, whom he succeeded; they were known to a proverb for
leaving their friends in distress; George, on the contrary, soon after his
arrival in England, used to say, My maxim is never to abandon my friends; to do
justice to all the world; and to fear no man. To these qualifications he joined
great application to business; but generally studied more the interests of
those subjects he had left behind, than of these he came to govern.

The King first landed at Greenwich, where he was received by the Duke of
Northumberland, and the Lords of the regency. From the landing-place he walked
to his house in the Park, accompanied by a great number of the nobility, and
other persons of distinction, who had the honor to kiss his hand, as they
approached. When he retired to his bedchamber, he sent for those of the
nobility who had distinguished themselves by their zeal for his succession; but
the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Chancellor, and Lord Trevor, were not of the
number; Lord Oxford too, the next morning, was received with marks of
disapprobation; and none but the Whig party were admitted into any share of
confidence. The King of a faction is but the sovereign of half his subjects; of
this, however, the Monarch I speak of did not seem sensible; it was his
misfortune, as well as that of the nation, that he was hemmed round by men who
soured him with all their interests and prejudices; none now but the violent in
faction were admitted into employment; and the Whigs, while they pretended to
secure for him the crown, were, with all possible diligence, abridging the
prerogative. An instantaneous and total change was effected in all offices of
honor and advantage. The Whigs governed the senate, and the court disposed of
all places at pleasure; whom they would they oppressed; bound the lower orders
of people with new and severe laws; and this they called liberty.

These partialities, and this oppression, soon raised discontents throughout
the kingdom. The clamor of the church's being in danger was revived;
jealousies were received, and dangerous tumults raised in every part of the
country. The party cry was, Down with the Whigs; Sacheveral for ever. During
these commotions in the Pretender's favor, this Prince himself continued only
a calm spectator on the continent, now and then sending over his emissaries to
inflame the disturbances, to disperse his ineffectual manifestoes, and to
delude the unwary. Copies of a printed address were sent to the Dukes of
Shrewsbury, Marlborough, Argyle, and other noblemen of the first distinction,
vindicating the Pretender's right to the crown, and complaining of the
injustice that was done him by receiving a foreigner. Yet, for all this, he
still continued to profess the truest regard for the Catholic religion; and,
instead of concealing his sentiments on that head, gloried in his principles.
It was the being a Papist which had dispossessed his father of the throne; and
surely the son could never hope to gain a crown by the very methods in which it
was lost; but an infatuation seemed for ever to attend all the family.

However odious, at that time, the Popish superstitions were to the people in
general, yet the opinions of the Dissenters seemed still more displeasing.
Religion was mingled with all political disputes. The High-church party
complained, that, under a Whig administration, impiety and heresy daily gained
ground; that the prelates were at once negligent of religious concerns, and
warm in pursuit of temporal blessings. A book written by Doctor Samuel Clarke,
in favor of Socinianism, was strictly reprehended; the disputes among the
Churchmen rose to such a height that the ministry was obliged to interpose; and
the clergy received orders for finishing suchlike debates, and from
intermeddling in affairs of state. Nothing, however, can be more impolitic in a
state, than to prohibit the clergy from disputing with each other; by this
means they become more animated in the cause of religion; and which ever side
they defend, they become wiser and better, as they carry on the cause. To
silence their disputes ^s to lead them into negligence; if religion be not kept
up by opposition, it falls to the ground, no longer becomes an object of public
concern. Government, I say again, should never silence dispute, and should
never side with either disputant.

A new parliament was now called, in which the Whigs had by far the majority;
all prepossessed with the strongest aversion to the Tories, and led on by the
King himself, who made no secret of his displeasure. Upon their first meeting
he informed them, that the branches of the revenue granted for the support of
civil government, were not sufficient for that purpose; he apprized them of the
machinations of the Pretender, and intimated that he expected their assistance
in punishing such as had endeavored to deprive him of that blessing which he
most valued, the affection of his people. As the houses were then disposed,
this served to give them the alarm; and they out-went even the most sanguine
expectations of the most vindictive ministry.

Their resentment began with arraigning Lord Bolingbroke of high treason, and
other high crimes and misdemeanors. To this it was objected by one of the
members of the house of commons, that nothing in the allegations laid to his
charge amounted to high treason. To this there was no reply given; but, Lord
Coningsby standing up, The chairman, said he, has impeached the hand, but I
impeach the head; he has impeached the scholar, and I the master. I impeach
Robert Earl of Oxford, and Earl Mortimer, of high treason and other crimes and
misdemeanors. When therefore this nobleman appeared the next day in the house
of Lords, he was avoided, by his brother Peers, as infectious; he, whose favor
had been but a little before so earnestly sought after, was now rejected and
contemned. When the articles were read against him in the house of Peers, some
debates arose as to the nature of his indictment, which, however, were carried
by his adversaries, and the articles of impeachment approved by the house; he
was therefore again impeached at the bar of the house of Lords; and a motion
was made that he might lose his seat, and be committed to close custody. The
Earl now seeing a furious spirit of faction raised against him, and aiming at
his head, was not wanting to himself, upon this emergency, but spoke to the
following purpose: I am accused, says he, for having made a peace; a peace,
which, bad as it is now represented, has been approved by two successive
parliaments. For my own part, I always acted by the immediate directions and
commands of the Queen my mistress, and never offended against any known law. I
am justified in my own conscience, and unconcerned for the life of an
insignificant old man. But I cannot, without the highest ingratitude, remain
unconcerned for the best of Queens; obligation binds me to vindicate her
memory. My Lords, if ministers of state, acting by the immediate commands of
their Sovereign, are afterward to be made accountable for their proceedings,
it may, one day or other, be the case of all the members of this august
assembly. I do not doubt therefore, that, out of regard to yourselves, your
Lordships will give me an equitable hearing; and I hope, that in the
prosecution of this inquiry it will appear, that I have merited, not only the
indulgence, but also the favor of this government. My Lords, I am now to take
my leave of your Lordships, and of this honorable house, perhaps, for ever! I
shall lay down my life with pleasure, in a cause favored by my late dear royal
mistress. And, when I consider that I am to be judged by the justice, honor,
and virtue of my Peers, I shall acquiesce, and retire with great content. And,
my Lords, God's will be done. On his return from the house of Lords to his own
house, where he was, for that night, permitted to go, he was followed by a
great multitude of people, crying out, High-church Ormond and Oxford for ever.
Next day he was brought to the bar, where he received a copy of his articles,
and was allowed a month to prepare his answer. Though Doctor Mead declared,
that if the Earl should be sent to the Tower, his life would be in danger, it
was carried, that he should be sent there, whither he was attended by a
prodigious concourse of people, who did not scruple to exclaim against his
prosecutors. Tumults grew more frequent; and this only served to increase the
severity of the legislature. An act was made, decreeing, that if any persons,
to the number of twelve, unlawfully assembled, should continue together one
hour, after being required to disperse by a Justice of Peace, or other officer,
and heard the proclamation against riots read in public, they should be deemed
guilty of felony, without benefit of the clergy. An act of this kind carries
its own comment with it; legislators should ever be averse to enacting such
laws as leave the greatest room for abuse.

A committee was now appointed to draw up articles of impeachment, and prepare
evidence against him and the other impeached Lords; he was confined in the
Tower, and there remained for two years; during which time, the kingdom was in
a continual ferment, several other Lords, who had broke out into actual
rebellion, and were taken in arms, being executed for treason; the ministry
seemed weary of executions; and he, with his usual foresight, presented, upon
this occasion, a petition for coming to his trial. A day was therefore assigned
him. The commons appointed a committee to enquire into the state of the Earl's
impeachment, and demanded a longer time to prepare for the trial. The truth is,
they had now began to relax in their former asperity; and the intoxication of
party was not quite so strong now as when he had been first committed. At the
appointed time the Peers repaired to the court in Westminster Hall, where Lord
Cowper presided as Lord Steward. The commons were assembled; and the King and
royal family assisted at the solemnity. The prisoner was brought from the
Tower, and his articles of impeachment read, with his answers and the replies
of the commons. Sir Joseph Jekyl, one of the agents for the commons, standing
up to enforce the first article of his Lordship's accusation, one of the Lords
adjourning the house, observed, that much time would be consumed in going
through all the articles of the impeachment; that nothing more remained than
for the commons to make good the two articles of high treason contained in his
charge; and that this would at once determine the trial. His advice was agreed
to by the Lords; but the commons delivered a paper containing their reasons for
asserting it as their undoubted right to carry on the impeachment in the manner
they thought most conducive to their aim. On the other hand, the house of Lords
insisted on their former resolution, considering it as the privilege of every
judge to hear each cause in the manner he thinks most fitting. The dispute grew
still more violent; a message was at length sent to the commons, intimating
that the Lords intended to proceed immediately to the Earl of Oxford's trial;
and, soon after repairing to the Hall of Justice, they took their places. The
commons, however, did not think fit to appear; and the Earl, having waited a
quarter of an hour at the bar, was dismissed for want of accusers. To this
dispute, perhaps, he owed his safe^y, though it is probable they would have
acquitted ^im of high treason, as none of his actions could ^ustly suffer such
an imputation. With the same ^crimony prosecutions were carried on against Lord
Bolingbroke and the Duke of Ormond; but they ^ound safety in flight.

Such vindictive proceedings as these naturally ex^ted indignation; the people
groaned to behold a ^ew great ones close up all the avenues to royal fa^our,
and rule the nation with rigor and partiality. In Scotland the discontent
broke forth, at length, into the flames of rebellion. The Earl of Mar,
assembling three hundred of his own vassals, in the Highlands of Scotland,
proclaimed the Pretender at Castletown, and set up his standard at Brae Mar, on
the sixth day of September, then assuming the title of Lieutenant General of
the Pretender's forces; he exhorted the people to take arms in defense of their
lawful Sovereign. But these preparations were weak and ill-conducted; all the
designs of the rebels betrayed to the government, the beginning of every revolt
repressed, the western counties prevented from rising, and the most prudent
precautions taken to keep all suspected persons in custody, or in awe. The Earl
of Derwentwater, and Mr. Foster, took the field near the borders of Scotland;
and, being joined by some gentlemen, proclaimed the Pretender. Their first
attempt was to seize upon Newcastle, in which they had many friends; but they
found the gates shut upon them, and were obliged to retire to Hexam; while
General Carpenter, having assembled a body of dragoons, resolved to attack them
before their numbers were increased. The rebels had two methods of acting with
success; either marching immediately into the western parts of Scotland, and
there joining General Gordon, who commanded a strong body of Highlanders; or of
crossing the Tweed, and attacking General Carpenter, whose forces did not
exceed nine hundred men. From their usual infatuation neither of these schemes
were put into execution; for, taking the route another way, they left General
Carpenter on one side, and resolved to penetrate into England by the western
border. They accordingly advanced without either foresight or design, as far as
Preston, where they first heard the news that General Wills was marching at the
head of six regiments of horse, and a battalion of foot, to attack them. They
now therefore began to raise barricadoes, and to put the place in a posture of
defense, repulsing at first the attack of the King's army with some success.
Next day, however, General Wills was reinforced by the troops under Carpenter,
and the rebels were invested on all sides. Foster, their General, sent Colonel
Oxburgh with a trumpet to the English commander, to propose a capitulation.
This, however, General Wills refused, alleging that he would not treat with
rebels; and that all they could expect was, to be spared from immediate
slaughter. These were hard terms; but they were then obliged to submit. They
accordingly laid down their arms, and were put under a strong guard. The
leaders were secured, and led through London pinioned, and bound together,
while the common men were confined at Chester and Liverpool.

While these unhappy circumstances attended the rebels in England, the Earl of
Mar's forces, in the mean time, increased to the number of ten thousand men,
and he had made himself master of the whole county of Fife. Against him the
Duke of Argyle set out for Scotland, as commander in chief of the forces in
North Britain; and, assembling some troops in Lothian, returned to Stirling
with all possible expedition. The Earl of Mar, being informed of this, at first
retreated; but being joined soon after by some Clans under the Earl of
Seaforth, and others by General Gordon, who had signalized himself in the
Russian service, he resolved to march forward toward England. The Duke of
Argyle, apprized of his intention, and being joined by some regiments of
dragoons from Ireland, determined to give him battle in the neighborhood of
Dumblain, though his forces were by no means so numerous as those of the rebel
army. In the morning therefore of the same day on which the Preston rebels had
surrendered, he drew up his forces, which did not exceed three thousand five
hundred men, but found himself greatly outflanked by the enemy. The Duke
therefore perceiving the enemy making attempts to surround him, was obliged to
alter his disposition; which, on account of the scarcity of general officers,
was not done so expeditiously as to be all formed before the rebels begun the
attack. The left wing therefore of the Duke's army fell in with the center of
the enemy's, and supported the first charge without shrinking. This wing even
seemed, for a short time, victorious, as they killed the chief leader of part
of the rebel army. But Glengary, who was second in command, undertook to
inspire his intimidated forces; and, waving his bonnet, cried out several
times, Revenge. This animated his men to such a degree, that they followed him
close to the muzzles of the muskets, pushed aside the bayonets with their
targets, and with their broad-swords did great execution. A total route of that
wing of the royal army ensued, and General Witham, their commander, flying full
speed to Stirling, gave out, that all was lost. In the mean time the Duke of
Argyle, who commanded in person on the right, attacked the left of the enemy,
and drove them before him for two miles, though they often faced about, and
attempted to rally. The Duke having thus entirely broke their left, and pushed
them over the river Allen, returned to the field, where they found that part of
the rebel army which had been victorious; but, instead of renewing the
engagement, both armies continued to gaze at each other, neither caring to
engage; till toward evening both sides drew off, each boasting of victory.
Which ever might claim the triumph, it must be owned, that all the honor, and
all the advantages of the day, belonged only to the Duke of Argyle. It was
sufficient for him to have interrupted the enemies progress; and delay was to
them a defeat. The Earl of Mar therefore soon found his disappointments, and
losses increase. The castle of Inverness, of which he was in possession, was
delivered up to the King by Lord Lovat, who had hitherto appeared in the
interest of the Pretender. The Marquis of Tullibardine left the Earl to defend
his own country; and many of the Clans seeing no likelihood of coming soon to a
second engagement, returned home. An irregular army being much easier led to
battle, than induced to bear the fatigues of a campaign.

The pretender might now be convinced of the vanity of his expectations, in
imagining that the whole country would rise up in his cause; his affairs now
were actually desperate; yet, with the usual infatuation of the family, he
resolved to hazard his person among his friends in Scotland, at a time when
such a measure was totally useless. Passing therefore through France in
disguise, and embarking in a small vessel at Dunkirk, he arrived, on the
twenty-second day of December, on the coasts of Scotland, with only six
gentlemen in his retinue. Upon his arrival in Aberdeen, he was solemnly
proclaimed, and soon after made his public entry into Dundee; and, in two days
more, came to Scoon, where he intended to have the ceremony of his coronation
performed. He ordered thanksgivings for his safe arrival, injoined the
ministers to pray for him in the churches; and, without the smallest share of
power, went through all the ceremonies of royalty, which were, at such a
juncture, perfectly ridiculous. After this unimportant parade, he resolved to
abandon the enterprise with the same levity with which it had been undertaken,
and embarked again for France, together with the Earl of Mar, and some others,
in a small ship that lay in the harbor of Montross; and, in five days, arrived
at Gravelin. General Gordon, who was left commander in chief of the forces,
with the assistance of the Earl-marshal, proceeded with them to Aberdeen, where
he secured three vessels to sail northward, which took on board the persons who
intended to make their escape to the continent. In this manner the rebellion
was suppressed; but the fury of the victors did not seem in the least to abate
with success. The law was now put in force, with all its terrors; and the
prisons of London were crowded with those deluded wretches whom the ministry
showed no disposition to spare. The commons, in their address to the crown,
declared they would prosecute in the most vigorous manner the authors of the
rebellion; and their resolutions were as speedy as their measures were
vindictive. The Earls Derwentwater, Nithsdale, Carnwath, and Wintown; the Lords
Widrington, Kenmuir, and Nairn, were impeached. The Habeas Corpus act was
suspended; and the rebel Lords, upon pleading guilty, received sentence of
death. Nothing could soften the Privy Council; the house of Lords even
presented an address to the throne for mercy, but without effect. Orders were
dispatched for executing the Earls of Derwentwater and Nithsdale, and the
viscount Kenmuir, immediately; the others were respited for three weeks longer.
Nithsdale, however, escaped in woman's clothes, which were brought him by his
mother, the night before his intended execution. Derwentwater and Kenmuir were
brought to the scaffold on Tower Hill, at the hour appointed. Both underwent
their sentence with calmness and intrepidity, pitied by all, seemingly less
moved themselves than the spectators.

An act of parliament was also made for trying the private prisoners in London,
and not in Lancashire, where they were taken in arms; which proceeding was, in
some measure, an alteration of the ancient constitution of the kingdom; when
Foster, Mackintosh, and several others were found guilty. Foster, however,
escaped from Newgate, and reached the continent in safety; and some time after
also Mackintosh, with some others, forced their way, having mastered the keeper
and turnkey, and disarmed the sentinel. Four or five were hanged, drawn, and
quartered; among whom was William Paul, a clergyman, who professed himself a
true and sincere member of the Church of England; but not of that schismatical
church whose Bishops had abandoned their King. Such was the end of a rebellion,
probably first inspired by the rigor of the new Whig ministry and parliament.
In running through the vicissitudes of human transactions, we too often find
both sides culpable; and so it was in this case. The royal party acted under
the influences of partiality, rigor, and prejudice, gratified private
animosity under the mask of public justice; and, in their pretended love of
justice, forgot humanity. On the other hand, the pretender's party aimed not
only at subverting the government, but the religion of the kingdom; bred a
Papist himself, he confided only in counselors of his own persuasion; and most
of those who adhered to his cause were men of indifferent morals, or bigoted
principles. Clemency, however, in the government, at that time, would probably
have extinguished all the factious spirit which has hitherto disturbed the
peace of this country; for it has ever been the character of the English, that
they are more easily led than driven to loyalty.

I am, etc.

LETTER XV.
IN a government, so very complicated as that of England, it must necessarily
change from itself, in a revolution of even a few years, as some of its weaker
branches acquire strength, or its stronger decline. At this period, the rich
and noble seemed to possess a greater share of power than they had done for
some ages preceding; the house of commons became each day a stronger body, at
once more independent on the crown and the people. It was now seen that the
rich could at any time buy their election; and that while their laws governed
the poor, they might be enabled to govern the law. The rebellion was now
extinguished; and the severities which justice had inflicted, excited the
discontent of many, whose humane passions were awakened as their fears began to
subside. This served as a pretext for continuing the parliament, and repealing
the act by which they were to be dissolved at the expiration of every third
year. An act of this nature, by which a parliament thus extended their own
power, was thought, by many, the ready means of undermining the constitution;
for if they could with impunity extend their continuance for seven years, which
was the time proposed, they could also for life continue their power; but this,
it was observed, was utterly incompatible with the spirit of legislation. The
bill, however, passed both houses; all objections to it were considered as
disaffection; and, in a short time, it received the royal sanction. The people
might murmur at this encroachment; but it was now too late for redress.

Domestic concerns being thus adjusted, the King began to turn his thoughts to
his Hanoverian dominions, and determined upon a voyage to the continent. Nor
was he without his fears for his dominions there, as Charles XII, of Sweden,
professed the highest displeasure at his having entered into a confederacy
against him in his absence. Having therefore passed through Holland to Hanover,
in order to secure his German territories, he entered into a treaty with the
Dutch and the Regent of France, by which they promised mutually to assist each
other, in case of invasion; but the death of the Swedish Monarch, who was
killed by a cannonball at the siege of Frederickstadt, soon put an end to his
disquietudes from that quarter. However, his Majesty, to secure himself as far
as alliances could add to his safety, entered into various negotiations with
the different powers of Europe; some were brought to accede by money, others by
promises. Treaties of this kind seldom give any real security; they may be
considered as mere political playthings; they amuse for a while, and then are
thrown neglected by, never more to be heard of, as nothing but its own internal
strength or situation can guard a country from insult.

Among other treaties concluded with such intentions, was that called the
Quadruple Alliance. It was agreed upon between the Emperor, France, England,
and Holland, that the Emperor should renounce all pretensions to the crown of
Spain, and exchange Sardinia for Sicily with the Duke of Savoy. That the
succession to the Duchies of Tuscany, Parma, and Placentia, should be settled
on the Queen of Spain's eldest son, in case the present possessors should die
without male issue. This treaty was by no means favorable to the interests of
England, as it interrupted the commerce with Spain; and, as it destroyed the
balance of power in Italy, by throwing too much into the hands of Austria.
However, England sitted out a strong squadron in order to bring Spain to terms,
if that kingdom should insist upon its rights in Italy. The war between the
Emperor and King of Spain was actually begun in that country; and the mediation
of the King of England was rejected, as partial and unjust. It was therefore
resolved by the court of London to support its negotiations with the strongest
reasons; namely, those of war. Sir George Byng sailed to Naples with twenty-two
ships of the line, where he was received as a deliverer, that city having been
under the utmost terrors of an invasion from Spain. Here the English admiral
received intelligence, that the Spanish army, amounting to thirty thousand men,
had landed in Sicily; wherefore he immediately determined to sail thither,
fully resolved to pursue the Spanish fleet. Upon doubling Cape Faro, he
perceived two small Spanish vessels, and pursuing them closely they led him to
their main fleet, which, before noon, he perceived in line of battle,
amounting, in all, to twenty-seven sail. At sight of the English fleet, the
Spanish fleet, though superior in numbers, attempted to sail away, as the
English had, for some time, acquired such expertness in naval affairs, that no
other nation would venture to face them, except with manifest advantage on
their side. The Spaniards seemed distracted in their councils, and acted with
extreme confusion; they made a running fight; but notwithstanding what they
could do, all but three were taken. The admiral, during this engagement, acted
with equal prudence and resolution; and the King wrote him a letter with his
own hand, approving his conduct. This victory necessarily produced the
resentment and complaints of the Spanish ministers at all the courts of Europe,
which induced England to declare war with Spain; and the Regent of France
joined England in a similar declaration. The Duke of Ormond now, once more,
hoped, by the assistance of Cardinal Alberoni, the Spanish minister, to restore
the pretender in England. He accordingly set sail with some troops, and
proceeded as far as Cape Finisterre, where his fleet was dispersed, and
disabled by a violent storm, which entirely frustrated the armament; and, from
this time, the pretender seemed to lose all hopes of being received in England.
This blow of fortune, together with the bad success of the Spanish arms in
Sicily and elsewhere, once more induced them to wish for peace; and the King of
Spain was at last contented to sign the quadruple alliance.

King George having thus, with equal vigor and deliberation, surmounted all
the obstacles he met with in his way to the throne, and used every precaution
that sagacity could suggest, for securing himself in it, again returned to
England, where the addresses from both houses were as loyal as he could expect.
From addressing they turned to an object of the greatest importance; namely,
that of securing the dependency of the Irish parliament upon that of Great
Britain. Maurice Annesly had appealed to the house of Peers in England, from a
decree of the house of Peers in Ireland; which was reversed. The British Peers
ordered the Barons of the Exchequer in Ireland, to put Mr. Annesly in
possession of the lands he had lost by the decree in that kingdom. The Barons
obeyed this order, and the Irish house of Peers passed a vote against them, as
having attempted to diminish the just privileges of the parliament of Ireland;
and, at the same time, ordered the Barons to be taken under the custody of the
Black Rod. On the other hand, the house of Lords in England resolved, that the
Barons of the Exchequer in Ireland had acted with courage and fidelity; and
addressed the King to signify his approbation of their conduct, by some marks
of his favor. To complete their intention, a bill was prepared, by which the
Irish house of Lords was deprived of all rights of final jurisdiction. This was
opposed in both houses. In the lower house Mr. Pit asserted, that it would
only increase the power of the English Peers, who already had too much. Mr.
Hungerford demonstrated that the Irish Lords had always exerted their power of
finally deciding causes. The Duke of Leeds produced fifteen reasons against the
bill; but, notwithstanding all opposition, it was carried by a great majority,
and received the royal assent. The kingdom of Ireland was not, at that time, so
well acquainted with the nature of ^iberty, and its own constitution, as it is
at present. Their house of Lords might then consist mostly of men bred up in
luxury and ignorance; neither spirited enough to make opposition, nor skilful
enough to conduct it.

But this blow, which the Irish felt severely, was not so great as that which
England now began to suffer from that spirit of avarice and chicanery which had
infected almost all ranks of people. In the year 1720, John Law, a Scotchman,
had erected a company in France under the name of the Missisippi; which, at
first, promised the deluded people immense wealth, but too soon appeared an
imposture, and left the greatest part of that nation in ruin and distress. The
year following the people of England were deceived by just such another
project, which is remembered by all by the name of the South Sea scheme; and,
to this day, felt by thousands. To explain this as concisely as possible, it is
to be observed, that ever since the revolution, the government, not having
sufficient supplies granted by parliament; or, what was granted requiring time
to be collected, they were obliged to borrow money from several different
companies of merchants; and, among the rest, from that company which traded to
the South Sea. In the year 1716, they were indebted to this company about nine
millions and an half of money, for which they granted annually at the rate of
six per cent. interest. As this company was not the only one, to which the
government was debtor, and paid such large interest yearly, Sir Robert Walpole
conceived a design of lessening these national debts, by giving the several
companies an alternative, either of accepting a lower interest; namely, five
per cent. for their money, or of being paid the principal. The different
companies chose rather to accept of the diminished interest than their capital;
and the South Sea company accordingly having made up their debt to the
government ten millions, instead of six hundred thousand pounds which they
usually received as interest, were satisfied with five hundred thousand. In the
same manner the governors and company of the Bank, and other companies, were
contented to receive a diminished annuity for their several loans, all which
greatly lessened the debts of the nation. It was in this situation of things
that Sir John Blount, who had been bred a scrivener, and was possessed of all
the cunning and plausibility requisite for such an undertaking, proposed to the
ministry, in the name of the South Sea company, to lessen the national debt
still further, by permitting the South Sea company to buy up all the debts of
the different companies, and thus to become the principal creditor of the
state. The terms offered the government were extremely advantageous. The
South Sea company was to redeem the debts of the nation out of the hands of the
private proprietors, who were creditors to the government, upon whatever terms
they could agree on; and, for the interest of this money, which they had thus
redeemed, and taken into their own hands, they should be allowed for six years
five per cent. and then the interest should be reduced to four per cent. and be
redeemable by parliament. For these purposes a bill passed both houses; and as
the directors of the South Sea company could not of themselves alone be
supposed to be possessed of money sufficient to buy up these debts of the
government, they were empowered to raise it by opening a subscription, and
granting annuities to such proprietors as should think proper to exchange their
creditors; namely, the Crown for the South Sea company, with the advantages
that might be made by their industry. The superior advantages with which the
proprietors were flattered, by thus exchanging their property in the funds for
South Sea stock were a chimerical prospect of having their money ^urned to
great advantage, by a commerce to the ^outhern parts of America, where it was
reported, that the English were to have some new settlements granted them by
the King of Spain. The directors books therefore were no sooner opened for the
first subscription, but crowds came to make the exchange; the delusion spread;
subscriptions in a few days sold for double the price they had been bought for.
The scheme succeeded, and the whole nation was infected with a spirit of
avaricious enterprise. The infatuation prevailed; the stock increased to a
surprising degree; but after a few months, the people awaked from their
delirium; they sound that all the advantages to be expected were merely
imaginary; and an infinite number of families were involved in ruin. Many of
the directors whose arts had raised these vain expectations, had amassed
surprising fortunes: it was, however, one consolation to the nation, to find
the parliament stripping them of their ill-acquired wealth; and orders were
given to remove all directors of the South Sea company from their seats in the
house of commons, or the places they possessed under the government. The
delinquents being punished by a forfeiture of their estates, the parliament
next converted its at^ention toward redressing the sufferers. Several useful
and just resolutions were taken, and a bill was speedily prepared toward
repairing the mischiefs. Of the profits arising from the South Sea scheme, the
sum of seven millions was granted to the ancient proprietors; several additions
also were made to their dividends out of what was possessed by the company in
their own right, the remaining capital stock also was divided among all the
proprietors at the rate of thirty-three pounds per cent. In the mean time
petitions from all parts of the kingdom were presented to the house, demanding
justice; and the whole nation seemed exasperated to the highest degree. During
these transactions, the King, with serenity and wisdom presided at the helm,
influenced his parliament to pursue equitable measures, and, by his councils,
endeavored to restore the credit of the nation.

The discontents occasioned by these public calamities, once more gave the
disaffected party hopes of rising. But, in all their councils they were weak,
divided, and wavering. Their present designs therefore could not escape the
vigilance of the King, who had emissaries in every court, and who had made, by
his alliances, every potentate a friend to his cause. He was therefore
informed, by the Duke of Orleans, Regent of France, of a new conspiracy raised
against him by several persons of distinction, which postponed his intended
journey to Hanover. Among those against whom the most positive evidence was
obtained, was Mr. Christopher Layer, a young gentleman of the Middle Temple. He
was convicted of having inlisted men for the pretender's service, and received
sentence of death; which he underwent, after having been often examined, and
having strenuously refused, to the last, to discover his accomplices. He was
the only person who suffered death upon this occasion; but several noblemen of
high distinction were made prisoners upon suspicion. The Duke of Norfolk, the
Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Orrery, and the Lord North and Gray were of this
number. Of these all but the Bishop of Rochester come off without punishment,
the circumstances not being sufficient against them for conviction. A bill was
brought into the house of commons against him, although a Peer; and though it
met with some opposition, yet it was resolved by a great majority, that he
should be deprived of his office and benefice, and banished the kingdom for
ever. The Bishop made no defense in the lower house, reserving all his power to
be exerted in the house of Lords. In that assembly he had many friends; his
eloquence, politeness, and ingenuity had procured him many; and his cause being
heard, a long and warm debate was the consequence. As there was little against
him but intercepted letters, which were written in cipher, the Earl Pawlet
insisted on the danger and injustice of departing, in such cases, from the
fixed rules of evidence. The Duke of Wharton having summed up the depositions,
and shown the insufficiency of them, concluded with saying, That let the
consequences be what they would, he hoped the luster of that house would be
never tarnished, by condemning a man without evidence. The Lord Bathurst spoke
also against the bill, observing, That if such extraordinary proceedings were
countenanced, he saw nothing remaining for him and others to do, but to retire
to their country-houses, and there, if possible, quietly enjoy their estates
within their own families, since the least correspondence, or intercepted
letter, might be made criminal. Then turning to the Bishops, he said he could
hardly account for the inveterate hatred and malice some persons bore the
ingenious Bishop of Rochester, unless it was, that they were infatuated like
the wild Americans, who sondly believe they inherit, not only the spoils, but
even the abilities of any man they kill. The Earl of Strafford spoke on the
same side; as also Lord Trevor, who observed, That if men were, in this
unprecedented manner, proceeded against, without legal proof, in a short time
the minister's favor would be the subject's only protection; but that for
himself, no apprehension of what he might suffer, would deter him from doing
his duty. He was answered by Lord Seafield, who endeavored to show, that the
evidence which had been produced before them was sufficient to convince any
reasonable man; and, in this, he was supported by the Duke of Argyle and Lord
Lechmere. To these Lord Cowper replied, That the strongest argument urged in
behalf of the bill, was necessity; but, for his part, he could see nothing that
could justify such unprecedented, and such dangerous proceedings. The other
party, however, said little in answer; perhaps already sensible of a majority
in their favor. The bill was passed against the Bishops, and several Lords
entered their protest. Among the members of the house of commons, who had
exerted themselves most strenuously in the Bishop's favor, was Doctor Friend,
the celebrated physician; and he was now taken into custody on suspicion of
treasonable practices. He was soon after, however, admitted to bail; his friend
Doctor Mead becoming his security. In two days after the Bishop of Rochester
embarked for banishment, accompanied with his daughter; and, on the same day
that he landed at Calais, the famous Lord Bolingbroke arrived there, in his
return to England, having obtained his Majesty's pardon. Upon which the Bishop,
smiling, said, His Lordship and I are exchanged. In this manner the Bishop
continued in exile and poverty till he died; though it may not be improper to
observe, that Doctor Sacheverel left him, by will, five hundred pounds.

Few transactions of importance happened during the remainder of this reign;
the ministry were employed in making various and expensive negotiations,
alliances, and treaties; covenants that are made without faith, and only
observed from motives of interest or fear. The parliament made also some
efforts to cheek the progress of vice and immorality, which now began to be
diffused through every rank of life; luxury and profligacy had increased to a
surprising degrce; nor were there any transactions to fill the page of history,
except the mercenary schemes of vile projectors, or the tasteless profusion of
new-made opulence. The treaties lately concluded with Spain were again broken,
perhaps by every party; admiral Hosier was sent to intercept the Spanish
galleons from America; of which the Spaniards being apprized, remanded back
their treasure; and the greatest part of the English fleet, sent on this
errand, was rendered, by the worms, entirely unfit for service; and the men
were cut off by the unhealthy climate and long voyage. To retaliate this, the
Spaniards undertook the siege of Gibraltar, and with similar success. New
treaties were set on foot; France offered its mediation; and such a
reconciliation as treaties could procure was the consequence.

The King had not now, for two years, visited his German dominions; and
therefore soon after the breaking up of parliament he prepared for a journey to
Hanover. Accordingly, having appointed an administration in his absence, he
embarked for Holland; lay, upon his landing, at the little town of Vert; next
day proceeded on his journey; and, in two days more, between ten and eleven at
night, arrived at Delden, in all appearance in perfect health. He supped there
very heartily, and eat an orange; and continued his progress early the next
morning. Between eight and nine he ordered the coach to stop, and, it being
perceived that one of his hands lay motionless, monsieur Fabrice, who had
formerly been the servant of the King of Sweden, and now attended King George,
chafed it between his. As this had no effect, the surgeon was called, who
followed on horseback, and also rubbed it with spirits; soon after the King's
tongue began to swell, and he had just force enough to bid them hasten to
Osnaburgh; and, falling into Fabrice's arms, quite insensible, never recovered,
but expired about eleven o'clock the next morning. He died on Sunday the
eleventh of June, in the sixty-eighth year of his age, and in the thirteenth of
his reign. Whatever was good or great in the reign of George I, ought to be
attributed wholly to himself; and whenever he deviated, it might justly be
imputed to a ministry always partial, and often corrupt. He was almost ever
^nded with good fortune, which was partly owing to prudence, and more to
assiduity. In short, his successes are the strongest instance of how much may
be achieved by moderate abilities, exerted with application and uniformity.

I am, etc.

LETTER XVI.
I Have not hitherto said any thing of the literature of the present period,
having resolved to refer it to a separate letter, in which we may have a more
perspicuous view of it, than if blended with the ordinary occurrences of the
state. Though learning had never received fewer encouragements than in the
present reign, yet it never flourished more. That spirit of philosophy which
had been excited in former ages, still continued to operate with the greatest
success, and produced the greatest men in every profession. Among the divines,
Atterbury and Clarke distinguished themselves. As a preacher, Atterbury united
all the graces of style with all the elegance of a just delivery; he was
natural, polite, spirited; and his sermons may be ranked among the first of
this period. Clarke, on the other hand, despising the graces of eloquence, only
sought after conviction, with rigorous though phlegmatic exactness, and brought
moral truths almost to mathematical precision. Yet neither he, Cudworth, nor
any other divine, did such service to the reasoning world, as the great Mr.
John Lock, who may be justly said to have reformed all our modes of thinking
in metaphysical inquiry. Though the jargon of schools had been before him
arraigned, yet several of their errors had still subsisted, and were regarded
as true. Lock therefore set himself to overturn their systems, and refute
their ^bsurdities; these he effectually accomplished; for which reason his
book, which, when published, was of infinite service; it may be found less
useful at present, when the doctrines it was calculated to refute, are no
longer subsisting.

Among the moral writers of this period, the Earl of Shaftesbury is not to be
passed over, whose elegance, in some measure, recompenses for his want of
solidity. The opinions of all latter writers upon moral subjects, are only
derived from the ancients^ Morals are a subject on which the industry of men
has been exercised in every age; and an infinite number of systems have been
the result. That of Shaftesbury, in which he establishes a natural sense of
moral beauty, was originally professed by Plato, and only adorned by the
English philosopher. Thi^ seemed to be the age of speculation. Berkeley,
afterward Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland, surpassed al^ his cotemporaries in
subtlety of disquisition; but the mere efforts of reason, which are exerted
rather t^ raise doubt than procure certainty, will never mee^ with much favor
from so vain a being as man^ Lord Bolingbroke had also some reputation for
metaphysical inquiry; his friends extolled his sagacity on that head; and the
public were willing enough t^ acquiesce in their opinion; his fame therefore
might have continued to rise; or, at least, would have never sunk, if he had
never published. His work^ have appeared, and the public are no longer in their
former sentiments. In mathematics and natural philosophy, the vein opened by
Newton, was prosecute^ with success; Doctor Halley illustrated the theory (...)
the tides, and increased the catalogue of the stars^ while Gregory reduced
astronomy to one comprehensive and regular system. Doctor Friend, in medicine,
produced some ingenious theories, which, ^ they did not improve the art, at
least showed his abilities and learning in his profession. Doctor Mea^ was
equally elegant, and more successful; to him ^ owing the useful improvement of
tapping in the dropsy, at once by means of a swathe. But, of all the other
arts, poetry in this age was carried to the greatest perfection. The language,
for some ages, had been improving, but now it seemed entirely divested of its
roughness and barbarity. Among the poets of this period we may place John
Philips, author of several poems, but of none more admired than that humourous
one, entitled, The splendid Shilling; he lived in obscurity, and died just
above want. William Congreve deserves also particular notice; his comedies,
some of which were but cooly received upon their first appearance, seemed to
mend upon repetition; and he is, at present, justly allowed the foremost in
that species of dramatic poesy. His wit is ever just and brilliant; his
sentiments new and lively; and his elegance equal to his regularity. Next him
Vanburgh is placed, whose humor seems more natural, and characters more new;
but he owes too many obligations to the French, entirely to pass for an
original; and his total disregard to decency, in a great measure, impairs his
merit. Farquhar is still more lively, and, perhaps, more entertaining than
either; his pieces still continue the favorite performances of the stage, and
bear frequent repetition without satiety; but he often mistakes pertness for
wit, and seldom strikes his characters with proper force or originality.
However, he died very young; and it is remarkable, that he continued to improve
as he grew older; his last play, entitled The Beau Stratagem, being the best of
his productions. Addison, both as a poet and prose writer, deserves ^he highest
regard and imitation. His Campaign, and Letter to Lord Halifax from Italy, are
masterpieces in the former, and his Essays published in the Spectator are
inimitable specimens of the latter. Whatever he treated of was handled with
elegance and precision; and that virtue which was taught in ^is writings, was
enforced by his example. Steel was Addison's friend and admirer; his comedies
ar^ perfectly polite, chaste, and genteel; nor were hi^ other works
contemptible; he wrote on severa^ subjects, and yet it is amazing, in the
multiplicity of his pursuits, how he found leisure for the discussion of any.
Ever persecuted by creditors, whom his profuseness drew upon him, or pursuing
impracticable schemes, suggested by ill-grounded ambition. Dean Swift was the
professed antagonist of both Addison and him. He perceived that there was a
spirit of romance mixed with all the works of the poets who preceded him; or,
in other words, that they had drawn nature on the most pleasing side. There
still therefore was a place left for him, who, careless of censure, should
describe it just as it was, with all its deformities; he therefore owes much of
his fame, not so much to the greatness of his genius, as to the boldness of it.
He was dry, sarcastic, and severe; and suited his style exactly to the turn of
his thought, being concise and nervous. In this period also flourished many of
subordinate fame. Prior was the first who adopted the French elegant easy
manner of telling a story; but if what he has borrowed from that nation be
taken from him, scarce any thing will be left upon which he can lay claim to
applause in poetry. Row was only outdone by Shakespeare and Otway as a tragic
writer; he has fewer absurdities than either; and is, perhaps, as pathetic as
they; but his flights are not so bold, nor his characters so strongly marked.
Perhaps his coming later than the rest may have contributed to lessen the
esteem he deserves. Garth had success as a poet; and, for a time, his fame was
even greater than his desert. In his principal work, the Dispensary, his
versification is negligent; and his plot is now become tedious; but whatever he
may lose as a poet, ^t would be improper to rob him of the merit he deserves
for having written the prose dedication, and preface, to the poem already
mentioned; in which he has shown the truest wit, with the most refined
elegance. Parnel, though he has written but one poem, namely, the Hermit, yet
has found a place among the English first-rate poets. Gay, likewise, by his
Fables and Pastorals, has acquired an equal reputation. But of all who have
added to the stock of English poetry, Pope, perhaps, deserves the first place.
On him foreigners look as one of the most successful writers of his time; his
versification is the most harmonious, and his correctness the most remarkable
of all our poets. A noted cotemporary of his own, calls the English the finest
writers on moral topics, and Pope the noblest moral writer of all the English.
Mr. Pope has somewhere named himself the last English Muse; and, indeed, since
his time, we have seen scarce any production that can justly lay claim to
immortality; he carried the language to its highest perfection; and those who
have attempted still farther to improve it, instead of ornament, have only
caught finery.

Such was the learning of this period; it flourished without encouragement, and
the English taste seemed to diffuse itself over all Europe. The French
tragedies began to be written after the model of ours; our philosophy was
adopted by all who pretended to reason for themselves. At present, however,
when the learned of Europe are turned to the English writers for instruction,
all spirit of learning has ceased amongst us. So little has been got by
literature for more than an age, that none choose to turn to it for preferment.
Church preferments, which were once given as the rewards of learning, have, for
some time, deviated to the intriguing, venal, and base. All desire of novelty,
in thinking, is suppressed amongst us; and our scholars, more pleased with
security and ease than honor, cooly follow the reasonings of their
predecessors, and walk round the circle of former discovery.

LETTER XVII.
UPON the death of George I, his son George II^ ascended the throne, of
inferior abilities to the late King; and consequently still more strongly
attached to his dominions on the continent. The various subsidies that had been
in the last reign granted, to maintain foreign connexions, were still kept u^
in this and the late system of politics, underwent n^ sort of alteration. The
rights and privileges of the throne of England were, in general, committed t^
the minister's care; the royal concern being chief^ fixed upon balancing the
German powers, and gaining an ascendancy for the Elector of Hanover i^ the
Empire. The ministry was, at first, divided between Lord Townshend, a man of
extensive knowledge; the Earl of Chesterfield, the only man of genius employed
under this government; and Sir Robert Walpole, who soon after engrossed the
great share of the administration to himself.

Sir Robert Walpole, who is to make the principa^ figure in the present reign,
had, from low beginnings, raised himself to the head of the treasury^ Strongly
attached to the house of Hanover, and serving it at times, when it wanted his
assistance, he sti^ maintained the prejudices with which he set out^ and,
unaware of the alteration of sentiments in the nation, still attempted to
govern by party. He, probably, like every other minister, began by endeavou^ing
to serve his country; but, meeting with stron^ opposition, his succeeding
endeavors were rath^ employed in maintaining his post, than of being
serviceable in it. The declining prerogative of the crown might have been an
early object of his attention; but, in the sequel, those very measures which he
took to increase it, proved to be the most effec^tual means of undermining it.
As latterly all h^ aims were turned only to serve himself, and his friends, he
undertook to make a majority in the house of commons, by bribing the members;
and, what was still worse, avowed the corruption. As all spirit of integrity
was now laughed out of the kingdom; and as the people were held to duty by no
motives of religious obedience to the throne, patriotism was ridiculed, and
venality practiced without shame. As such a disposition of things naturally
produced opposition, Sir Robert was possessed of a most phlegmatic
insensibility to bear reproach, and a calm dispassionate way of reasoning upon
such topics as he desired to enforce. His discourse was fluent without
eloquence; and his reasons convincing, without any share of elevation.

The house of commons, which, in the preceding reign, had been distinguished
into Whigs and Jacobites, now underwent another change, and was again divided
into the Court and Country party. The Court party were for favoring all the
schemes of the ministry, and applauding all the measures of the crown. They
regarded foreign alliances as conducive to internal security; and paid the
troops of other countries for their promises of future assistance. Of these Sir
Robert was the leader; and such as he could not convince by his eloquence, he
undertook to buy over by places and pensions. The other side. who called
themselves the Country party, were entirely averse to continental connexions;
they complained that immense sums were lavished on subsilies, which could never
be useful; and that alliances were bought with money, which should be only
rewarded by a reciprocation of good intentions. These ^ooked upon the frequent
journies of the King to his Electoral dominions with a jealous eye, and
some^^mes hinted at the alienation of the royal affections ^om England. Most of
these had been strong as^rtors of the Protestant succession; and, not fearing
the reproach of Jacobitism, they spoke with stil^ greater boldness. As the
Court party generally threatened the house of commons with imaginary danger to
the state; so these of the Country usually de claimed against the encroachments
of the prerogative. The threats of neither were founded i^ truth; the kingdom
was in no danger from abroad^ nor was internal liberty in the least infringed
by the crown. On the contrary, those who viewed the stat^ with an unprejudiced
eye, were of opinion that the prerogatives of the crown were the only part of
the constitution that was growing every day weaker; tha^ while the King's
thoughts were turned to foreig^ concerns, the ministry were unmindful of his
authority at home; and that every day the government wa^ making hasty steps to
an aristocracy, the worst of a^ governments. As Walpole headed the Court party^
so the leaders of the opposite side were Mr. William Pit, Mr. Shippen, Sir
William Wyndham, and M^ Hungerford.

The great objects of controversy during this reig^ were the national debt, and
the number of forces (...) be kept in pay. The government, at the accessio^ of
the present Monarch, owed more than thirty mi^lions of money; and, though it
was a time of profound peace, yet this sum was continually found (...)
increase. To pay off this, the ministry propos^ many projects, and put some
into execution; bu^ what could be expected from a set of men who man the public
wealth only subservient to private interes^ and who grew powerful on the wrecks
of their country? Demands for new supplies were made eve^ session of
parliament, either for the purposes of s^curing friends upon the continent, of
guarding (...) internal polity, or for enabling the ministry to a^ vigorously
in conjunction with their allies abroa^ These were as regularly opposed as
made; the spea^ers of the Country party ever insisted that the Engli^ had no
business to embroil themselves with the affairs of the continent; that expenses
were incurred without prudence or necessity; and that the increase of the
national debt, by multiplying taxes, would, at length, become intolerable to
the people. Whatever reason there might be in such arguments, they were
notwithstanding constantly overruled; and every demand granted with pleasure
and profusion.

All these treaties and alliances, however, in which the kingdom had been
lately involved, seemed noway productive of the general tranquillity expected
from them. The Spaniards, who had never been thoroughly reconciled, still
continued their depredations, and plundered the English merchants upon the
southern coasts of America, as if they had been pirates. This was the reign of
negotiations; and, from these alone, the ministry promised themselves and the
nation redress. Still, however, the enemy went on to insult and seize,
regardless of our vain ex-postulations. The British merchants complained, by
petition, of the losses sustained by the Spaniards; and the house of commons
deliberated upon this subject. They examined the evidence, and presented an
address to his Majesty. He promised them all possible satisfaction, and
negotiations were begun as formerly. And a new treaty was signed at Vienna
between the Emperor and the Kings of Great Britain and Spain, tending to
confirm the former. Though such transactions did not give the security that was
^xpected from them, yet they, in some measure, put off the troubles of Europe
for a time. An interval of ^eace succeeded, in which scarce any events hap^ened
that deserve the remembrance of an historian; ^ch intervals are, however, the
periods of happiness (...) a people; for history is too often but the register
^f human calamities. By this treaty at Vienna the ^ing of England conceived
hopes, that the peace of ^urope was established upon the most lasting
foundation. Don Carlos, upon the death of the Duke o^ Parma, was, by the
assistance of an English fleet, pu^ in peaceable possession of Parma and
Placentia. Six thousand Spaniards were quietly admitted, and quartered in the
Duchy of Tuscany, to secure for him the reversion of that Dukedom. Thus we see
Europe, in some measure, resembling a republic, putting Monarchs into new
kingdoms, and depriving others of their succession by an universal concurrence.
But this amicable disposition among the great powers can never continue long;
and the republic of Europe will be but an empty name, until there be some
controlling power set up by universal consent, to enforce obedience to the law
of nations.

During this interval of profound peace, nothing remarkable happened, except
the constant disputations in the house of commons, where the contests between
the Court and Country party were carried on with the greatest acrimony; the
speeches, on either side, being dictated less by reason than resentment. A calm
uninterested reader is now surprised at the heat with which many subjects of
little importance in themselves, were discussed at that time; he now smiles at
those denunciations of ruin with which their orations are replete. The truth
is, the liberty of a nation is better supported by such an opposition, than by
what is said in the opposition.

In times of profound tranquillity the slightest occurrences become objects of
universal attention. A society of men, entitled, The charitable Corporation,
excited the indignation of the public. Their professed intention was, to lend
money at legal interest to the poor, upon small pledges; and to persons of
better rank, upon proper security. Their capital was at first limited to thirty
thousand pounds; but they afterward increased it to six hundred thousand. This
money was granted in by subscription; and the care of conducting the capital
was entrusted to a pro^^^ number of directors. This company, having continued
for more than twenty years, the cashier, George Robinson, and the
warehouse-keeper of the company, disappeared in one day. Five hundred thousand
pounds of the capital appeared to be sunk, and embezzled by the directors, in a
manner the proprietors could not account for. They therefore petitioned the
house, representing the manner in which they had been defrauded of such vasts
sums of money, and the distress to which many were reduced to, in consequence
of such imposition. The petition was received, and a secret committee appointed
to inquire into the grievance. They soon discovered a most iniquitous scene of
fraud, which had been carried on by Thompson and Robinson, in concert with some
of the directors, for embezzling the capital, and cheating the proprietors.
Many persons of rank and quality were concerned in this infamous conspiracy;
some of the first characters in the nation did not escape without censure. The
house of commons declared their resentment, and expelled one or two of their
members; but the sufferers met with scarce any redress. Nor can I mention such
a circumstance without reflecting on that spirit of rapacity and avarice which
infected every degree of people. An ill example in the governing part of a
country ever diffuses itself downward; and, while the ministry do not blush at
detection, the people of every rank will not fear guilt. About this time not
less than five members of parliament were expelled for the most sordid acts of
knavery; Sir Robert Sutton, Sir Archibald Grant, and George Robinson, for their
^rauds in the management of the Charitable Corpora^ion scheme; Dennis Bond,
Esquire; and Sergeant Burch, for a fraudulent sale of the late Earl of
Derwentwater's forfeited estates. Luxury had produced ^rodigality, the sure
parent of every meanness. It was even asserted in the house of Lords, that not
one shilling of the forfeited estates was ever applied to the service of the
public; but became the reward of avarice and venality.

Another occurrence of a more private nature, about this time, excited public
compassion, not without a degree of horror: Richard Smith, a bookbinder, and
his wife, had long lived together, and struggled with those wants, which,
notwithstanding the profusion of the rich at this time, oppressed the poor.
Their mutual tenderness for each other, was the only comfort they had in their
distresses, which distresses were increased by having a child, which they knew
not how to maintain. At length, they took the desperate resolution of dying by
their own hands; the child's throat was cut, and the husband and wife were
found hanging in their bedchamber. They left a letter behind, containing the
reasons which induced them to this act of desperation; they declared, that they
could no longer support a life of such complicated wretchedness; and thought it
tenderness to take their child with them, from a world where they themselves
had found no compassion. Suicide, in many instances, is ascribed to phrenzy: we
have here an instance of self-murder, concerted with composure, and borrowing
the aids of reason for its vindication.

I am, etc.

LETTER XVIII.
THE History of England has little, during this interval, to excite curiosity.
The debates in parliament grew every day more obstinate, as every subject
happened to come round in voting the annual supplies. But as the subjects were
mostly the same, so also were the arguments. There was one, however, of a
different nature from those in the usual course of business, which was labored
for strenously by the ministry, and as warmly opposed by their antagonists,
namely, the excise bill, which Sir Robert Walpole introduced into the house, by
first declaiming against the frauds practiced by the factors in London, who
were employed by the American planters in selling their tobacco. To prevent
these frauds he proposed, instead of having the customs levied in the usual
manner upon tobacco, that what was imported should be lodged in warehouses
appointed for that purpose by the officers of the crown; from thence to be
sold, after paying the duty of four-pence per pound, when the proprietor found
a market for it. This proposal raised a violent ferment, not less in the house
than without doors. Those who opposed the scheme, asserted, that this scheme
would expose the factors to such hardships, that they would not be able to
continue the trade, nor would it prevent the frauds complained of. They
asserted, that it would produce an additional swarm of exciseofficers and
warehouse-keepers, which would at once tender the ministry formidable, and the
people dependant. Arguments, however, were not what the ministry most dreaded;
for the people had been raised into such a ferment, that all the avenues to the
house were crowded with complaining multitudes; and Sir Robert Walpole began
even to fear for his life. The ministry carried the proposal in the house; but,
observing the tumult of the people, they thought fit to drop the design. The
miscarriage of the bill was celebrated with public rejoicings in London and
Westminster; and the minister was burned in effigy by the populace.

This success, in the members of the opposition, encouraged them to go on to a
proposal for repealing an act made in the last reign, by which the house of
commons was to be septennial. They proposed that parliaments should again be
made triennial, a^ had been settled at the revolution. In the course o^ this
debate, in which they were opposed, as usual, by the ministry, they reflected,
with great severity, o^ the measures of the late reign. They asserted, tha^ the
septennial act was an incroachment on the right^ of the people; that during the
continuance of tha^ parliament, several severe laws had been enacted^ that by
one of these a man might be removed, and tried in any place where the jury
might be favorable to the crown, and where the prisoners witnesses could not,
or dare not, to come. That, by another, a justice of the peace was empowered to
put the best subjects to immediate death only, after reading a proclamation
against riots. The South Sea scheme, they said, was established by an act of a
septennial parliament; and the excise bill had like, under their influence
also, to have passed into a law. Sir William Wyndham distinguished himself in
this debate: Let us suppose, said he, a man without any sense of honor raised
to be a chief minister of state. Suppose him possessed of great wealth; the
plunder of the nation. Suppose him screened by a corrupt majority of his
creatures, and insulting over all men of family, sense, and honor, in the
nation. Let us suppose a venal parliament, and an ignorant King; I hope such a
case will never occur; but should such ever happen to be at once united, a
short parliament will be the only means of lessening the evil. Notwithstanding
these expostulations, the ministry were, as usual, victorious, and the motion
suppressed by the majority. The Country party now found themselves out-numbered
upon every occasion; they had long complained, in vain, that debate was
useless, since every member seemed to have listed himself under the banners of
party, to which he held without shrinking. Despairing therefore of being able
to stem the torrent of corruption, they retired to their seats in the country,
and left the ministry an undisputed majority in the house.

The minister being now left without opposition in the house, took this
opportunity to render his rivals odious or contemptible, by getting several
useful laws passed in their absence; while the King labored, with equal
assiduity, to adjust the political scale of Europe; and, for this purpose, made
several journies to his Electoral dominions. But his assiduity in healing
foreign differences did not prevent one of a more domestic nature; for a
misunderstanding arose between him and the Prince of Wales; a Prince that was
the darling of the people, and who professed his dislike both of the ministry
and their venal measures. He had been, a short time before, married to the
Princess of Saxegotha; and the Prince's mistaking a message from the King, at a
time when the Princess was lying-in, first caused the rupture. It was soon
after widened by the vile emissaries of the court, so that his Majesty forbade
the Prince his presence; and gave orders that none of his attendants should be
admitted to court. A motion, however, was made in the house of commons, for
increasing the Prince's settlement, which was but fifty thousand pounds, to an
hundred thousand. It was represented that so much had been granted by the late
King, to his present Majesty, when Prince of Wales; and that such a settlement
was conformable to the practice of former times, and necessary to the
independency of the heir apparent to the English crown. This motion was
vigorously opposed by Sir Robert Walpole, as an incroachment on the
prerogative, and an officious intermeddling in the King's family affairs. The
supporters of the motion observed, that the allowance of fifty thousand pounds
was not sufficient to defray the Prince's yearly expenses, which, by his
Majesty's own regulation, amounted to sixty-three thousand. The motion,
however, met the fate of all other antiministerial measures, being rejected by
the majority.

But whatever imaginary disappointments the people might suffer, there was a
blow levelled at the little wit that was left remaining, which has effectually
banished all taste from the stage, and from which it has never since recovered.
When Walpole entered into power, he resolved to despise that set of underrate
writers, who live by arraigning every ministry, and disseminate scandal and
abuse. For a time he prosecuted that intention; but, at last, found it
necessary to employ a set of mean hirelings, to answer calumny with calumny. He
wanted judgment to distinguish genius; or none possessed of such a gift were
mean enough to applaud his measures. From hence he took an implacable aversion
to the press, which so severely exposed his corruption, and branded his
follies. But the press alone was not the only scourge he had to fear; the
theater joined all its ridicule, and he saw himself exposed as the object of
scorn, as well as hatred. When license once transgresses the rules of decency,
it knows no bounds^ Some of the pieces exhibited at that time were no^ only
severe, but immoral also. This was what the minister held to; he brought in a
bill to limit the number of play houses; to subject all dramatic writings to
the inspection of the Lord Chamberlain, whos^ license was to be obtained before
any work could appear. Among those who undertook to oppose thi^ bill, was the
Earl of Chesterfield, who observed tha^ the laws already in being for keeping
the stage within due bounds, were every way sufficient. If, says he^ our
stage players at any time exceed those bounds, they ough^ to be prosecuted, and
may be punished. A new law therefore is, in the present instance, unnecessary;
and every unnecessary law is dangerous. Wit, my Lords, is the property of those
that have it; and it is too often the only property they have. It is unjust
therefore to rob a man at a^ rate of his possessions; but it is cruelty to
spoil him, if already poor. If poets and players are to be restrained, let them
be restrained like other subjects; let them be tried by their Peers, and let
not a Lord Chamberlain be made the sovereign judge of wit. A power lodged in
the hands of a single man to determine, without limitation or appeal, is a
privilege unknown to our laws, and inconsistent with our constitution. The
house applauded his wit and eloquence; and the question was carried against him.

The discontents occasioned by such proceedings at home, were still more
increased by the depredations of the Spaniards. They disputed the right of the
English to cut logwood in the Bay of Campeachy in America; a right which had
been often acknowledged, but never clearly explained, in all former treaties
between the two kingdoms. Their Guarda Costas plundered the English merchants
with impunity; and, upon the least resistance, behaved with insolence, cruelty,
and rapine. The subjects of Britain were buried in the mines of Potosi,
deprived of all means of conveying their complaints to their protectors, and
their vessels confiscated, in defiance of justice. The English court made
frequent remonstrances to that of Madrid, of this outrageous violation of
treaties. and they received for answer only promises of inquiry, which produced
no reformation. Our merchants loudly complained of these outrages; but the
minister expected, from negotiation, that redress which could only be obtained
by arms. He knew that a war would increase the difficulties he had to
encounter; and he was sensible that those he already encountered required all
his art and industry to remove. A war, he was sensible, would require expenses
which he wished to share in peace. In short, all his measures now were not to
serve the state, but to preserve his power. Influenced by these considerations,
he industriously endcavoured to avoid a rupture. The fears he discovered only
served to increase the enemies insolence and pride. However the complaints of
the English merchants were loud enough to reach the house of commons; their
letters and memorials were produced, and their grievances enforced at the bar
by council. The house, at length, agreed to an address, to entreat his Majesty
to obtain effectual relief, and to convince Spain that its indignities would be
no longer borne with impunity. These complaints produced a convention between
the two crowns, concluded at Prado, importing, that two plenipotentiaries
should meet at Madrid, to regulate the respective pretensions of either
kingdom, respecting the trade in America, and the limits of Florida and
Carolina. These conferences were to be finished in eight months; and, in the
mean time, all hostile preparations should cease on either side. His Catholic
Majesty agreed to pay the King of Great Britain ninety-five thousand pounds, to
satisfy the demands of the British subjects upon the crown of Spain, after
deducting from the whole the demands of the crown and subjects of Spain upon
that of Britain. Such an agreement as this was justly regarded on the side of
the British ministry as a base desertion of the honor and interests of their
country. And when the house of commons came to take the convention under
consideration, it produced the warmest debate. All the adherents to the Prince
of Wales had joined in the opposition. It was alleged, that the Spaniards,
instead of granting a redress, had rather extorted a release for their former
conduct. That they still asserted their former right to searching English
ships, and had not so much as mentioned the word satisfaction in all the
treaty. Notwithstanding all the remonstrances against this treaty, the majority
of the house declared in its favor; and several members of the opposite
sentiment retired from parliament, having despaired of being longer serviceable
in a place where party, and not reason, prevailed.

As Spain had engaged to pay a large sum of money by this convention, some time
after, when the minister demanded a supply, upon a different occasion, Lord
Bathurst moved to know, whether Spain had paid the sums stipulated, as the time
limited for the payment was expired. The Duke of Newcastle, by his Majesty's
permission, acquainted the house, that it was not paid; and that Spain had
assigned no reason for the delay. In some measure, therefore, to atone for his
former slowness, the minister now began to put the nation into a condition for
war. Letters of reprisal were granted against the Spaniards. These preparations
were regarded by the Spanish court as actual hostilities. The French ambassador
at the Hague declared, that the King his master was obliged, by treaties, to
assist the King of Spain; he dissuaded the Dutch from espousing the cause of
England; who promised him an inviolable neutrality. It is curious enough to
consider the revolutions which the political system of Europe had undergone.
But about twenty years before, France and England were combined against Spain;
at present, France and Spain united against England. Those statesmen who build
upon alliances as a lasting basis of power, will, at length, find themselves
fatally mistaken.

A rupture between Great Britain and Spain being now become inevitable, the
people, who had long clamoured for war, began to feel uncommon alacrity at its
approach; and the ministry finding it unavoidable, began to be earnest in
preparation. Orders were issued for augmenting the land forces, and raising a
body of marines. Two rich Spanish prizes were taken in the Mediterranean, and
war declared against them in form. Admiral Vernon was sent to the West Indies,
commander of the fleet, in order ^o distress the Spaniards in that part of the
globe. Vernon was a rough and honest soldier, untainted with the corruption or
the effeminacy of the times. He had, in the house of commons, asserted, that
Porto-Bello, a fort and harbor in South America, might be easily taken, and
that he himself would undertake to reduce it with six ships only. A project
which appeared so wild, and impossible, was ridiculed by the ministry; but, as
he still insisted upon the proposal, they were pleased in complying with his
request. This would at once rid them of a troublesome antagonist in the house;
and, in case of his failure, there would be a new cause of triumph in his
disgrace. In this, however, they were disappointed. The admiral, with six ships
only, attacked and demolished all the fortifications of the place, and came
away victorious, almost without bloodshed. This dawning of success upon the
British arms induced the house of commons to enter vigorously into the King's
measures for carrying on the war. They enabled him to equip a very powerful
navy; they voted a subsidy to the King of Denmark, and empowered their
Sovereign to defray some other expenses, not specified in the estimates; the
whole of their grants amounting to about four millions. The war was carried on
with vigor, and the debates in the house of commons became less violent. In a
nation, like England, of arts, arms, and commerce, war, at certain intervals of
time, must ever be serviceable. It turns the current of wealth from the
industrious to the enterprising. Thus, all orders of mankind find
encouragement, and the nation becomes composed of individuals, who have skill
to acquire property, and who have courage to defend it.

I am, etc.

LETTER XIX.
A War between England and Spain was sufficient to communicate disturbances
over all the globe. Countries that were once too obscure to be known, were now
seen to send out fleets, one ship of which was capable of destroying all the
naval power of an Asiatic empire. A squadron of ships commanded by Commodore
Anson was equipped, in order to sail through the Streights of Magellan into the
South Sea, and to act against the enemy on the coasts of Chili and Peru. This
fleet was to cooperate occasionally with Admiral Vernon across the Isthmus of
Darien; but the delays and blunders of the ministry frustrated this scheme,
though originally well laid. However, though too late in the season, the
Commodore set forward with five ships of the line, a frigate, and two
store-ships, supplied with provisions and other merchandise, designed to carry
on a trade with the savage inhabitants of that part of the world, or to
conciliate their affections. The number of men amounted, in all, to about
fourteen hundred, including two hundred invalids taken from the hospitals, and
two hundred new raised recruits. This whole expedition is a fine instance of
the power of perseverance in forcing fortune. The Commodore steered his course
by the island of Madeira, proceeded to the Cape Verd Islands, and sailed along
the coasts of Brazil. He refreshed for some time at the island of St.
Catharine, in twenty-seven degrees of southern latitude; a spot that enjoys all
the verdure and fruitage of those luxurious climates. From this place he
steered still onward into the cold and tempestuous climates of the south, along
the coast of Patagonia; and, in about five months, entered the famous Streights
of Magellan. After having suffered the most violent tempests he doubled Cape
Horn; the rest of his fleet were dispersed or wrecked; his crew deplorably
disabled by the scurvy; and his own ship with difficulty arrived on the Island
of Juan Fernandez. In this delicious abode he remained for some time, where
nature seemed, in some measure, to console mankind far the calamities of their
own avarice and ambition^ In order to improve still farther a retreat of such
elegance, he ordered several European seeds and fruits to be sown upon the
island, which increased to such a surprising degree, that some Spaniards, who,
several years after, landed there, and found them in plenty, could not avoid
acknowledging this act of generosity and benevolence. Here the Commodore was
joined by one ship more of his fleet, and by the Trial frigate of seven guns.
Advancing now northward, toward the tropic of Capricorn, he attacked the city
of Payta by night. In this bold attempt he made no use of his ships, nor even
landed all his men. A few soldiers landed by night, and filled the whole town
with terror and confusion. The governor of the garrison, and the inhabitants,
fled on all sides; accustomed to cruelty over a conquered enemy themselves,
they expected a similitude of treatment. In the mean time, for three days, a
small number of English kept possession of the town, and stripped it of all its
treasures and merchandise, to an immense amount. Such of the negroes as had not
fled were made use of in carrying the goods of their former masters on board
the English shipping; and the Spaniards refusing to treat soon saw their town
all in flames. This, however, was but a small punishment for all the cruelties
which they had practiced in taking possession of that country, upon its first
inhabitants. The plunder of this place served to enrich the captors; and the
ravage made among them, by the scurvy, still increased the share of every
survivor. This small squadron now came up as far as Panama, situated on the
Streights of Darien. Thus they came upon on the western side of the great
American continent; and Admiral Vernon was expcted to succeed on the opposite
side nearer home. Thus the Spanish Empire was attacked on both sides; but the
scheme failed from Vernon's want of success.

Anson, who now only commanded two ships, the remainder having either put back
to England, or, being wrecked by the tempests, bounded all his hopes to the
taking one of those rich Spanish ships, which trade between the Philippine
islands, near the coast of China and Mexico, on the Spanish main. But one or
two, at the most, of these vessels passed from one continent to the other in a
year. The ships are made immensely strong, large, and carry great quanties of
treasure and merchandise. The Commodore therefore, and his little fleet,
traversed that great ocean lying between the Asiatic and American continent, in
hopes of meeting this rich prize, which it was hoped would, at this time of the
year, return from the East, and would amply repay the adventurers for all their
dangers and fatigues. Avarice thus became honorable when pursued through peril
and distress. But the scurvy once more visited his mariners, now long kept at
sea, and without fresh provisions. This disorder, though it takes the same
name, is very different from that on land. The sea scurvy is attended with an
universal putrefaction, the teeth loosen, old wounds that had been healed again
open, and sometimes the limbs are seen to drop off at the joints. By this
terrible disorder several of his men daily fell, and others were disabled. One
of his ships becoming leaky, and the number of his hands decreasing, he thought
proper to set it on fire in the midst of the ocean. His fleet now being reduced
only to one ship, called the Centurion, of sixty guns, and all the crew in the
most deplorable situation, he cast anchor on the deserted island of Tinian,
which lies About half way between the old and new world. This island had some
years before been peopled by near thirty thousand inhabitants, but an
epidemical distemper coming among them, destroyed a part; and the rest forsook
the place. Nothing, however, could exceed the beauty of this spot. The most
romantic imagination cannot form a scene surpassing what Tinian naturally
afforded; greens, groves, cascades, fields, flowers, and prospects. This
retreat saved the English squadron. All that a sea-beaten company of mariners
could wish, they found here in great abundance; clear and wholesome water,
medicinal herbs, domestic animals, and other necessaries for refitting their
shattered vessel. Thus refreshed, he went forward toward China, passed by the
kingdom of Formosa, and went up the river Canton in order to careen the only
ship that now was left him. Being thus far on his way homeward, nothing can
better testify the hardy and untameable spirit of the English, than his
venturing once more back into the same ocean where he had experienced such a
variety of distress. The Commodore having put his vessel into good order, by
the assistance of the Chinese, and having taken Dutch and Indian sailors on
board, he again returned toward America. At length, on the 9th of June, he
discovered the galleon he so ardently expected. This vessel was formed as well
for the purposes of war as of merchandise. It mounted sixty guns and five
hundred men, while the crew of the Commodore did not exceed half that number.
The engagement soon began; but as those who oppose have always the advantage of
those who defend, and as the English are more expert in naval affairs than any
other nation; the Spanish ship soon became the Centurion's prize. There were
but a few men killed on the side of the English, while the Spaniards lost near
seventy. The conqueror now returned to Canton oncemore with his prize. He there
maintained the honor of his country, in refusing to pay the imposts which were
laid upon ordinary merchants; and insisted that an English ship of war was
exempted from such a duty. From Canton he proceeded to the Cape of Good Hope,
and prosecuted his voyage to England, where he arrived in safety, with immense
riches. His last prize was valued at three hundred and thirteen thousand pounds
sterling; and the different captures that had been made before this last piece
of good fortune, might amount to as much more. Upon his return, Commodore Anson
received all that honor which prudence and perseverance deserve. He soon
became the oracle consulted in all naval deliberations; the King after wards
raised him to the dignity of the peerage; and he was made first Lord of the
Admiralty.

I am, etc.

LETTER XX.
THE expedition of Anson took up near three years. The English, in the mean
time, carried on their operations against Spain with vigor, and various
success. When Anson had set out, it was only to act a subordinate part to a
formidable armament, designed for the coasts of New Spain, consisting of
twenty-nine ships of the line, and almost an equal number of frigates,
furnished with all kinds of warlike stores, and near fifteen thousand seamen,
and twelve thousand land forces. Never was a fleet more completely equipped,
nor never had the nation more sanguine hopes of victory. Lord Cathcart
commanded the land forces; but, dying on the passage, the command devolved upon
General Wentworth, whose chief merit was his favor with those in power. This,
with several other unfortunate ^ircumstances, concurred to frustrate the hopes
of the Public. The ministry, without any visible reason, had detained the fleet
in England until the season for action was almost over. In the country where
they were to carry on their operations, periodical rains begin about the end of
April; and this change in the atmosphere is always attended with epidemical
distempers. They, at length, however, set sail for the continent of New Spain;
and, after some tempests, and some delays, arrived before Carthagena. This
city, which lies within sixty miles of Panama, serves as the magazine for the
Spanish merchandise, which is brought from Europe hither, and from thence
transported, by land, to Panama, lying on the opposite coast. The taking of
Carthagena therefore would interrupt the whole trade between Old Spain and the
New. The troops were landed on the island Terra Bomba, near the mouth of the
harbor, known by the name of the Bocca-Chica, which was fortified with all the
arts of engineering. The British forces erected a battery on shore, with which
they made a breach in the principal fort, while the Admiral sent in a number of
ships to divide the fire of the enemy; and to cooperate with the endeavors of
the army. The breach being deemed practicable, the forces advanced to the
attack; but the Spaniards deserted the forts; which, had they courage, they
might still have defended with success^ The troops, upon this success, were
brought neare^ the city, where they found a greater opposition tha^ they had
expected. The climate killed numbers o^ the men; and a dissension which arose
between the land and naval officers, retarded all the operations^ Stimulated by
mutual recriminations, the general ordered his troops to attack the fort of St.
Lazar; but the guides being slain, the troops mistook their way, an^ attacked
the strongest part of the fortification, where after suffering incredible
slaughter, with the most serene intrepidity, they were, at length, obliged to
retire. Bad provisions, a horrid climate, and epidemical fever, still more
contributed to thin their numbers, and to deprive them of all hopes of success.
It was determined therefore to reimbark the troops, and to conduct them, as
soon as possible, from this scene of slaughter and contagion. The
fortifications and harbor were demolished; and the fleet returned to Jamaica.
This fatal miscarriage, which tarnished the British arms, was no sooner known
in England, than the kingdom was filled with murmurs and discontent; a measure
which, if it had succeeded, would have crowned the promoters of it with honor,
now only served to cover them with reproach. The greatest part of this
discontent fell upon the minister; his former conduct, which justly deserved
censure, was not so powerfully objected against him, as this failure, of which
he was innocent. It is not villainy, but misfortune that finds censure from
mankind. Besides, the activity of the enemy, in distressing the trade of
England contributed to increase the murmurs of the people. Their privateers
were so numerous and successful, that in the beginning of this year they had
taken, since the commencement of the war, four hundred and seven ships,
belonging to the subjects of Great Britain. The English, though at immense
expense in equipping fleets, seemed tamely to lie down under every blow, and
suffered one loss after another without reprisal. This general discontent had a
manifest influence upon the election of members for the new parliament. All the
adherents of the Prince of Wales, who now lived, retired from the court as a
private gentleman, concurred in the opposition to the ministry. Obstinate
struggles were maintained in all parts of the kingdom; and such a national
spirit of opposition prevailed, that the Country interest seemed, at length, to
preponderate ^n the house of commons. It was soon seen that the ^nterest of the
minister was in the wane, and that opinion, once established, began to deprive
him of even those who had determined to act with neutrality. In proclinantes,
as Ovid says, omne recumbit onus.

Sir Robert now tottered on the brink of ruin. He was sensible that nothing but
a division in the opposition could give him safety. The Prince was his most
formidable rival; a Prince revered by the whole nation, for his humanity,
benevolence, and candour^ These were only private virtues; but these were al^
he had then a liberty of exercising. The minister's first attempt was, to
endeavor taking him from the party; a message therefore was carried to his
roya^ highness by the Bishop of Oxford, importing, that i^ the Prince would
write a letter to the King, he and all his counselors should be taken into
favor, fifty thousand pounds should be added to his revenue, two hundred
thousand given him to pay his debts, and suitable provision should be made, in
due time, for all his followers. This, to a Prince already involved in debt,
from the necessity of keeping up his dignity^ was a tempting offer; but his
royal highness generously disdained it, declaring he would accept no such
conditions which were dictated to him under the influence of Sir Robert
Walpole. The minister now therefore saw that no arts could dissolve the
combination against him; he resolved, as an expiring struggle, to try his
strength once more in the house of commons upon a disputed election; but he had
the mortification to see the majority still increased against him by sixteen
voices. He then declared he would never sit in that house more. The parliament
was adjourned the next day, and Sir Robert being created Earl of Orford,
resigned all his employments. Never was a joy more universal and sincere than
this resignation produced. The people now flattered themselves that all their
domestic grievances would find redress; that their commerce would be protected
abroad; that the war would be carried on with vigor; and that the house of
commons would be unanimous in every measure. But they were disappointed in most
of their expectations. The misconduct of a minister is more likely to affect
his successor than himself, as a weak reign ever produces a feeble succession.
The house of commons had been for a long time increasing in power, and Walpole,
with all his arts, was, in fact, rather weakening than extending the
prerogative. By his method of bribing opposition he had taught the venal to
oppose him; and, by his increasing the national debt, he weakened the vigor of
the crown in war, and made it more dependant upon parliament in times of peace.
A part of those who succeeded him were therefore sensible of this, and still
resolved to support the crown, which they regarded as the only declining branch
of the constitution. Another part, who clamoured from motives of self-interest,
having now attained the object of their desires, blundered on in the former
measures, studious of fortune and not of fame. In short, his successors
pursuing all the former schemes of the deposed minister, presented the
political part of the nation with the mortifying prospect of pretended
patriotism unstripped of its mask, and showed the little certainty there is in
all political reasonings.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXI.
THE war with Spain had now continued for several years, with but indifferent
success. Some insuccessful expeditions were carried on in the West Indies under
Admiral Vernon, Commodore Knowles, and others; and these were all aggravated by
a set of worthless and mercenary things, called Political Writers. A class of
beings first employed against Walpole, and afterward encouraged by him, at the
expense, as it is said, of not less than thirty thousand a year. These were men
naturally too dull to shine in any of the politer kinds of literature, which
might adorn either a scholar or a gentleman; and therefore they turned their
thoughts to politics; a science on which they might declaim without knowledge,
and be dull without detection. These men, I say, had, for some time,
embarrassed the constitution, inflamed the people, and were paid with large
pensions from the crown. It was upon this occasion that they exaggerated every
misconduct, and drew frightful pictures of the distress and misery which they
foreboded to posterity. This clamor, and want of success in a naval war, in
which the principal strength of the kingdom lay, induced the new ministry to
divert the attention of the public to a war, which might be carried on by land.
The King's attachment to his Electoral dominions contributed still more to turn
the current of British indignation that way, and an army was therefore now
prepared to be sent into Flanders; the war with Spain being become an object of
secondary consideration.

To have a clear, yet concise, idea of the origin of the troubles on the
continent, it will be expedient to go back, for some years, and trace the
measures of the European republic to that period where we formerly left them.
After the Duke of Orleans, who had been regent of France, died, Cardinal Fleury
undertook to settle that confusion in which the former had left the kingdom.
His moderation was equal to his prudence; he was sincere, frugal, modest, and
simple. Under him France repaired her losses, and enriched herself by commerce;
he only left the state to its own natural methods of thriving, and saw it daily
assuming its former health and vigor. During the long interval of peace, which
his councils had procured for Europe, two powers, unregarded, now began to
attract the notice, and the jealousy of their neighboring states. Peter the
Great had already civilized Russia, and this new extensive empire began to
influence the councils of other Princes, and to give laws to the North. The
other power was that of Prussia, whose dominions were compact and populous, and
whose forces were well maintained, and ready for action. The Empire continued
under Charles VI, who had been placed upon the throne by the treaty of Utrecht.
Sweden languished, being not yet recovered from the destructive projects of
Charles XII. Denmark was powerful; and part of Italy subject to the masters
which had been imposed upon it by foreign treaties. All, however, continued to
enjoy a profound peace, till the death of Augustus, King of Poland, again
kindled up the general flame. The Emperor Charles VI, assisted by the arms of
Russia, declared for the Elector of Saxony, son to the deceased King. On the
other hand, France declared for Stanislaus, who had been long since elected
King of Poland by Charles XII, and whose daughter had been since married to the
French King. Stanislaus repaired to Dantzick in order to support his election;
ten thousand Russians appearing, the Polish nobility dispersed, and their new
elected Monarch was shut up, and besieged by so small a number of forces: the
city was taken, and the King ^scaped with the utmost difficulty, being made a
pri^oner, and fifteen hundred Frenchmen that were sent ^o his assistance were
made prisoners of war. He ^ad now no hopes left but in the assistance of
France, which accordingly resolved to give him powerful suc^ours, by
distressing the house of Austria. The views ^f France were seconded by Spain
and Sardinia; ^oth hoped to grow more powerful by a division of ^he spoils of
Austria; and France had motives of ^liance and revenge. A French army therefore
soon ^ver-ran the empire under the conduct of old Marshal Villars; the Duke of
Montemar, the Spanish general, was equally victorious in the kingdom of Naples;
and the Emperor, Charles VI, had the mortification of seeing himself deprived
of the greatest part of Italy, for having attempted to give a King to Poland.
These rapid successes of France and its allies soon compelled the Emperor to
demand a peace. By this treaty Stanislaus, upon whose account the war was
undertaken, was obliged to renounce all right to the throne of Poland; and
France made some valuable acquests of dominion; particularly the Duchy of
Lorrain. In the year 1740, the death of the Emperor gave the French another
opportunity of exerting their ambition. Regardless of treaties, particularly
the pragmatic sanction, as it was called, which settled upon the daughter of
the Emperor the reversion of all his dominions, they caused the Elector of
Bavaria to be crowned Emperor. Thus the daughter of Charles VI, descended from
an illustrious line of Emperors, saw herself stripped of her inheritance, and,
for an whole year, without hopes of succor. She had scarce closed her father's
eyes, when she lost Silesia, by an irruption of the young King of Prussia, who
seized the opportunity of her defenseless state, to renew his ancient
pretensions to that province of which it must be owned his ancestors had been
unjustly deprived. France, Saxony, and Bavaria, attacked the rest of her
dominions. In this forlorn situation she found a powerful ally in Britain;
Sardinia and Holland soon after came to her assistance; and, last of all,
Russia joined in her cause. It may be demanded, What part Britain had in these
continental measures? The interests of Hanover; the security and aggrandizement
of that Electorate, depended upon the proper regulation of the empire. Lord
Carteret had now taken that place in the royal confidence which had formerly
been possessed by Walpole; and, by pursuing these measures he soothed the
wishes of his master, and opened a more extensive field for his own ambition.
He expected honor from victories which could produce no good; and campaigns,
whether successful or not, that could only terminate in misfortune. When the
parliament met, his Majesty informed them of his strict adherence to his
engagements, though attacked in his own dominions; and that he had augmented
the British forces in the Low Countries with sixteen thousand Hanoverians. When
the supplies came to be considered, by which this additional number of troops
was to be paid, it raised violent debates in both houses. It was considered as
hiring the troops of the Electorate to fight their own cause. The ministry,
however, who were formerly remarkable for declaiming against continental
measures, now boldly stood up for them; and, at length, by dint of number,
carried their cause. The people saw, with pain, their former defenders
sacrificing the blood and treasure of the nation upon destructive alliances;
they knew not now on whom to rely for safety; and began to think that
patriotism was but an empty name. However injurious these measures might have
been to the nation, they were of infinite service to the Queen of Hungary. She
began, at this period, to triumph over all her enemies. The French were driven
out of Bohemia. Her general, Prince Charles, at the head of a large army,
invaded the dominions of Bavaria. Her rival, the nominal Emperor, was obliged
to fly before her; abandoned by his allies, and stripped of all his dominions,
he repaired to Francfort, where he lived in indigence and obscurity. He agreed
to remain neuter during the remainder of ^he war; while the French, who first
began it as al^ies, supported the burden. The troops sent by England to the
Queen's assistance were commanded by the Earl of Stair, an experienced
commander, who had learned the art of war under the famous Prince Eugene; and
the chief object he had first in view was, to effect a junction with the army
commanded by Prince Charles of Lorrain. The French, in order to prevent this
junction, assembled sixty thousand men upon the river Main, under the command
of Marshal Noailles, who posted his troops upon the east side of that river.
The British forces, to the number of forty thousand, pushed forward on the
other side, while the French, in the mean time, found means to cut off all the
communications by which they could be supplied with provisions. The King of
England arrived at the camp while the army was in this situation; and seeing it
in danger of starving, resolved to proceed forward, to join twelve thousand
Hanoverians and Hessians, who had reached Hanau. With this view he decamped;
but before the army had marched three leagues, he found the enemy had enclosed
him on every side, near a village called Detingen.. In this situation he must
have fought at great disadvantage, if he began the attack; and if he continued
in the same situation, his army must have perished for want o^ subsistence. The
impetuosity of the French, however, saved the English army; they passed a
defil^ which they should have guarded; and, under the conduct of the Duke of
Gramont, their horse charged with great impetuosity. They were received by the
English infantry with undaunted resolution; the French were obliged to give
way, and to pass the Main with great precipitation, with the loss o^ about
five thousand. The King, who was possesse^ of personal courage, which seems
hereditary to the family, exposed himself to a severe fire of cannon^ as well
as musquetry; and, in the midst of the rank^ encouraged his troops, by his
presence and example^ The whole of the battle, on either side, exhibited mo^
courage than conduct. The English had the hono^ of the day; but the French soon
after took possessi^ of the field of bat^le, treating the wounded Engli^ that
were left behind with a clemency unprecedented in ancient history, and that
serves to show how much superior the present times are in point of humanity to
the boasted ages of antiquity. Though the English were victorious upon this
occasion, yet the Earl of Stair, who commanded, did not assume any honor from
such a victory; he was unwilling that his reputation should suffer for
measures, which he was not allowed to conduct; he therefore solicited, and
obtained leave to resign; and the British troops desisted from further
operations that campaign.

Mean while the French went on with vigor on every quarter; they opposed
Prince Charles of Lorrain, and interrupted his progress in his attempts to pass
the Rhine, gained some successes in Italy; but their chief expectations were
placed in a projected invasion of England. Cardinal Fleury was now dead, and
Cardinal Tencin succeeded to his place a person of a very different character
from his predecessor, proud, turbulent, and enterprizing. France. from the
violence of parliamentary disputes in England, had been long persuaded that the
country was ripe for a revolution, and only wanted the presence of the
Pretender to induce the majority to declare against the reigning family.
Several needy adventurers, who wished for a change; some men of broken
fortunes, and almost all the Roman Catholics of the kingdom, endeavored to
confirm the court of France in these sentiments. An invasion therefore was
actually pro^ected. Charles, son of the old Chevalier St. George, ^eparted from
Rome in the disguise of a Spanish ^ourier, and prosecuting his journey to
Paris, had ^n audience of the French King. The troops de^igned for this
expedition amounted to fifteen thou^and; preparations were made for embarking
them ^t Dunkirk, and some other of the nearest ports to England, under the eye
of the young Pretender; and ^even thousand of the number actually went on
board. The Duke de Roquefuille, with twenty ship of the line, was to see them
landed safely in England; and Count Saxe was to command them, when put ashore.
The whole project, however, was disconcerted by the appearance of Sir John
Norris, with a superior fleet, making up against them; the French fleet was
obliged to put back; a very hard gale of wind damaged their transports beyond
redress. All hopes of invasion were now frustrated; and, at length, the French
thought fit openly to declare war.

But, though fortune seemed to favor England on this occasion, yet, on others,
she was not equally propitious. The combined fleets of France and Spain, for
some time, fought the British armament under Admiral Matthews and Lestock,
though with inferior forces, and came off upon nearly equal terms, Such a
parity of success in England was regarded as a defeat. Both the English
Admirals were tried by a court martial; Mathews, who had fought the enemy with
intrepidity, was declared incapable of serving for the future in his Majesty's
navy. Lestock, who had kept aloof, was acquitted with honor, for he had
entrenched himself within the punctilios of discipline; he barely did his duty;
a man of honor, when his country is at stake, should do more.

The proceedings in the Netherlands were still more unfavourable. The French
had assembled a formidable army of one hundred and twenty thousand men; the
chief command of which was given to Count Saxe. This General was originally a
soldier of fortune, and natural son to Augustus King of Poland, by the famous
Countess of Konigsmark. He had been bred from his youth in camps, and had shown
the most early instances of cool intrepidity. He, in the beginning of the war,
had offered his service to several crowns, and, among the rest, it is said, to
that of England; but his offers were rejected. He was possessed of great
military talents; and, by long habit, preserved an equal composure in the midst
of battle, as in a drawing room at court. On the other side, the allied forces,
consisting of English, Hanoverians, Dutch, and Austrians, did not amount to
above seventy thousand. These were incapable of withstanding such a superior
force, and commanded by such a General. The French besieged and took Fribourg,
before they went into winter quarters; and early the next campaign invested the
city of Tournay. The allies were resolved to prevent the loss of this city by a
battle. Their army was inferior, and they were commanded by the Duke of
Cumberland. Notwithstanding these disadvantages they marched toward the enemy,
and took post in sight of the French army, which was encamped on an eminence;
the village of Antoine on the right, a wood on their left, and the town of
Fontenoy before them. This advantageous situation did not repress ^he ardour of
the English; on the thirtieth day of April the Duke of Cumberland marched to
the at^ack at two o'clock in the morning. The British ^nfantry pierced forward,
bore down all opposition, and, for near an hour, were victorious. Marshal Saxe
was at that time sick of the same disorder of which he afterward died. He
visited all the posts (...) a litter, and saw, notwithstanding all appearances,
that the day was his own. The English column, without command, by a mere
mechanical courage, ^ad advanced upon the enemies lines, which formed ^n avenue
on each side to receive them. The French ^rtillery began to play upon this
forlorn body; and, ^ough they continued a long time unshaken, they ^ere obliged
to retreat about three o'clock in the af^rnoon. This was one of the most bloody
battles ^at had been fought this age; the allies left upon ^e field near twelve
thousand slain; and the French ^ught their victory with near an equal number.

This blow, by which Tournay was taken, gave the French a manifest superiority
all the rest of the campaign, and which they did not forego during the
continuance of the war. The Emperor, Charles VII, who had been raised to the
throne from the dukedom of Bavaria, and for whom the war first began was now
dead; yet this did not in the least restore tranquillity to Europe. The Grand
Duke of Tuscany, husband to the Queen of Hungary, was declared Emperor upon his
decease; but the war between France and the allies still continued; and the
original views and interests seemed now quite forgotten.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXII.
THE intended French invasion had rouzed al^ the attention of the English
ministry; and nothing but loyalty breathed throughout the whol^ kingdom. The
administration of affairs being committed to the Earl of Harrington, the Earl
of Chesterfield, and others, who enjoyed a great share of popularity, the views
of the crown were no longe^ thwarted by an opposition in parliament. The
Admiral^ Rowley and Warren had retrieved the honor of the British flag, and
made several rich captures. Louisburg in the island of Cape Breton, in North
America, a place of great consequence to the Britis^ commerce, surrendered to
General Pepperel, while a short time after, two French East India ships, an^
another from Peru laden with treasure, supposing the place still in possession
of the French, sailed into the harbor, and their capture added to the English
success. It was in this period of universal satisfaction that the son of the
old Pretender resolved to mak^ an effort at gaining the British crown. Young
Charles Edward, the adventurer in question, had been bred in a luxurious court
without sharing its effeminacy; he was enterprising and ambitious; but, either
from inexperience, or natural inability, utterly unequal to the undertaking. He
was flattered by the rash, the superstitious, and the needy, that the kingdom
was ripe for a revolt; that the people could no longer bear the immense load of
taxes, which was daily increasing; and that the most considerable persons in
the kingdom would gladly seize the opportunity of crowding to his standard.
Being furnished with some money, and still larger promises from France, who
fanned this ambition in him, from which they hoped to gain some advantages; he
embarked for Scotland on board a small frigate, accompanied by the Marquis
Tullibardine, Sir. Thomas Sheridan, and a few other desperate adventurers. For
the conquest of the whole British empire he brought with him seven officers,
and arms for two thousand men. Fortune, which ever persecuted his family,
seemed no way more favorable to him; his convoy, a ship of sixty guns, was so
disabled in an engagement with an English man of war, called the Lion, that it
returned to Breast, while he was obliged to continue his course to the western
parts of Scotland; and, landing on the coast of Lochaber, he was, in a little
time, joined by some chiefs of the Highland Clans, and their vassals. These
chiefs had ever continued to exercise an hereditary jurisdiction over all their
tenants. This power of life and death vested in the Lords of the manor, was a
privilege of the old feudal law, long abolished in England, but which had been
confirmed to the Scotch lairds at the time of the union. From hence we see,
that a chief had the power of commanding all his vassals, and that immediate
death was the consequence of their disobey^ng. By means of these chiefs
therefore he soon saw himself at the head of fifteen hundred men; and invited
others to join him by his manifestoes, which were dispersed throughout all the
Highlands.

The boldness of this enterprise astonished all Europe; it awakened the fears
of the pusillanimous, the pity of the wise, and the loyalty of all. The whole
kingdom seemed unanimously bent upon opposing the enterprise, which they were
sensible, as being supported only by Papists, would be instrumental in
restoring Popery. The ministry was no sooner confirmed of the truth of his
arrival, which, at first, they could scarely be induced to believe, than Sir
John Cope was ordered to oppose his progress. In the mean time, the young
adventurer marched to Perth, where the unnecessary ceremony was performed of
proclaiming the Chevalier de St. George, his father, King of Great Britain. The
rebel army, descending from the mountains, seemed to gather as it went. They
advanced toward Edinburgh, which they entered without opposition. Here too the
pageantry of proclamation was performed, in which he promised to dissolve the
union, and redress the grievances of the country. But, though he was master of
the capital, yet the citadel, which goes by the name of the Castle, a strong
fortress built upon a rock, and commanded by General Guest, braved all his
attempts. In the mean time, Sir John Cope, who had pursued them to the
Highlands, but declined meeting them in their descent, now reinforced by two
regiments of dragoons, resolved to march toward Edinburgh, and give them
battle. The young adventurer, unwilling to give him time to retreat, attacked
him near Preston-pans, about twelve miles from the capital, and, in a few
minutes, put him and his troops totally to the route. This victory, in which
the King lost about five hundred men, gave the rebels great influence; and, had
the Pretender taken advantage of the general consternation, and marched toward
England, the consequence might have been dangerous to the safety of the state;
but he spent the time at Edinburgh, seeming to enjoy the useless parade of
royalty, pleased at being addressed and treated as a King. By this time he was
joined by the Earl of Kilmarnock, the Lords Elcho, Balmerino, Ogilvy, Pitsligo,
and the eldest son of the Lord Lovat. This Lord Lovat was the same whom we have
seen, upon a former occasion, trusted by the old Pretender, and betraying him
by taking possession of the castle of Stirling for King George. This nobleman,
true to neither party, had again altered from his attachment to the house of
Hanover, and, in secret, aided the young Chevalier; studious only for his own
interest, he exerted all the arts of low cunning, to appear an open enemy to
the rebellion; yet to give it secret assistance.

While the young Pretender thus trifled away the time at Edinburgh, (for all
delays in dangerous enterprises are even worse than defeats) the ministry of
Great Britain took every possible measure to defeat his intentions. Six
thousand Dutch troops that had come over to the assistance of the crown, were
sent northward, under the command of General Wade; but, as it was then said,
these could lend no assistance, as they were, properly speaking, prisoners of
France, and, upon their parole, not to oppose that power for the space of one
year. However this be, the Duke of Cumberland soon after arrived from Flanders,
and was followed by another detachment of dragoons and infantry; volunteers in
different parts of the kingdom employed themselves ^n the exercise of arms; and
every county exerted ^ generous spirit of indignation, both against the
^mbition, the religion, and the allies of the young ^dventurer.

It would be illiberal and base, to deny this enter^ising youth that praise
which his merit may deserve. Though he might have brought civil war, and all
the calamities attending it, with him, into the kingdom; yet we must consider,
that he had ever been taught that bathing his country in blood was but a just
assertion of his right; that altering the constitution and, perhaps, the
religion of his supposed dominions was a laudable object of ambition. Thus
inspired he went forward with vigor, and resolving to make an irruption into
England, he entered it by the western border, on the sixth day of November.
Carlisle was invested, and, in less than three days, it surrendered. Here he
found a considerable quantity o^ arms, and was declared King of Great Britain.
General Wade being apprized of his progress, advance^ across the country from
the opposite shore; but, receiving intelligence that the enemy were two day^
march before him, he retired to his former station^ The young Pretender now
resolved to proceed, having received assurances from France that a considerable
body of troops would be landed on the souther^ coast of Britain, to make a
diversion in his favour^ and, flattered with the hopes of being joined by ^
large body of English malcontents, as soon as h^ should make his appearance
among them. Leavin^ therefore a small garrison in Carlisle, which he should
rather have left defenseless, he advanced to Penrit^ marching on foot in an
Highland garb, and continue^ his irruption till he came to Manchester, where h^
established his head quarters. He was here joine^ by about two hundred English
men, who were forme^ into a regiment, under the command of Colon^ Townley. From
hence he prosecuted his route t^ Derby, intending to go by the way of Chester
into Wales, where he hoped for a great number of adherents. He was, by this
time, advanced within a^ hundred miles of the capital, which was filled wit^
terror and confusion. The King resolved to take the field in person. The
volunteers of the city were incorporated into a regiment. The practitioners of
the law resolved to take the field, with the judges at their head. Even the
managers of the theaters offered to raise a body of their dependants for the
service of their country. Yet these combinations only served as instances of
the national terror; for the trading part of the city, and those concerned in
the money corporations, were overwhelmed with dejection. They could hope for
little safety in the courage or discipline of a militia, especially as they,
every hour, dreaded an invasion from France, and an insurrection of the Roman
Catholics, and other friends to the expelled family. This therefore was the
moment for the advancement of the adventurer's enterprise. Had he marched up to
the capital, he would undoubtedly have been joined by several, secretly
attached to his cause. But he determined to retreat once more to Scotland; and
thus his scheme was defeated. In fact, he was but nominally the leader of his
forces. His Generals, the chiefs of Highland Clans, were, from their education,
ignorant; and, from their independency, obstinate. They each embraced peculiar
systems, and began to contend with each other for the pre-eminence; so that
after violent disputes, they resolved to march back. They effected their
retreat to Carlisle without any loss; and from thence crossed the rivers Eden
and Solway into Scotland. In this irruption, however, they preserved all the
rules of war; they desisted, in a great measure, from rapine; levied
contributions; and, in the usual form, left a garrison at Carlisle in their
retreat; which, a short time after, to the number of four hundred, surrendered,
to the Duke of Cumberland, prisoners at discretion. The Pretender, being
returned to Scotland, proceeded to Glasgow; from which city he exacted severe
contributions. Advancing to Stirling, he was joined by Lord Lewis Gordon, at
the head of some forces which had been assembled in his absence. Other Clans,
to the number of two thousand, came in likewise; Spain sent him some supplies
of money; and, in one or two skirmishes with the loyalists, his Generals came
off with victory; so that his affairs once more seemed to wear an aspect of
success. Being joined by John Lord Drummond, he invested the castle of
Stirling, commanded by General Blakeney; but his forces being unused to sieges,
consumed much time to no purpose. General Hawley, who commanded a considerable
body of forces near Edinburgh, undertook to raise the siege. He advanced
toward the rebel army, and rendezvoused his whole force at Falkirk, while the
rebels lay encamped at no great distance. After two days, mutually examining
each other's strength, the rebels, on the seventeenth day of January, came on
in full spirits to attack the King's army. The Pretender, who stood in the
front line, gave the signal to fire; and the first volley served to put
Hawley's forces into confusion. The horse retreated with precipitation, and
fell in upon their own infantry; the rebels followed their blow; and the
greatest part of the royal army fled with the utmost precipitation. They
retired in confusion to Edinburgh, leaving the field of battle, with part of
their tents and artillery, to the rebels.

This was the end of all their triumphs. A new scene of conduct was now going
to open; for the Duke of Cumberland, at that time the favorite of the English
army, had put himself at the head of the troops at Edinburgh, which consisted
of about fourteen thousand men. He resolved therefore to come to a battle as
soon as possible; and marched forward, while the young adventurer retired at
his approach. The Duke advanced to Aberdeen, where he was joined by the Duke of
Gordon, and some other Lords, attached to his family and cause. After having
refreshed his troops here for some time, he renewed his march; and, in twelve
days, came upon the banks of the deep and rapid river Spey. This was a place
where the rebels might have disputed his passage; but they seemed now totally
void of all counsel and subordination, without conduct, and without
expectation. The Duke still proceeded in his pursuit; and, at length, had
advice that the enemy had advanced from Inverness to the Plain of Culloden,
which was about nine miles distant, and there intended to give him battle. On
this Plain the Highlanders were drawn up in order of battle, to the number of
eight thousand men, in thirteen divisions, supplied with some pieces of
artillery. The battle began about one o'clock in the afternoon; the canon of
the King's army did dreadful execution among the enemy, while theirs, being but
ill served, was ineffectual. One of the great errors in all the Pretender's
warlike measures, was his subjecting undisciplined troops to the forms of
artful war, and thus repressing their native ferocity, from which alone he
could hope for success. After they had stood the English fire for some time,
they, at length, became impatient for closer engagement; and about five hundred
of them attacked the English left wing, with their accustomed fierceness. The
first line being disordered by this onset, two battalions advanced to support
it, and galled the enemy by a terrible and close discharge. At the same time
the dragoons under Hawley, and the Argyleshire militia, pulling down a park
wall that guarded the enemy's flank, and which the rebels had left but feebly
defended, fell in among them, sword in hand, with great slaughter. In less than
thirty minutes they were totally routed, and the field covered with their
wounded and slain, to the number of above three thousand men. Civil war is in
itself terrible, but still more so when heightened by cruelty. How guilty
soever men may be, it is ever the business of a soldier to remember, that he is
only to fight an enemy that opposes him, and to spare the supplicant. This
victory was in every respect complete; and humanity to the conquered would even
have made it glorious. The conquerors often refused mercy to wretches who were
defenseless or wounded; and soldiers were seen to anticipate the base
employment of the executioner.

Thus sunk all the hopes, and the ambition of the young adventurer; one short
hour deprived him of imaginary thrones and sceptres, and reduced him from a
nominal King to a distressed forlorn outcast, shunned by all mankind, except
such as sought to take his life. To the good-natured, subsequent distress often
atones for former guilt; and while reason would repress humanity, yet our
hearts plead in the favor of the wretched. The Duke, immediately after the
decisive action at Culloden, ordered six-and-thirty deserters to be executed;
the conquerors spread terror wherever they came; and, after a short time, the
whole country round was one scene of slaughter, desolation, and plunder;
justice seemed forgotten; and vengeance assumed the name.

In the mean time, the unhappy fugitive adventurer wandered from mountain to
mountain, a wretched spectator of all these horrors, the result of his
ill-guided ambition. He now underwent a similiarity of adventures with Charles
II, after the defeat at Worcester. He sometimes found refuge in caves and
cottages, without attendants, and exposed to the mercy of peasants, who could
pity but not support him. Sometimes he lay in forests, with one or two
companions of his distress, continually purfued by the troops of the
conquerors, as there was thirty thousand pounds bid for his head. Sheridan, an
Irish adventurer, was he who kept most faithfully by him, and inspired him with
courage to support such incredible hardships. He was obliged to trust his life
to the fidelity of about fifty individuals. One day, having walked from morning
till night, pressed by hunger, and worn with fatigue, he ventured to enter an
house, the owner of which he well knew was attached to the opposite party: The
son of your King, said he, entering, comes to beg a bit of bread and clothes. I
know your present attachment to my adversaries, but I believe you to have
sufficient honor not to abuse my confidence, or to take the advantage of my
misfortunes. Take these rags that have for some time been my only covering, and
keep them. You may, probably, restore them to me one day, when seated on the
throne of the Kings of Great Britain. His host was touched with his distress;
assisted him as far as he was able, and never divulged his secret. In this
manner he wandered among the frightful wilds of Glengarry, for near six months,
often hemmed round by his pursuers, but still finding some expedient to save
him from captivity and death. At length a privateer of St. Malo, hired by his
adherents, arrived in Lochnanach, on which he embarked, and arrived at France
in safety,

Many were the conjectures then, and they still subsist, as to the possibility
of the young adventurer's escape. Some were of opinion that the government gave
secret orders to the Generals to connive at it; while others still firmly
assert, that he was put to death in an out-house, in which a number of the
rebels were enclosed and burnt. Which ever report be most true, certain it is,
that the place of his retreat has ever since been concealed from all the world.

While the Prince thus led a wandering and solitary life, the scaffolds and the
gibbets were bathed with the blood of his adherents; seventeen officers of the
rebel army were executed at Kennington-Common, in the neighborhood of London,
whose constancy in death gained more proselytes to their cause than perhaps
their victories could have done. Nine were executed in the same manner at
Carlisle; six at Brumpton; seven at Penrith; and eleven at York A few obtained
pardons; and a considerable numbe were transported to the Plantations. The
Earls o Kilmarnock and Cromartie, with the Lord Balmerino were tried by their
Peers, and found guilty. Cromartie was pardoned; the other two were beheaded on
Tower Hill. Kilmarnock, either from conviction, or from the hope of a pardon,
owned his crime, and declared his repentance of it. On the other hand,
Balmerino, who had from his youth up, been bred to arms, died in a more daring
manner. When his fellow sufferer, as commanded, bid God bless King George,
Balmerino still held fast to his principles, and cried out, God bless King
James, and suffered with the utmost intrepidity. Lord Lovat, and Mr. Radcliff
the titular Earl of Derwentwater, suffered the same fate with equal resolution.
Thus ended a rebellion, dictated by youth and presumption, and conducted
without art or resolution. The family of Stewart found fortune become more
averse at every new solicitation of her favors. Let private men, who complain
of the miseries of this life, only turn to the vicissitudes in that family, and
learn to bless God, and be happy.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIII.
A Rebellion quelled, and mercy shown to the delinquents, ever strengthens the
reigning cause. How it might have been in the present instance I will not
pretend to determine; whether too much rigor might have been exerted upon the
conquered, posterity must determine; actions of this kind are too near our own
times to be either judged of, or talked of with freedom. Immediately after the
rebellion was suppressed, the legislature undertook to establish several
regulations in Scotland, which were equally conducive to the happiness of the
people there, and the tranquillity of the united kingdom. The Highlanders, who
had, till this time, continued to wear the old military dress of the Romans,
and who always went armed, were now reformed. Their habits were, by act of
parliament, reduced to the modern modes; the obedience they were under to their
chiefs was abolished, and the lowest subject of that part of the kingdom was
granted a participation of British freedom.

But whatever tranquillity might have been restored by these means at home, the
flames of war still continued to rage upon the continent with its accustomed
violence. The French went forward with rapid success, having reduced almost the
whole Netherlands to their obedience. In vain the Dutch negotiated,
supplicated, and evaded war; they saw themselves stripped of all those strong
towns which defended their dominions from invasion; and they now lay almost
defenseless, ready to receive terms from their conquerors. The Dutch, at this
time, were very different from their forefathers, the brave assertors of
liberty, in the beginning of their republic; the individuals of their state
were rich, while the government was poor; they had lost, in a spirit of traffic
and luxury, all generosity of sentiment, and desire of independence; they only
sought riches, regardless of public virtue. They were divided in their councils
between two factions which now subsisted, namely, that which declared for a
Stadtholder, and that which, with attachments to France, opposed his election.
The prevalence of either side was almost equally fatal to liberty; if a
Stadtholder was elected, they then saw their constitution altered from a
republic to a kind of limited monarchy; if the opposite party prevailed, they
were to feel the weight of a confirmed aristocracy, confirmed by French power,
and crouching under its authority. Of the two e^s they chose the former; the
people, in several to^ns, inflamed almost to tumult and sedition, compelled
their magistrates to declare for the Prince of Orange as Stadtholder,
Captain General and Admiral of the United Provinces. The vigorous consequences
of this resolution immediately appeared; all commerce with the French was
prohibited; the Dutch army was augmented; and orders were issued to commence
hostilities against the French by sea and land.

Thus we see this war diffused throughout the whole system of Europe, in some
measure resembling a disorder, the symptoms of which, at different times,
appear in different parts of the body, remitting and raging by turns. At the
commencement of the war we have seen the Queen of Hungary upon the point of
losing all her possessions. Soon after we saw the unfortunate Duke of Bavaria,
who had been chosen Emperor by the name of Charles VII, banished from his
throne, stripped of his hereditary dukedom, and ever shrinking from surrounding
dangers. We have seen the Duke of Savoy, now King of Sardinia, changing that
side which some years before he espoused, and, joining with Austria and
England, against the ambitious designs of France, while Italy still felt all
the terrors of war, or rather saw foreigners contending with each other for her
dominions; the French and Spaniards on one side, the Imperialists and the King
of Sardinia on the other. Thus Rome, that once gave laws to the world, now saw
the troops of Germany and Spain, by turns, enter into her territories; and,
after various combats, she, at last, saw the Imperialists become masters. The
Spaniards and French lost the most flourishing armies, notwithstanding the
excellent conduct of the Prince of Conti their General; and, at last, after a
bloody victory obtained over the Spaniards (...) St. Lazaro, the beautiful city
of Genoa, which ^d sided with Spain, was obliged to submit to the conquerors,
to suffer some indignities imposed upon them, and to pay a most severe
contribution.

The city of Genoa had, for ages before, maintained its own laws, and boasted
of liberty. Besides its inner wall, it had another formed by a chain of rocks
of more than two leagues extent; but both being built in those times when
modern fortification was yet unknown, it was not thought, by its Senate,
capable of making a proper resistance. Upon submitting, the unhappy Italians
too soon found that no mercy was to be expected from the court of Vienna, which
had ever patronized oppression. More than a million sterling was demanded for a
contribution; a tax, the payment of which must have utterly ruined the city.
The magistrates did all in their power to pay the exorbitant sum demanded; and
the German troops exercised every inhumanity in exacting it. The conquerors
lived upon the people, and treated them with an insolence which was natural to
them as conquerors, and as Germans. The Genoese were, at length, reduced to
despair, and were resolved to make a last effort for the recovery of their
liberty and independence. The Austrians took the cannon of the city, in order
to transport them to Provence, where their arms had already penetrated. The
Genoese themselves were obliged to draw those cannon which they had once
considered as the defense and ornament of their citadel. It was on this
occasion that an Austrian officer struck one of the citizens, who had been
employed in this laborious task. This blow served to animate the people with
their former spirit of freedom. They took up arms in every quarter of the town,
and surprised some battalions of the Austrians, surrounded others, and cut them
in pieces. The Senate, uncertain how to proceed, neither encouraged nor stopped
the citizens, who drove the Austrians entirely out, and then appointed
commanders, and guarded the walls with the utmost regularity.

This revolution in a little city, the transactions of which has filled whole
Folios of history, should not be passed over without remark; though no longer
capable of maintaining its liberties amidst the shock of the enormous powers of
Europe; yet still we find it possessed of its ancient spirit; only to lose it,
however, by the prevailing power of the Senate, which established their
aristocracy on the necks of the citizens, as before.

In this manner we see victory and miscarriage mutually declaring for either;
all sides growing more feeble, and none acquiring any real recompense for the
losses sustained. Thus, about this time, the English made an unsuccessful
expedition into France, in order to attack Port l'Orient, in which they came
off without any honor. The French gained a considerable victory at Rocroux in
Flanders, over the allies, although it procured them no real advantage; and it
cost them a greater number of lives than those whom they obliged to retire. The
Dutch, in this general conflict, seemed the greatest losers. A victory gained
over the allies at La Feldt served to reduce them to a still greater degree of
distrust in their Generals, than they had hitherto shown: but the taking of
Bergen-op-Zoom, the strongest fortification of Dutch Brabant, and which put the
French in possession of the whole navigation of the Schelde, threw them almost
into despair. But these victories, in favor of France, were counterbalanced
with almost equal disappointments. In Italy, the French General, Marshal
Bellisle's brother, at the head of thirty-four thousand men, attempted to
penetrate into Piedmont; but his troops were put to the route, and he himself
slain. The French King equipped an unsuccessful armament for the recovery of
Cape Breton; and, not discouraged by this failure, fitted out two squadrons,
one to make a descent upon the British Colonies in America, and the other to
assist the operations in the East Indies. These, however, were attacked by
Anson and Warren, and nine of their ships were taken. Soon after this Commodore
Fox, with six ships of war, took above forty French ships laden from St.
Domingo; and this loss was soon after followed by another defeat, which the
French fleet sustained from Admiral Hawke, in which seven ships of the line,
and several frigates, were taken.

This variety of success served to make all the powers at war heartily desirous
of a peace. The States General had, for some years, endeavored to stop the
progress of a war, in which they could gain no advantages, and had all to lose.
The King of France was sensible, that, after a victory, was the most
advantageous opportunity of proposing terms of peace; and even expressed his
desire of general tranquillity, in a personal conversation with Sir John
Ligonier, who had been made prisoner in the last victory obtained by the French
at La Feldt. The bad success of his admirals at sea, his Generals misfortunes
in Italy, the frequent bankruptcies of his subjects, the election of a
Stadtholder in Holland, who opposed his interests, his views in Germany
entirely frustrated by the elevation of the Duke of Tuscany to rule the Empire;
all these contributed to make him weary of the war. An accommodation was
therefore agreed upon; and the contending powers agreed to a congress at Aix la
Chapelle, where the Earl of Sandwich and Sir Thomas Robinson assisted as
plenipotentiaries from the King of Great Britain. The treaty which takes its
name from that city, was concluded on the seventh day of October, a lasting
instance of precipitate counsels and English humility. By this it was agreed,
that all prisoners, on each ^ide, should be mutually restored, and all
conquests given up. That the Duchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla, should
be ceded to Don Philip, heir apparent to the Spanish throne, and his heirs; but
in case of his succeeding to the crown of Spain, that then these dominions
should revert to the house of Austria. That the fortifications of Dunkirk to
the sea should be demolished; that the ship annually sent with slaves to the
coast of Spain, should have this privilege continued for four years; that the
King o^ Prussia should be secured in the possession of Silesia^ which he had
conquered; and that the Queen o^ Hungary should be secured in her patrimonial
dominions. But one article of the peace was more displeasing and afflictive to
the English than all the rest^ for it was agreed, that she should give two
person^ of rank and distinction to France as hostages, unt^ restitution should
be made of all the conquests which England possessed of the enemy, either in
the Ea^ or West Indies. This was a mortifying stipulation^ but there was no
mention made of the searchin^ English ships in the American seas, upon which
the war originally began. The treaty of Utrecht ha^ long been a subject of
reproach to those by whom (...) was negotiated; but, with all its faults, the
trea^ that was just concluded was far more despicable a^ erroneous. The honor
of the nation was forgo^ten; its interests left undetermined. Yet such w^ the
strange infatuation of the multitude, that t^ treaty of Utrecht was held in
universal contemp^ and this was extolled with the highest strain of pan^gyric.
The truth is, the people were wearied wi^ repeated disgrace, and only expected
an accumul^tion of misfortunes by continuing the war. T^ ministers and their
emissaries, about this period, h^ the art of persuading men to what they thoug^
proper, and represented the circumstances of the ^tion as flourishing, though
the public was groani^ beneath an immense load of debt; and though all measures
were guided by an ignorant and unconstitutional faction.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIV.
THIS peace might, in every respect, be termed only a temporary cessation from
general hostilities; though the war between England and France had actually
subsided in Europe, yet in the East and West Indies they still carried on
hostile operations, both sides equally culpable, yet each complaining of the
infraction.

In the mean time, as Europe enjoyed a temporary tranquillity, the people of
England expected, and the government promised them, a restitution of those
blessings which had been taken from them by a long and obstinate war. A
magnificent firework was played off upon this occasion; which, though an
useless and vain expense, served to amuse the populace, and render them more
contented with the late precarious treaty.

The ministry also showed some desire to promote the commerce of the kingdom;
and, for this purpose, a bill was passed for encouraging a British herring
fishery, under proper regulations. From such a scheme carried into execution,
great advantages were expected to accrue; the Dutch, who had long en^oyed the
sole profits arising from it, considered the ^ea as a mine of inexhaustible
wealth. However, ^xperience has shown that the English were either ^ncapable of
turning this fishery to the same ad^antage, or that their company was not
established ^ith the most strict economy. Private persons have ^ften been
found to make fortunes by this fishery; but the company have found themselves
considerabl^ losers.

A scheme, which, by many, was thought still more advantageous to the nation,
was, the encouragin^ those who had been discharged the army or navy, t^ become
members of a new colony in North America^ called Nova Scotia. To this retreat,
it was thought^ the waste of an exuberant nation might well be drained off; and
here those free spirits might be kep^ employed, who, if suffered to remain at
home, would only prey upon the community. This was a cold climate, and a barren
soil, where the English had a fort, and a small garrison, rather to intimidate
the neighboring French, and repress their encroachments, than to derive any
advantages from the improvement of trade, or the cultivation of the country. It
was here that a scheme was laid for the foundation of a new colony, which might
improve the fishery upon that coast, and become a new source of wealth to the
mother country. Thus did the nation exchange her hardy and veteran troops for
the expectation of precarious wealth. Every colony taken from the parent
country serves to lessen its strength; and all the wealth imported into it,
after it has become moderately rich, being only used as the instrument of
luxury, instead of invigorating the nation, tends to render it more effeminate.

However, it was advertised by authority, that all proper encouragement would
be given to such officers and private men, who, being discharged from the
service of the government, should be willing to settle in Nova Scotia. Fifty
acres of land were granted to every private soldier or seaman, free from taxes
for ten years, and then to pay only one shilling a year. Besides this fifty,
ten acres more were to be granted to every individual of which each family
should consist. Every officer, under the rank of ensign, was to have fourscore
acres; ensigns were to have two hundred, lieutenants three, captains four, and
those above that rank six. Such offers failed not to induce numbers to try
their fortunes on that desolate coast; and, in a little time, about four
thousand adventurers, with their families, were carried thither; a town named
Halifax was built; and the colonists left to glean a scanty subsistence from an
ungrateful soil. Since that time, notwithstanding all the encouragement this
colony has received from the government, the inhabitants have cleared but a
very small part of the woods with which the face of the country is covered.
Agriculture is quite forsaken; and the settlement entirely subsists by the sums
expended by the army and navy stationed in this part of the western world.

Here those voluntary outcasts of their country expected to live, though
hardly, yet at least securely; but, in this they found themselves disappointed.
The Indians, a savage and fierce people, from the first looked upon these
settlements of the English as an incroachment upon their own liberties; and the
French, who were equally jealous, fomented these outrages. Commissaries were
therefore appointed to meet at Paris, and compromise these disputes; but these
conferences were rendered abortive by mutual cavillings, and all the arts of
evasion.

In the mean time Mr. Pelham, who chiefly conducted the business of the state,
and was esteemed a man of candor and capacity, laid a scheme for lightening
the immense load of debt that was laid upon the nation. His plan was to lessen
the national encumbrance, by lowering the interest which had been promised upon
the first raising the supply, or obliging the lenders to receive the sums
originally granted. Those who were proprietors of stocks, and received, for the
use of their money, four per cent., were, by royal authority, ordered to
subscribe their names, signifying their consent to accept of three pounds ten
shillings per cent. a year after, and three per cent. onl^ about six years
after their thus subscribing; and, i^ case of a refusal, that the government
would pay o^ the principal. This scheme was attended with the desired effect;
though it, in some measure, was ^ force upon the lender, who had originally
grante^ his money upon different terms, yet it was salutar^ to the nation; and,
as Machiavel has it, politic^ injustice is sometimes allowable, in order to
secur^ national benefits. Besides this salutary measure, other^ were pursued by
the minister at the helm, with equa^ success. The importation of iron from
America wa^ allowed, and the trade to Africa laid open to the whole nation;
but, at the same time, to be superintended by the board of trade and
plantations.

But all the advantages the nation reaped from these salutary measures, were
not sufficient to counter-balance the stroke which liberty received (as some
are of opinion) by an unusual stretch of the privileges of the house of
commons. As this is a point which deserves the strictest attention, permit me
to trace it up to the source. The city of Westminster had long been represented
by members who were nominated, in some measure, by the ministry; Lord Trentham
having vacated his seat in the house, by accepting a place under the crown, he
again declared himself a candidate; but met with violent opposition. It was
objected to him by some, that he had been uncommonly active in introducing some
French strollers, who had come over to exhibit plays upon the suppression of
our own. This accusation, whether true or false, excited numbers against him,
who styled themselves the independent electors of Westminster, and named Sir
George Vandeput, a private gentleman, as his competitor. The opposition
resolved to support their candidate at their own expense. They accordingly
opened houses of entertainment, solicited votes, and propagated abuse as usual.
At length, the poll being closed, the majority appeared in favor of Lord
Trentham; a scrutiny was demanded by the other side; it was protracted by the
obstinacy of both parties; but this also turning out in favor of Lord
Trentham, the independent electors petitioned the house, complaining of an
undue election, and of partiality and injustice in the high-bailiff of
Westminster, who took the poll. To this petition the house paid little regard,
but proceeded to examine the high-bailiff as to the causes that had so long
protracted the election; who laid the blame upon Mr. Crowle, who had acted as
council for the petitioners, on the honorable Alexander Murray, and one Gibson
an upholsterer. These three persons were therefore brought to the bar of the
house; Crowle and Gibson, after having asked pardon upon their knees, and,
being reprimanded by the house, were dismissed. Murray was first admitted to
bail; but, after some witnesses had deposed, that he had headed a mob to
intimidate the voters, it was voted that he should be committed a close
prisoner to Newgate; and, to invigorate their measures, that he should receive
this sentence at the bar of the house on his knees. He accordingly appeared;
but being directed by the Speaker to kneel, refused to comply. This refusal
threw the whole house into a commotion; and it was ordered that he should be
committed close prisoner to Newgate, debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper,
and that no person should have access to him without permission from the house.
This imprisonment he underwent, sensible that it could continue no longer than
while they continued to sit; and, at the close of the session, he was conducted
from prison to his own house, amidst the acclamations of the people. He now was
thought, by many, entirely free from all farther prosecution; but, in this,
they were mistaken; for, at the opening of the ensuing sitting of parliament, a
motion was made, that Mr. Murray should be again committed close prisoner to
the Tower. Hitherto it was supposed by several, that the house of commons had
acted with a spirit of resentment. Now it was thought, that they made an
attempt at extending their privileges. Though the delinquent, a person of no
great consequence in himself, had taken the prudent precautions of retiring
from their resentment, yet several of the people saw that the house considered
itself rather as a body distinct from the people, than the guardians of the
people; and, instead of maintaining the liberties of the subject in general,
attempted to increase their own. Some thought they saw, in this measure, the
seeds of future aristocracy; that the house of commons constituted themselves
judges of their own privileges; and that the liberty of every individual in
society was at the disposal of a body who professed acting chiefly for their
own honor.

However this may be, another measure was soon after taken, which, in reality,
made distinctions among the people, and laid an unpassable line between the
rich and poor. This was an act for the better preventing clandestine marriages,
and for the more public solemnization of that ceremony. The grievance
complained of, and which this law was to redress, was, that the sons and
daughters of opulent families were often seduced into marriage, before they had
acquired sufficient experience in life to be sensible of the disparity of
fortune in the match. This statute therefore enacted, that the bans of marriage
should be regularly published three successive Sundays in the church of the
parish where both parties had resided for one month at least, before the
ceremony. That a marriage which was solemnized without this previous
publication, or a license obtained from the Bishop's Court, should be void, and
the person who solemnized it should be transported for seven years. This act
was, at that time, thought replete with consequences injurious to society; and
experience has manifested some of them; villains have gone about deceiving
ignorant women, under a pretense of marriage, and then have left them without
redress. The poor were thus rendered utterly incapable of making alliances with
the rich; and the wealth of the nation has thus been more liable to
accumulation in opulent families. It has been thought to impede that ardour
which impels many to marry; and to clog a ceremony of the most infinite
advantage to society, with procrastination and delay. Some have affirmed, that
debaucheries and lewdness have become more frequent since the enacting this
law; and it is believed, that the numbers of the people are upon the decline.

This session of parliament was also distinguished by another act equally
unpopular, and, perhaps, equally injurious to the religion of the community.
This was a law for naturalizing the Jews. The ministers boldly affirmed, that
such a law would greatly contribute to the advantage of the nation; that it
would increase the credit and commerce of the kingdom, and set a laudable
example of political toleration. Many others, however, were of very different
sentiments; they saw that greater favor was shown, by this bill, to Jews, than
to some other sects professing the Christian religion; that an introduction of
this people into the kingdom would disgrace the character of the nation, and
cool the zeal of the natives already too lukewarm. However, notwithstanding all
opposition, this bill was passed into a law; nor was it till the ensuing
session of parliament, that it was thought necessary to be repealed.

An act, equally unpopular with the two former, was now also passed, which
contained regulations for the better preserving the game. By this none but men
already possessed of a stated fortune, had a privilege of carrying a gun, or
destroying game, though even upon the grounds which he himself rented. This
totally damped all that martial spirit among the lower orders of mankind, by
preventing their handling those arms which might one day be necessary to defend
their country; and gave the rich the sole enjoyment of a pleasure, which,
before, had been considered as the common privilege of humanity. Such were the
laws passed this session; through all which a spirit of aristocracy was
discerned by some. The body of the rich no longer fearing oppression from the
throne, or an infringement of their own liberties, now began to lean heavy upon
the poor, and to consider the interests of that useful part of society, as
entirely distinct from their own. They never omitted, however, the usual
addresses to the throne; and this session was remarkable for an address of
thanks to his Majesty for maintaining, and rendering permanent, the general
tranquillity of Europe, at a time when war was kindling in almost every quarter
of the world.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXV.
IF we seek for the origin of that war which now threatened universal
devastation, we shall find it kindling up in several countries, both of Europe,
America, and Asia, at one and the same time. Most other national contests have
arisen from some one principal cause; but this war seems to have been produced
by the concurrence of several, or it may be considered as the continuance of
the late war, which had not been effectually extinguished by the defective
treaty of Aix la Chapelle.

In Asia, upon the coast of Malabar, the English and French had never ceased
hostilities. The claim of Prussia and Austria, upon the territories of Silesia,
had never been thoroughly adjusted. The limits of Nova Scotia, inhabited by the
English, and bordered upon by the French, were never precisely determined; and,
southward, the boundaries of Acadia, an extended country belonging to the
French, and bordering upon Virginia, were equally left uncertain. Negotiations
had long been carried on to determine these differences; but what could reason
do in determining disputes in which there were no certain principles to be
guided by? The limits of these countries had never been settled; for they were,
before this time, thought too remote, or too insignificant, to employ much
attention. And it was not probable that powers who had no other right to the
countries in dispute, but that of invasion, would have equity enough to agree
upon sharing the spoil.

The right which any of the contending powers pretended to, might, in the eye
of reason, be thought very controvertible; but the convenience which either
party was to derive from the enjoyment of their peculiar claims was not so
uncertain. As the dissensions seemed to begin in North America, we must turn to
that country to consider their rise. The French had been the first cultivators
of Nova Scotia, and, by great industry and long perseverance, rendered the
soil, naturally barren, somewhat fertile, and capable of sustaining nature with
very little assistance from Europe. This country, however, had frequently
changed masters, until the English were acknowledged as the rightful possessors
by the treaty of Utrecht. The possession of this country, in any other nation,
would expose our colonies to perpetual invasion, and assist them in acquiring a
superiority in commerce, and the northern fisheries. It has been already
observed, that we had an infant colony upon that coast, which was chiefly
supported by royal bounty, and struggled with all the disadvantages of the
severe climate, and the ungrateful soil. But it had an obstruction to its
growth still more formidable than either. The French, who had been long settled
in the back parts of the country, continually spirited up the Indians to repel
the new comers; so that some of them were actually murdered, or sold to the
French at Louisburg. These violations were complained of, and complaint
produced recrimination; so that the two powers of France and England were
negotiating with, accusing, and destroying each other all at one time.

Now also began to be observed another source of dispute, which promised as
much uneasiness as the former. The French, pretending first to have discovered
the mouth of the river Mississippi, claimed the whole adjacent country toward
New Mexico on the east, quite to the Apalachian Mountains on the west. And
finding several Englishmen, who had settled beyond these mountains, both from
motives of commerce, and invited by the natural beauties of the country, they
drove them away, and built such forts as could command the whole country
around. It was now, therefore, seen, that their intentions were to surround the
English colonies which lay along the shore, by taking possession of the
internal parts of the country that lay on the back of our settlements; and
being already possessed of the northern and southern shores, thus enclose to us
on every side, and secure to themselves all trade with the natives of the
country. The English therefore justly apprehended, that if the French were able
to unite their northern colonies, which were traded into by the river St.
Lawrence, to their southern, which were accessible by the river Mississippi,
they must, in time, become masters of the whole territory; and, by having a
wide country to increase in, would soon multiply, and become every year more
dangerous.

The government of England having long complained of these encroachments,
determined, at length, to repel force by force, and to cut the knot of
negotiation, which they could not untie. Orders were dispatched to the
governors of the provinces to unite into a confederacy for their mutual
security; and, if possible, to bring the Indians over to their cause. The
Indians were a fierce savage people, unacquainted with the arts, but from
infancy trained to the practice of war. It had long been the method of the
English to cultivate their friendship in times of danger, but to slight their
alliance in circumstances of tranquillity; this, in some measure, served to
alienate their affections from our government; but the fraud and avarice of our
merchants, particularly that called the Ohio company, who sold them bad
merchandises, and treated them with equal insolence and perfidy, served to
confirm their aversion. Besides, there was something in the disposition of the
French settlers in these regions more similar to theirs; the French, like the
natives, were hardy, enterprising, and poor; they naturally therefore joined
with those allies, from conquering of whom they could expect no plunder; and
declared against the English colonists, who were rich, frugal, and laborious,
and whose spoils they consequently were the more desirous to share.

Thus then the English had not only the French, but almost the whole body of
the Indian nations to oppose; yet this confederacy against them did not give a
greater union to the different provinces, whose interest it was to oppose. Some
of the provinces, who, from their situation, had little to fear from the enemy,
or little advantages to expect from victory, declined furnishing their share of
the supplies, the governors of some other colonies, who had been men of broken
fortunes, and had come from their native country to retrieve them by acts of
rapacity and oppression here, were so much dreaded, or hated, that they lost
all influence in inspiring the colonists with a proper spirit of defense. The
ministry, however, at home, began to exert itself for their defense, and their
measures were hastened by hostilities already commenced, there having been, for
some time, a skirmishing between General Lawrence to the north, and Colonel
Washington to the south, with parties of the French, in which the latter were
victorious. It would be tedious, as well as uninforming, to relate all the
preparations that now began to be made by either party; or to load this account
with barbarous names and unimportant marches; or to recount the alternate
victories and defeats of either side; be it sufficient to observe, that they
seemed, in some measure, to have imbibed the ferocity of manners of the savage
people, with whom they fought, and exercised various cruelties, either from a
spirit of reprisal or revenge.

Four operations were undertaken by the English at the same time; one commanded
by Colonel Monckton, to drive the French from the encroachments they had made
upon the province of Nova Scotia; another to the south, against Crown Point,
under the command of General Johnson; a third commanded by General Shirley,
against Niagara; and a fourth, still farther to the south, against Du Quesne,
under the conduct of General Braddock. In these respective expeditions Monckton
was successful; Johnson victorious, though without effect; Shirley was thought
dilatory, and his expedition deferred to another season! but the fortunes of
Braddock are so extraordinary as to require a more ample detail. This General
was recommended to this service by the Duke of Cumberland, who was justly
sensible of his courage, and knowledge in the art of war. These two advantages,
however, which, upon other occasions, are thought the highest requisites of a
General were, in some measure, conducive to this commander's overthrow. His
courage made him obstinate; and his skill in war was improper to be exerted in
a country where there were no regular advances to be made, nor a marshalled
enemy to encounter. This brave but unfortunate man set forward upon the
expedition in June, and left Fort Cumberland on the tenth, at the head of two
thousand two hundred men, directing his march to that part of the country where
General Washington had been defeated the year before. Upon his arrival there he
was informed, that the French at fort Du Quesne expected a reinforcement of
five hundred men; he therefore resolved, with all haste, to advance, and attack
them, before they became too powerful by this assistance. Leaving, therefore,
Colonel Dunbar, with eight hundred men, to bring up the provisions, stores, and
heavy baggage, as fast as the nature of the service would permit, he marched
forward with the rest of his army through a country equally dangerous from its
forests and savage inhabitants; a country where Europeans had never before
attempted to penetrate, wild, solitary, and hideous. Still, however, he went
forward with intrepidity, through the deserts of Oswego, regardless of the
enemy's attempts, taking no care previously to explore the woods or thickets,
as if the nearer he approached the enemy, the less regardless he was of danger.
At length, on the eighth of July, he encamped within ten miles of the fort Du
Quesne, which he intended to attack, and the next day resumed his march,
without so much as endeavoring to get intelligence of an enemy he despised.
With this confidence he was marching forward; his soldiers promised themselves
a speedy cessation from their harrassing march, and all things seemed to
promise success, when the whole army was at once astonished by a general
discharge of arms, from an unseen enemy, along the front and left flank. It was
now too late to think of retreating; his whole body had passed into the defile,
which the enemy had artfully permitted before they attempted to fire. His van
guard therefore fell back, in consternation, upon the main body; and the pannic
soon became general. The officers alone disdained to fly, while Braddock
himself, at their head, discovered the greatest intrepidity, and the highest
imprudence; he never thought of retreating, but obstinately continued on the
spot where he was, and gave orders to the few brave men who surrounded him, to
form according to the rules of war, and regularly advance against the enemy. An
enthusiast to the discipline of the field, he desired to bring the spirit of a
German campaign into the wilds of Niagara. In the mean time, his officers fell
thick about him, while he still continued to issue out orders with composure,
though he had five horses shot under him, and though the whole body of his
troops was fled. At length he received a musket shot through the lungs, he
dropped, and a total confusion ensued. All the artillery, ammunition, and
baggage, of the army, were left to the enemy; the General's cabinet of letters
also shared the same fate; and the loss of the English, in this unhappy
surprise, amounted to seven hundred men; and the remainder of the army, some
time after, returned to Philadelphia. It was in this manner the expedition of
General Braddock terminated; from which England had expected such advantages.
In all actions, that excite the applause and admiration of mankind, a part of
their success is owing to conduct, and a part to fortune. Of the latter
Braddock was totally forsaken; he was unsuccessful; and the ungrateful world
are unwilling to grant him the former.

Thus unfortunate were the beginnings of this war, with regard to England; it
was resolved therefore, that no measures were now to be preserved with the
French; and orders were given to take their ships wherever found, though there
was yet no formal declaration of war. With this order the naval commanders very
readily and willingly complied, so that soon the English ports were filled with
ships taken from the enemy, and kept as an indemnification for these forts
which the enemy had unjustly possessed themselves of in America. The French
complained loudly against the injustice of this proceeding; they represented it
to the rest of Europe, as a breach of that faith which should be observed among
nations, as a piratical measure, disgraceful to the most savage nation. Their
memorials were answered by the English, with some show of reason. However, it
must be owned, that as a declaration of war was a ceremony easily performed, it
would have been more consistent with the honor of the ministry, to have
pursued the usual methods of contest which had been long established in Europe.
The truth is, that the ministry were now divided between peace and war; they
saw the necessity of vigorous measures, but they were afraid to throw off the
mask of peace entirely. Henry Pelham, who had long guided at the helm of
affairs with candor and capacity, had for some time been dead, and his place
supplied by Sir Thomas Robinson, who, though a sensible minister, and a
favorite of the King, was of no great weight in council, and, consequently,
soon under a necessity of resigning; and Mr. Fox was put in his place. The
administration was also new formed, in other respects, by the taking in several
other new members. Those who had long been in the ministry, were, it is
thought, for peace; those, on the contrary, who were newly taken into the
direction of affairs, expected to supplant their rivals by an opposite system,
and were consequently for war. The leader of this party, therefore, warmly
solicited for war, seconded by the justice of the cause, and the general voice
of the people, those who opposed him expected to effect by negotiation whatever
arms could atchieve. Whatever might have been the motives for protracting the
declaration, the French seemed to convince Europe of their moderation upon this
attack by sea, by neither declaring war, nor making any reprisals by sea.
However, they threatened England with a formidable invasion; several bodies of
troops moved to the coasts adjacent to ours; their ministers threatened loudly
in foreign courts; and such preparations were made as showed a resolution of
carrying the war into the heart of Great Britain. These preparations had the
desired effect, filling the nation with consternation, turbulence, and clamor.
The people saw themselves exposed without arms, leaders, or discipline, while
the ministry were timid, unpopular, and wavering. In this situation the Dutch
were applied to for six thousand men, which, by treaty, they were to send
England, in case of its being threatened with an invasion. Which demand,
however, by affected delays, was put off so long, that the King, unwilling to
come to an open rupture with the republic, desisted from it; for which they
returned his Majesty thanks. Such are the advantages England is to expect, by
relying on assistance from any other quarter than its native strength and
unanimity; and every day seems to convince us of the absurdity of political
alliances, which are never observed, as wanting friendship to bind, or force to
compel.

In this timid situation the ministry were eager to catch at any assistance; a
body therefore of Hessians and Hanoverians, amounting to about ten thousand,
were brought over to protect about as many millions of Englishmen, who, with
swords in their hands, were able to defend themselves; but such was the vile
complexion of this period, that the whole kingdom presented nothing but one
picture of discontent, terror, and distrust of their leaders. The ministry was
execrated for having reduced the nation to such circumstances of disgrace, as
to be thought to stand in need of preservation from a few German mercenaries;
but what could be expected from such a ministry, who were possessed neither of
the arts, nor the integrity of government.

However, the French were by no means serious in this intended descent; the
only design was to draw off the attention of the English ministry from an
expedition which was actually going forward against Minorca, an island in the
Mediterranean, which we had formerly taken from Spain, and had been secured to
us by repeated treaties. But the ministry of England were too much infected
with the more domestic terror, to take sufficient precautions to guard this
place, though they had early notice of the enemies intentions. Instead
therefore of sufficiently guarding the island with a proper garrison in St.
Philip's castle, the citadel, or of detaching a squadron that, in all respects,
should be superior to the French fleet in the Mediterranean, they only sent ten
men of war upon this service, poorly manned, and indifferently provided, under
the command of Admiral Byng, whose character in the navy was by no means
established, and orders to reinforce the garrison of St. Philip's with one
battalion from Gibraltar; with which command, however, the governor of that
place thought it unsafe to comply.

The Admiral sent upon this service reinforced his fleet by a detachment of men
at Gibraltar; and, sailing toward Minorca, was joined in the way by another
man of war, from whom he learned that Minorca was actually besieged, and the
French fleet destined to support the operations by land. He soon knew the
reality of this information, when, approaching the island, he saw the French
banners displayed, and the batteries opened upon the castle of St. Philip's,
which still displayed the English flag. The appearance of the French fleet,
soon after, still more strongly engaged his attention; he drew up his ships in
line of battle, and determined to act upon the defensive. Byng had been
formerly thought to be eminent in naval operations, to which he was early bred,
but he had hitherto exhibited no proofs of courage. Men are generally most apt
to pride themselves upon those talents for which they are most praised; and
this was the case with this unfortunate commander; he sacrificed his reputation
for courage, to the hopes of being applauded for his conduct. The French fleet
advanced; a part of the English fleet engaged; the Admiral still kept aloof,
giving prudent reasons for his remissness in coming to action; till, at length,
the French Admiral, taking the advantage of the Englishman's hesitation, sailed
slowly away to join the van of his fleet, which had been already discomfited.
The English, for a while, continued the pursuit; but the opportunity of coming
to a close engagement was now lost, and never presented itself again.

Byng was still resolved to act with his usual caution; he called a council of
war, wherein it was represented that he was much inferior to the enemy in ships
and men; that the relief of Minorca was impracticable; and that it was most
advisable to sail back to Gibraltar, which might require immediate protection.
This representation was almost unanimously agreed to, and put accordingly in
execution. His pusillanimous conduct, however, soon reached his native country,
where it excited almost a phrenzy of resentment. The ministry were also thought
to fan the flame, which served to turn the public eye from their own misconduct
in sending so weak an armament. Byng, in the mean time, remained at Gibraltar,
no way suspecting the storm that was gathering over his head; but talked, and
wrote, even as if he expected the thanks of his King, and the applause of his
countrymen; but he was soon awaked from this dream of infatuation, by a letter
from the ministry, giving him notice, that he was recalled; and another soon
after, by which directions were given that he should be sent home under arrest;
and, upon his arrival in England, he was committed close prisoner in Greenwich
hospital. Numberless arts were used to inflame the populace against this
unhappy man; and, long before his trial, several addresses were sent up, from
different counties, crying out for justice against the delinquent. The industry
of his friends, however, was not remiss upon this occasion; they expostulated
with the multitude, and attempted to divert the whole of universal hatred upon
the ministry, who, at worst, only deserved a share. But, soon after the news of
the surrender of fort St. Philip to the French inflamed the people beyond all
measure. This fortress had been reckoned, next to Gibraltar, the strongest in
Europe, the works having been planned by the celebrated Vauban; and, both from
the nature of the soil, which was one solid rock, and the peculiarity of the
situation, it was thought almost impregnable. In order to make themselves
masters of this important fortress; the French, under the command of the Duke
de Richelieu, had landed near twenty thousand men, which, by continual assault,
and having, at length, gained an outwork, made themselves masters of the place.
The English governor, General Blakeney, however, had very honorable terms of
capitulation, and marched out with all the ensigns of war. Yet, perhaps, in
truth, the harder the conditions a garrison is obliged to accept, the more
honorable to the commander, as they denote his extremity in being reduced to
accept of them.

The English now saw themselves everywhere defeated; in America their armies
were cut in pieces; in Europe their garrisons taken, the people trembling under
the dread of an invasion, a few mercenarie^ brought in for their defense, who,
in turn, becam^ formidable to the natives; all these circumstance^ concurred to
exasperate the people; but there was n^ object on whom to wreck their
vengeance, but the unhappy Byng, who, in a manner, was already devoted to
destruction. War was now proclaimed wit^ the usual solemnity, though it was now
but a denunciation after having struck the blow. The Hanoverians were sent back
to their own country, and the preparations were made for trying Admiral Byng i^
the usual form. On the twenty-eighth day of December his trial began before a
Court Martial, i^ the harbor of Portsmouth, where, after a scrutiny of several
days, his Judges came to a resolution, tha^ he had not done his utmost, during
the engagement^ to destroy the enemy, which it was his duty to have engaged.
They therefore unanimously were of opinion, that he fell under the twelfth
article of war^ which positively ordered death to any person, who in the time
of action should withdraw, keep back^ or not come into fight, or who should not
do his utmost, through either motives of cowardice, negligence, or
disaffection. He was therefore adjudge^ to be shot on board such ship as the
Lords of the Admiralty should please to direct; but his Judges, a^ the same
time, recommended him to mercy; as they could not tell the motives of his
keeping aloof. By such a sentence they expected to have satisfied the national
animosity against him, and yet to screen themselves from the consciousness of
severity. Whatever the government might wish to do is uncertain; but the cry of
vengeance was too loud to be disregarded! his Majesty therefore referred the
sentence to the twelve Judges, who were unanimously of opinion that the
sentence was legal; wherefore the King resolved that he should suffer the
extremity of the law. Still, however, there was another attempt made to save
him: One of those who had been his Judges at Portsmouth, and was also a member
of the house of commons, informed that assembly, that he, as well as some
others who had sat upon the Admiral's trial, desired to be released from the
oath of secrecy imposed upon Courts-Martial, that they might disclose the
grounds on which sentence of death had passed upon Admiral Byng, and, perhaps,
discover such circumstances as might show the sentence to be improper. To this
the house paid little regard; but his Majesty thought fit to respite the
execution, till the scruples of the Court Martial should be more clearly
explained. A bill therefore past the house of commons for releasing them from
their oath; but when it came to be debated among the Lords, and after the
members of the Court Martial were examined touching their reasons, the Peers
found no reason for passing the bill; and it was rejected. The Admiral being
thus abandoned to the stroke of justice, resolved at least, by the bravery of
his dying, in some measure, to show the injustice of the imputation of his
being a coward. He maintained to the last his natural serenity; and, on the day
fixed for his execution, when the boats belonging to the fleet, being manned
and armed, attended this solemnity in the harbor, the Admiral advanced from
the cabin, where he had been imprisoned, to the deck, the place appointed for
execution, with a composed step, and resolute countenance. He then delivered a
paper, containing the following address: A few moments will now deliver me from
virulent persecution, and frustrate the malice of my enemies. Nor need I envy
them a life subject to the sensations my injuries, and the injustice done me,
must create. Persuaded I am, that justice will be done to my reputation
hereafter. The manner and cause of raising and keeping up the popular clamor
and prejudice against me, will be seen through. I shall be considered as a
victim destined to divert the indignation and resentment of an injured and
deluded people from the Proper objects. My enemies themselves must now thin^ me
innocent. Happy for me, at this my last momen^ that I know my own innocence,
and am conscious that n^ part of my country's misfortunes can be owing to me. ^
heartily wish the shedding my blood may contribute to the happiness and service
of my country; but I cannot resig^ my just claim to a faithful discharge of my
duty, accordin^ to the best of my judgment, and the utmost exertion of n^
ability for his Majesty's honor, and my country's servic^ I am sorry that my
endeavors were not attended wit^ more success; and that the armament under my
comman^ proved too weak to succeed in an expedition of such moment. Truth has
prevailed over calumny and falshoo^ and justice has wiped off the ignominious
stain of my personal want of courage, and the charge of disaffection. M^ heart
acquits me of these crimes; but who can be presumptuously sure of his own
judgment? If my crime is a^ error of judgment, or differing in opinion from my
judges^ and if yet the error of judgment should be on their sid^ God forgive
them, as I do; and may the distress of their minds, and uneasiness of their
consciences, which, in justic^ to me, they have represented, be relieved, and
subside, (...) my resentment has done. The supreme Judge sees a^ hearts and
motives, and to him I must submit the justic^ of my cause. When he had
delivered these words, h^ came forward, and resolved to die with his face
uncovered; but, his friends representing that his look^ might possibly
intimidate the soldiers, and preven^ their taking proper aim, he had his eyes
bound wit^ an handkerchief, and, kneeling upon deck, the signa^ was given for
the soldiers to fire, and he dropped dow^ dead in an instant.

How far this unfortunate man was innocent, o^ culpable, we stand too near the
transaction to judge^ if he erred in point of judgment only, it might have deen
a proper cause for his dismission; but it would have been cruelty to condemn
him for it. Those who plead with the greatest vehemence against him, seem,
however, at present, to bring their arguments from the necessity there was of
making some one commander an example to give greater resolution to the rest,
and from the good effects that seemed to attend his execution, by our repeated
successes after it. These, however, are such reasons as may silence, but not
satisfy; we must be contented therefore, to reflect tacitly upon this
transaction, and to let posterity do the rest.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVI.
EUROPE has often been compared to one republic obeying one law, namely, that
of nations; and composed of provinces, each of which is prevented from becoming
too great by the universal jealousy of the rest. A quarrel therefore between
any two of these is apt to involve the whole in war; but, particularly, if the
dispute happens to arise between those who are reckoned the leading powers in
this assemblage of nations. A war begun between France and England, for a
desert and trackless wild in the remote parts of Europe, seemed now spreading
fast through the whole world; and the appearance of their commotions revived
all the ancient jealousies and claims among the rest.

The French, at the breaking out of this new war, though they were successful
at its commencement, were very sensible that they could not long hold their
acquisitions against such a superiority as the English were possessed of at
sea, and the numberless resources they had of assisting their colonies with all
the necessaries for war. Being therefore apprized that a naval war must, in the
end, turn out to their disadvantage, they made no scruple of declaring that
they would revenge the injuries they sustained in their colonies, or by sea,
upon the King of England's territories in Germany, which they secretly hoped
would be a motive to his complying with their demands, or dividing the English
forces, or draining their finances with heavy subsidies, as they knew his
affection for his native country. In these hopes they were not much
disappointed; the court of London immediately, to secure the Electorate of
Hanover, entered into a treaty with the Empress of Russia, by which a body of
fifty-five thousand men should be ready to act in the English service, in case
Hanover should be invaded, for which the Russian Empress was to receive an
hundred thousand pounds annually, to be paid in advance.

His Prussian Majesty had long considered himself as the guardian of the
interests of Germany, and was startled at the treaty. This was Frederic III, a
Prince adorned with all the arts of peace, and whom you have seen also acting
as the most consummate General. He had learned to read men, by being himself
bred in the school of adversity; and to love his subjects, by having
experienced their attachment. He therefore took the first opportunity to
declare, that he would not suffer any foreign forces to enter the Empire,
either as auxiliaries or principals. This consummate politician had, it seems,
been already apprized of some secret negotiations between the Austrians, whom
he looked upon as concealed enemies, and the Russians, for entering his
dominions, and stripping him of the province of Silesia, which had been
conceded to him in the last treaty of peace. His Britannic Majesty, whose fears
for Hanover guided his present councils, now saw himself in the very situation
he most dreaded, exposed to the resentments of France and Prussia, who could at
once invade and overrun his Electorate, while his Russian allies lay at too
great a distance to assist him. However, all he wished was to keep the enemy
out of Germany; and this the King of Prussia made a profession of doing, as
well as he. From the similitude of their intentions, therefore, these two
Monarchs were induced to unite their interests; and, as they both only desired
the same thing, they came to an agreement to assist each other mutually in
keeping all foreign forces out of the Empire.

From this alliance both powers hoped great advantages; the preserving the
peace of Germany was the apparent good, but each had other peculiar benefits in
view. The King of Prussia knew the Austrians to be his enemies, and the
Russians to be in league with them against him; an alliance therefore with the
court of London kept back the Russians whom he dreaded, and gave him hopes of
taking an ample satisfaction from Austria, whom he suspected. As for France, he
counted upon it as a natural ally, which, from the long and hereditary enmity
with the Austrians, could not, by declaring against him, join them to whom they
had such various reasons for political aversion. The Elector of Hanover, on the
other hand, had still stronger expectations of the benefits that would arise
from this alliance. He thus procured a near and powerful ally; an ally which he
thought the French, in their present circumstances, would not venture to
disoblige; he counted upon the Austrians as naturally attached to his interests
by former services and friendship; and the Russians, at least, as likely to
continue neuter, from their former stipulations and subsidy. Such were the
motives to this alliance; but both were deceived in every particular. And
though this alliance astonished Europe at that time, it soon produced another
still more extraordinary. The Austrian Queen had long meditated designs for
recovering Silesia, which, in her exigency, the King of Prussia had invaded,
and expected the assistance of Russia to effect her purposes. By this last
treaty, however, she saw England joining with Prussia in frustrating her hopes;
and, deprived of one ally, sought about, in order to substitute another in the
room. She therefore applied to France; and, in order to procure the friendship
of that power, gave up her barrier in the Netherlands, which England had been
for ages acquiring with its blood and treasure. By this extraordinary
revolution the whole political system of Europe assumed a new face, and it
pretty clearly shows that events guide the politician, while the politician
seldom guides events; or, to use words of Tacitus, there is but very little
difference between the art and its futility.

In the mean time, this treaty between France and Austria, was no sooner
ratified, than the Empress of Russia was invited to accede to it; which
proposal she ardently embraced. By concurring with their proposals, Russia had
another opportunity of sending her forces into the western parts of Europe,
which was all she had hoped by the subsidiary treaty with England. A settlement
in the western parts of Europe was what this fierce northern power long wanted
an opportunity of obtaining; for, possessed of that, she could then pour in
fresh forces at any time upon the more effeminate and contending states; and,
perhaps, at length, obtain universal Empire. The intrigues of France were also
successfully employed with Sweden. A war between that nation and Prussia was
kindled up, though contrary to the inclination of their Sovereign, who had the
natural motives of kindred for being averse to that measure.

Thus all the alliances which England had long been purchasing upon the
continent, and many of the treaties which she had been long making, with all
the bustle of negotiation, seemed now destroyed. The forces of the contending
powers therefore, now drawn out on each side, stood thus: England opposed
France in America and Asia; France attacked Hanover on the continent of Europe.
This country the King of Prussia undertook to protect, while England promised
to furnish him with troops and money to assist his operations. On the other
hand, Austria had designs upon Prussia, and drew the Elector of Saxony into the
same pursuits; she was also seconded in her views by Russia, Sweden, and
France, while the rest of the powers of Europe continued spectators of the
contention.

These designs of Austria, for the recovery of her lost dominions, were too
apparent not to be early discovered by so vigilant a Monarch as that of
Prussia; he saw that preparations were making against him by that power in
Bohemia and Moravia, while the Elector of Saxony, under the pretense of a
military parade, drew together about sixteen thousand men, which occupied the
strong fortress of Pirna. The secret treaty also between the courts of Russia
and Austria did not escape his penetration; by this it was privately
stipulated, that the treating powers should, in case of apprehending any breach
of the present peace, unite against Prussia, and share the dominions of that
crown between them. This he considered as an offensive alliance; the treating
powers alleged, that it was only defensive. As preparations for war, however,
were carrying on with the utmost diligence on either side; the King of Prussia,
in order to be confirmed in what he already suspected, ordered his minister at
Vienna to demand a clear explication, and proper assurances concerning the
preparations he saw making. He at first received an equivocal anwser; but,
ordering his minister to demand a categorical reply, whether the Empress Queen
was for peace or war; and to require a positive assurance, that she had no
intention to attack him that year, or the next; an ambiguous answer was
returned to so plain a question, which undoubted manifested an inclination for
war. H^ therefore thought proper no longer to suspend his operations, but to
carry the war into the enemies country^ rather than to wait for it in his own.
He entere^ with a large army into Saxony, and, in the usua^ strain of civility,
demanded from the Elector a passage through that country, which he well knew
the possessor of it was not able to refuse. In the mean time, he disguised all
his suspicions of the Elector's having secretly treated with his enemies; and,
upon the latter's proposing to observe a strict neutrality, the King of Prussia
professed himself extremely pleased at the offer; but desired, as a proof of
the sincerity of his intentions, to separate the army of the Electorate, for
which there could possibly be no occasion, in case of the neutrality proposed.
This, however, the Elector of Saxony thought it prudent to refuse, which was
probably what the other eagerly desired; for, in consequence of his refusal,
the King formed a kind of blockade about the Saxon camp, in order to reduce it
by famine; for such was the situation of this spot, on which the Saxons had
encamped, that though a small army could defend it against the most numerous
forces, yet the same difficulty attended leaving it, that served to render it
inaccessible to an enemy. Of this his Prussian Majesty took the advantage; and,
by blocking up every place of egress, thus cut off their provisions, and the
whole body was obliged to surrender prisoners of war.

In a detail of the transactions of England it will not be necessary to
recapitulate the numerous marches, victories, sieges, and repulses of this
great foreign ally. Whatever either former history had shown, or even romance
might feign, was outdone both by his expedition and intrepidity. King only of a
very small territory, assisted by England, whose situation was too remote to
give any considerable succors, opposed and surrounded by all the most
formidable powers of Europe, he still opposed them on every side; he invades
Bohemia, defeats the Austrian General at Lowoschtch, retreats, begins his
second campaign with another victory near Prague, is upon the point of taking
that city, but by a temerity inspired by former successes, attacking the
Austrians at a disadvantage near Kolin, he is defeated, and obliged to raise
the siege: Fortune, says he, has turned her back upon me this day. I ought to
have expected it; she is a female, and I am no gallant; success often occasions
a destructive confidence; but another time we will do better.

One misfortune seemed to follow another; the Hanoverians, who had joined with
him and England, in the alliance, had armed in his favor, commanded by the
Duke of Cumberland. As this army, which consisted of three thousand eight
hundred men, was greatly out-numbered by the French, they were obliged
continually to retire before them. The passage of the river Weser might have
been disputed with some hopes of success; yet the Hanoverians permitted them to
pass it unmolested. Their army, therefore, was now driven from one part of the
country to an other, till, at length, it made a stand near a village called
Hastenback, where it was judged they would be best able to sustain the
superiority of the enemies numbers. However, notwithstanding all the efforts of
discipline, and the advantages of situation, the weaker side was still obliged
to retire; and, leaving the field of battle to the French, retreated toward
Stade. By taking this route they marched into a country, from whence they could
neither procure provisions, nor yet had an opportunity of attacking the enemy
upon equal terms. Unable, by their situation, to retire; or, by their strength,
to advance; they were compelled to sign a capitulation, by which the whole army
laid down their arms, and were dispersed into different quarters of cantonment.
By this remarkable treaty, which went by the name of the treaty of Closter
Seven, the Hanoverians were quite subdued, and all the French forces let loose
upon the King of Prussia.

The situation of this Monarch was now become desperate; nor could human
prudence foresee how he could extricate himself from his distress. The French
forces, now united, invaded his dominions on one side; the Russians, who, for
some time, had hovered over his dominions in another part, all at once hastened
onward to overwhelm him, marking their way with slaughter and cruelty; a large
body of Austrians entered Silesia, and penetrated as far as Breslau, and
turning to Schweidnitz, sat down before that important fortress, which, after a
long siege, surrendered. Another army of the same nation entered Lusatia, made
themselves masters of Zittau, and pressing forward, laid the capital of Berlin
under contribution. Twenty-two thousand Swedes pierced into Prussian Pomerania,
took the towns of Anclam and Demmein, and exacted tribute from the whole
country. It was in vain that the King of Prussia faced about to every invader,
though his enemies fled before him, while he pursued one body, another
penetrated his territories in the mean time; and his dominions, even in the
midst of victory, were every day contracting. The greatest part were either
taken or laid under contribution, and possessed by his enemies; and he was left
without any alliance or assistance, but what the British parliament might think
proper to afford.

These succors could, at best, have been, for some time, but ineffectual;
however, it was resolved by the English ministry, that something should be
done, and accordingly an enterprise was planned against the French coast,
which, by drawing off their attention from their German enemies, might give the
latter kingdom time to respire, and call off a part of the French to the
defense of their own. Beside this intention, England also hoped to be able to
give a blow to their marine, by destroying such ships as were laid up, or
building in the harbor of Rochfort, the city against which this expedition was
destined. The English ministry had kept that object of their operations a
profound secret; and France was filled with alarms till, at length, it was
found that the fleet appeared before Rochfort, where it spent some time in
deliberating upon what manner to proceed. At last it was resolved to secure the
little island of Aix, an easy conquest, which, while performing, the militia of
the country had time to assemble, and there was an appearance of two camps upon
the shore. The commanders therefore, who, by the badness of the weather, were,
at first, prevented from landing, now feared equal danger from the numbers of
the enemy which were to oppose them. They took into consideration the badness
of the coast, the danger of landing, the time the city had to prepare for a
vigorous defense, and their own unfitness for any other methods to reduce it
but that of a sudden attack. This consideration induced them to desist from
further operations; and they unanimously resolved to return home, without
making any attempt. Nothing could equal the discontent of the English upon
seeing this expedition, of which they had conceived such expectations, return
unsuccessful. It produced, as usual, a contest between those who planned, and
those who were sent to execute it. The military men represented it as useless
and rash; the ministers exclaimed at the timidity and delays of those from
whose vigor success was to be expected. A Court of Enquiry censured the
commander; but a Court Martial acquitted him. This, like almost all the former
operations, served to embitter party, and increase despondence. A great man was
even heard to say, upon a very solemn occasion, that he believed the commanders
of every military operation were resolved upon doing nothing. The tumult of the
people was now sunk from turbulent clamor into sullen discontent; they saw
only gloomy prospects on every side, their armies destroyed, their fleets
unactive, their expeditions ridiculous, and the only ally they had left in
Europe, that would fight their battles, upon the point of being overwhelmed by
superiority of numbers. Such were the beginnings of this war, from which the
timid foreboded national servitude, and a total destruction of all maritime
power, and even the most sanguine only hoped for a peace that might restore
them to former equality.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVII.
SUCH was the ill success of the English arms, and of their allies, at the
beginning of this war. Every day the press, teemed with productions which
either reproached their cowardice, or foreboded their undoing. Yet still the
hopes of the parliament rose with their disappointments, and every resource
seemed to augment with their expenses. Though the supplies for this destructive
and hitherto shameful war, were enormous, yet they were raised as soon as
granted. The officers of the army seemed roused into vigor by the national
reproaches. Asia, however, was the country in which success first began to dawn
upon the British interest, and where we first learned the art of again
conquering the enemy. A war in Europe could not be proclaimed between the two
great powers, without being felt in the remotest parts of the globe. This
immense tract of country, which was the theater of an Asiatic war, comprehends
the whole peninsula of India Proper. On the coasts of this great territory, the
English, the French, and several other powers of Europe, had built forts, with
the original consent of the Mogul, who claims the sovereignty of the whole
Empire. Whatever his right may be to this dominion, his power is scarce felt or
acknowledged in many of the remoter provinces; and even the Governors or
Nabobs, who were originally of his appointment, have rendered themselves
independent, and exert an absolute dominion over their respective territories,
without acknowledging his superiority, either by tribute or homage. In the
contests of these Princes, therefore, instead of having recourse to the Mogul
for redress, they apply to the European powers, whom they can either purchase
or persuade to assist them. The war between England and France, in these remote
parts, first began by each power's siding with two contending Nabobs, and thus,
by degrees, becoming principals in the dispute. The success, on each side, for
some time after the treaty of Aix la Chapelle, seemed doubtful, till, at
length, the affairs of the English seemed to gain the ascendancy by the courage
and conduct of Mr. Clive, a gentleman who first entered into the service of the
company as a clerk, but soon showed his talents more adapted for war. By his
vigilance and courage the province of Arcot was cleared of the enemy, the
French General taken prisoner, and the Nabob, whom the English supported,
reinstated in the government of which he had been formerly deprived. The
French, discouraged by these misfortunes, and sensible of their own inferiority
in this part of the world, sent over a commissary with a view to restore peace;
and a convention between the two companies was accordingly concluded,
importing, that the territories taken on either side since the last peace
should be mutually restored; that the Nabobs advanced by the influence of
either party, should be acknowledged by both; and that, for the future, neither
should interfere in the differences between the Princes of the country. This
cessation, however, was not of long duration; compacts made between trading
companies can never be of long continuance, when there is a prospect of
advantage to either side from their infraction. In a few months after both
sides renewed their operations, no longer as auxiliaries but as rivals in arms
and commerce. What the motives to this infraction were are not sufficiently
known; wherever there is trade there must be a degree of avarice; and that is a
passion too often the parent of injustice and cruelty. Certain it is that the
Viceroy of Bengal, from motives of personal resentment, declared against the
English; and, levying a numerous army, laid siege to Calcutta, one of their
forts, which was in no situation to endure the attack even of barbarians. It
was taken by assault; and the garrison, to the number of one hundred and
forty-six persons, were crowded into a narrow prison called the Black Hole,
about eighteen feet square, without any entrance for air, except by two iron
windows to the west, which, by no means, afforded a sufficient quantity for the
supporting life in such numbers. In such a burning climate it is terrible to
conceive the situation of wretches thus immured and suffocating each other.
Their first effort, upon finding the danger of their horrid confinement, was to
break open the door; but this being impossible, they endeavored to excite the
compassion or the avidity of the guard, by offering him a large sum of money
for his assistance, in removing them to separate prisons, with which he was not
able to comply, as the Viceroy was asleep, and no person durst disturb him.
They were now therefore left without all hopes of relief to perish, and the
whole prison was filled with groans, shrieks, contest and confusion. This
turbulence soon after sunk into languor and despair; and toward morning all
was horrid silence and desolation. Of an hundred and forty-six who had entered
alive, but twenty-three only survived, and of these several died by putrid
fevers upon their being set free.

The reduction of this important fortress served to interrupt the prosperous
successes of the English company; but the fortune of Mr. Clive still vanquished
every obstacle; a fleet, under the command of Admiral Watson, conspired with
his efforts, and helped him in his victories. Angria, a piratical Prince, who
had long annoyed the company's settlements in the neighborhood of Bombay,
first felt the weight of our naval power. This Prince maintained a large number
of galleys, with which he would attack the largest ships, when he found a
proper opportunity; and, by this means, he exacted a tribute from every
European power for a permission to trade. To subdue such a dangerous enemy to
commerce, Admiral Watson and Colonel Clive sailed into his harbor of Geriah,
though they sustained a warm fire as they passed, and soon threw all his fleet
and his fort into flames. The next day the fort surrendered at discretion,
where the conquerors found a large quantity of warlike stores, and effects to
the value of one hundred and thirty thousand pounds.

From this conquest Mr. Clive went on to take revenge for the treatment of the
English at Calcutta, and about the beginning of December arrived at Balasore,
in the kingdom of Bengal. There was but small opposition made to the fleet, or
the army, till they came before Calcutta, the scene of former cruelty; but as
soon as the Admiral, with two ships, arrived before the town, he received a
furious fire from all the batteries. This, however, he returned with still
greater execution, and, in less than two hours, the place was abandoned. Thus,
by the conquest of this and the former fortress, the English became possessed
of the two strongest settlements on the banks of the Ganges. Soon after these
successes, Hughly, a city of great trade was reduced with as little difficulty,
and all the Viceroy of Bengal's storehouses and granaries were destroyed. This
barbarous Prince, incensed at these losses, assembled an army of ten thousand
horse, and fifteen thousand foot, fully resolved to expel the English out of
his dominions. Upon the first intelligence of his march, Colonel Clive begged
from the Admiral a reinforcement of men from the ships; and six hundred seamen
were accordingly soon added to his little army. The numerous forces of the
Viceroy of Bengal appeared, and Colonel Clive advanced in three columns to
attack him. But, though the forces were so seemingly disproportioned, with
respect to number, the victory soon declared in favor of the English
commander. In fact, what could the timid Asiatic soldier do against European
troops, hardened by war, and inured to all the vicissitudes of climate. All the
customs, habits, opinions, of the Asiatics tend to enfeeble the body, and
effeminate the mind. When we conceive a body of men led up to the attack,
dressed in long silk garments, with no other courage but that inspired by
opium; with no other fears from defeat but that of changing their mode of
slavery; their chief commander mounted on an elephant, and consequently a more
conspicuous object for aim; their artillery drawn by oxen, impatient and
furious upon the slightest wound; every soldier utterly unacquainted with that
cool intrepidity which provides against danger, and only taught to fight by the
same arts that raise their passions. If we consider all these circumstances, it
will be no way surprising if one or two thousand Europeans should easily
discomfit thirty thousand Indians. And all the heroism of a Cyrus, or an
Alexander, in gaining such disproportioned victories, will no longer be the
subject of admiration.

A victory so easily acquired by a foreign enemy, soon rendered the Viceroy of
Bengal contemptible to his subjects at home. His present cowardice rendered him
despicable; his former insolence and cruelty odious. A conspiracy was projected
against him by Alikan, his prime minister, and the English having private
intimations of the design, resolved to seize the opportunity of seconding it
with all their endeavors. Accordingly Colonel Clive marched forward, took the
town of Cutwa in his march, and soon came up with the Viceroy's army; and,
after a short contest, put the whole to flight, with terrible slaughter.
Alikan, who had first incited his master to this undertaking, had hitherto
concealed his attachments, either through fear or perfidy; but, after this
victory, he openly espoused the cause of the English, and was therefore
solemnly proclaimed Viceroy of Bengal, Bahar, and Oriza, in the room of the
former Viceroy, who was as solemnly deposed, and soon after put to death by his
successor. The new Viceroy was not insensible of the gratitude he owed the
English, for their assistance in his promotion. He granted liberally all their
demands, satisfied them even to the most extended wish of avarice, and took
every method to demonstrate his pride in their alliance.

Yet not the Indians alone, but the French also, submitted to Colonel Clive's
assiduity and courage, seconded by the endeavors of the Admirals Watson and
Pocock. Chadenagore, a French settlement higher up the river than Calcutta, of
great strength, and the most important of any possessed by that nation in the
bay of Bengal, submitted to the English arms. The goods and money found in the
place were considerable; but the chief damage the French sustained was, in the
ruin of their head settlement on the Ganges, by which they had long divided the
commerce of this part of India. Thus, in one campaign, the English, in some
measure, became possessors of an immense tract of country, superior in wealth,
fertility, extent, and number of inhabitants, to many of Europe. Above two
millions sterling were paid to the company and sufferers at Calcutta; the
soldiers and seamen shared six hundred thousand pounds, and the English forces
became too formidable for resistance. Yet, perhaps, this remote power will, one
day, either serve to drain from the mother country all its useful hands, or our
victories will serve to teach the native barbarians to avail themselves of
their numbers, and, by being frequently defeated, they will, at last, learn to
conquer.

The success of the English was not a little alarming to the French ministry at
home; and it is believed that even the Dutch themselves entertained some
jealousy of their growing greatness. A considerable reinforcement was therefore
sent from France, under the command of General Lally, an Irishman, who was
reckoned one of the bravest, yet the most whimfical man in the French service.
He had been, from his earliest years, bred a soldier of fortune, and carried
the military spirit of honor to its utmost limits. Under his guidance the
French affairs seemed, for some time, to wear a better face; he took fort St.
David's, plundered a town belonging to the King of Tanjour, in alliance with
the English, and after laid siege to his capital. Failing in his design upon
this city, he entered the province of Arcot, and prepared for laying siege to
Madrass, the chief settlement of our company, upon the coast of Coromandel. In
the siege of this important fortress, a greater variety of difficulties
presented than he had expected. The artillery of the garrison was well managed,
while, on the other side, the French acted with the utmost timidity; it was in
vain that their commander exhorted them to proceed, though a breach was made,
and lay open for fifteen days, not one of them dared to venture out to the
assault. Beside this, they were ill supplied with provisions; and the arrival
of a reinforcement in the garrison soon after, served to banish all hopes of
success. After a brisk fire they raised the siege; and this miscarriage so
entirely depressed the ardour of the enemy, that they appeared quite dispirited
in almost every ensuing engagement. In this manner, therefore, their affairs
went on declining, not less by land than by sea. There were several engagements
between the two fleets, in which the French, though superior in number of ships
and men, always declined a decisive engagement.

But the French were not the only enemies the English had to fear in this part
of the world; the jealousy of the Dutch was excited by our repeated success,
and the late extension of our power. As this dispute, however trifling it may
seem, may, one day, be of greater consequence than it appears at present, I
shall be more particular in my relation of it.

Under a pretense of reinforcing their garrisons in Bengal, the Dutch equipped
an armament of seven ships, which was ordered to sail up the Ganges, and render
their fort at a place called Chincura so formidable as to be able to bid
defiance to the power of Britain, and thus secure to themselves the trade for
saltpeter, which this place afforded. This design, however, Colonel Clive
thought incumbent on him, if possible, to defeat; and sending the Dutch
commander a letter, he informed him that he could not permit his landing, and
marching forces to Chincura. To this message the Dutchman replied, that he had
no such designs as were imputed to him; and he only begged liberty to land his
troops to refresh them; a request which was readily granted. He made these
concessions, however, only till he knew that the ships which were to second his
operations, were come up the river, and then, throwing off the mask, he began
his march to Chincura, and took several small vessels belonging to the English,
to retaliate for the affront he pretended to have sustained in being denied
permission to proceed. Whether, upon this occasion the Calcutta Indiaman was
sent out to interrupt their progress, or was only pursuing its way homeward, is
not clearly known; but certain it is, that the Dutch commander threatened to
sink it, if it presumed to pass him. The English captain seeing them point
their guns, as if they really resolved to put their threats in execution,
returned to Calcutta, where two other India ships lay at anchor, and reported
his adventure to Colonel Clive, who instantly ordered the three Indiamen to
prepare for battle. The Dutch fleet were not remiss in advancing to meet them.
After a few broadsides, however, the Dutch Commodore struck, and the rest of
his fleet followed the example. The victory being thus obtained without any
loss to the English, Captain Wilson, who commanded in the expedition, took
possession of the prizes which had greatly suffered, and the crews were sent
prisoners to the English fort. In the mean time their land forces, which
amounted to eleven hundred men, were totally defeated by Colonel Ford, sent
upon that duty by Clive. A considerable part were killed, and the rest were
made prisoners of war. During this contest, the Nabob preserved a suspicious
neutrality, ready, as it should seem, to join with the conquerors. Fortune,
however, no sooner determined in favor of the English, than he offered them
his services, and professed himself ready to demolish the Dutch fortification
of Chincura. This contest was represented in very different lights to the
respective governments at home; the Dutch declaimed against the English,
oppressing all who attempted to trade in the Indies; while the English, on the
other hand, reminded the Dutch of their former cruelties, and of their desire
of gain, even at the expense of every moral obligation. However, soon after a
negotiation ensued; the Dutch wisely gave way to a power they were unable to
withstand. A treaty was concluded, and peace was restored, seemingly to the
satisfaction of both parties. Such is the present situation of this contest,
which, probably, contains the seeds of future dissension. The Dutch will, upon
all occasions, think it allowable to increase their power in India to
whatsoever pitch they think proper; and the English will ever find it their
interest to repel them. It may thus happen, that the amity of the two powers in
Europe will not be sufficient to preserve unanimity in so distant a part of the
world. In this manner, while Great Britain puts an end to one war, she often
lays the foundation for another; for, extended Empire ever produces an
increasing necessity to defend it.

Our success against the French on the coast of Coromandel was not less
conspicuous; our troops were headed by Colonel Coote, a native of Ireland, a
man of prudence and bravery; he marched against General Lally, took the city of
Wandewash in his way, reduced Carangoly, a fortress commanded by Colonel O
Kenedy; and, at length, came up with the French General, who was equally
desirous of the engagement. It is remarkable enough, that the commanders, on
either side, were countrymen; but this did not, in the least, abate their
attachment to the different crowns they served. In the morning early the French
advanced within three quarters of a mile of the English line, and the
cannonading began with great fury on both sides; the engagement continued with
much obstinacy till about two in the afternoon, when the French gave way, and
fled toward their camp; which, however, they as quickly abandoned, and left
their cannon, and the field of battle, to the conquerors. Their losing the city
of Arcot was the consequence of this victory; and nothing now remained to them
of all their vast possessions in India but Pondicherry, their strongest,
largest, and most beautiful settlement in that part of the world. This capital
of the French Indian power, in the days of its prosperity, exceeded all other
European settlements there, in trade, opulence, and splendour; and was still the
repository for all the French wealth, which remained after repeated defeats. As
soon as the fortresses adjacent to this important place were reduced, Colonel
Coote sat down before it, resolved upon the blockade by land, while Admiral
Stevens shut up their harbor by sea. A regular siege was, at that time,
impracticable; from the periodical rains which in that climate were soon
expected to obstruct such operations. These disadvantages were even sufficient
to repress any attempts whatsoever; but, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
climate, the English commander continued before the place for full seven
months. Neither rains nor storms were, in the least, able to abate their
assiduity; they continued the siege, and pressed the garrison in such a manner
that they were reduced to the most extreme distress. Lally, however, was
resolutely bent on suffering every calamity rather than yield this last stake
of French power in India, though his soldiers were obliged to feed on dogs and
cats, and even bought such wretched provisions extremely dear, (eight crowns
having been given for the flesh of a dog) yet still he determined to hold out.
In the midst of this distress, fortune seemed to give an opportunity of relief,
had it been properly seconded. In the beginning of January one of those
terrible storms which are common in those climates, but of whose violence we
can have but little idea in Europe, wrecked a large part of the English fleet
that was blocking up the harbor of Pondicherry. This was a blow which once
more elevated the hopes of the despairing garrison. The General now flattered
himself with the hope of being supplied with provisions; and, once more,
animated his soldiers, long sunk with disease, famine, fatigue, and
uninterrupted adversity. He immediately wrote to one of the French residents at
a Dutch settlement sor instant assistance; his eager impatience appears in the
letter he sent. The English squadron is no more, Sir. Of the twelve ships they
had in our road, seven are lost, crews and all; the other four dismasted, and
no more than one frigate has escaped -- lose not an instant in sending boats
after boats loaded with rice. -- The saving of Pondicherry has been in your
power once already; this opportunity neglected, the fault will be all yours.
Offer great rewards. -- In four days I expect seventeen thousand Morattoes. --
In short, risque all, attempt all, force all, and send us some rice, should it
be but half a garse at a time. This singular letter, however, was intercepted;
and, in less than four days, he had the mortification to behold Admiral Stevens
again appearing in the harbor, who had repaired his losses with all possible
celerity; and the blockade now became as complete as ever. Still, however, he
made no proposal to surrender; the siege was carried on by his countryman with
redoubled alacrity; and, at length, he found his troops half consumed with
fatigue and famine, a breach made in the rampart, and not more than one day's
provision of any kind remaining. He was now reduced to an extremity that would
admit of no hesitation; a signal was therefore made to cease hostilities; the
principal of the Jesuits, together with two civilians, came out, and offered
terms of capitulation. Lally, however, could not be prevailed upon to offer any
terms; he sent a paper, filled with reproaches, against the English, to Colonel
Coote; and alleged, that he would not treat with an enemy upon the honorable
terms of war, who had already forfeited his honor in several instances. He
therefore suffered the English troops to take possession of the place, but
refused to surrender it in the usual forms. This conquest terminated the power
of France in India; the whole trade of that vast peninsula, from the Indus to
the Ganges, became our own. The Princes of the country knew the English force,
and learned to fear it. Since that time nothing considerable has been done
against us. Our East India company have become the arbiters of Empire. The
Mogul himself has been defeated, and taken prisoner. The British Empire begins
to vie even with that of ancient Rome; the extent of its dominions on land is
as wide, and its force at sea is infinitely greater. Happy if we know when to
bound our successes; happy if we can distinguish between victories and
advantages; if we can be convinced that when a nation shines brightest with
conquest, it may then, like a wasting taper, be only hastening to decay.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVIII.
VICTORY, which thus first dawned upon us, from the East, seemed to extend even
to Europe and America. But some steps led to these successes which had been
long wished for; and, at length, were effected. The affairs of war were
directed by a ministry which seemed utterly unequal to the weight and
importance of such a charge; they were but feebly held together among each
other, and clamoured against by the united voice of the people. It had long
been their method to rule by party; and, surrounding the throne, it was said,
they attempted only to fill the royal ear with whatever suggestions they
thought most to their interests. When any new measure was proposed, which could
not receive their approbation; or any new member was introduced into
government, whom they did not nominate, it was their method to throw up their
places with a secret view of resuming them with greater luster. Thus all hope
of preferment was to be expected only from them; public favors were conferred
only for private services; they were thought to govern in the senate and in the
field; the strength of the crown was actually declining; that of the people was
scarce any, while aristocracy filled up every avenue to the throne with pride,
ignorance, and faction.

The state of the King and nation, at that time, was truly deplorable; the
defeat of Braddock in America; the loss of Oswego; the delay of armaments; the
absurd destination of fleets and armies, all served to reduce the people almost
to a state of desperation, and brought addresses to the throne from every part
of the kingdom. The general voice was, at length, too loud not to reach the
throne; and the ministry were, at length, obliged to admit some gentlemen into
a share of the government, whose talents and integrity might, in some measure,
counterbalance their own deficience. At the head of these newly introduced were
Mr. Pit and Mr. Leg; the former of these was appointed Secretary of State,
the other Chancellor of the Exchequer. To draw the characters of men still
living, would necessarily subject me to the imputation of adulation or satyr;
it is enough to say, that the people had high expectations from their
abilities; and, in the end, they were not disappointed.

The pleasure of the nation, however, was but of short continuance; a ministry
composed of such jarring principles could not long continue united, being
constituted of persons espousing different measures, and actuated by different
motives. The old juncto courted the Sovereign's favor by their pretended
attachment to his foreign dominions; the new clamoured against all continental
connexions as utterly incompatible with the interest of the nation. Both,
perhaps, might have been wrong; but it is obvious, that these sentiments were
sufficient to sink the latter in the royal esteem; and this dislike was
artfully kept up, and increased by their old rivals in power. A few months,
therefore, after Mr. Pit had been put into office, he was obliged to resign
the seals, by his Majesty's command; and Mr. Leg was dismissed from being
Chancellor of the Exchequer. The old ministry now thought themselves secure in
the unmolested possession of former power; but this very step which they took
for their own security turned out to them as unfortunate as those they planned
for the public were unsuccessful. The whole nation seemed to rise up as one man
in vindication of that part of the ministry that was lately excluded. And the
King, at length, thought proper to comply with the general solicitation. Mr.
Pit and Mr. Leg were again restored, and a train of successes soon began to
dignify their designs.

For some time, however, the measures planned by the former ministry were
pursued in America; and though the English were superior to the enemy, yet
still they felt all the inconvenience of irresolute councils and ill-planned
operations. Our women and children in that part of the world were exposed to
the unparalleled cruelty of the Indian savages; and, what is still more
remarkable, two thousand Britons with arms in their hands, continued tame
spectators of these inhumanities. Bad success ever produces complaint on all
sides; and England now heard nothing but invective and accusation. The Generals
sent over to manage the operations of war, loudly accused the timidity and the
slowness of the natives, who were to unite in their own defense; the natives,
on the contrary, as warmly expostulated against the pride, avarice, or
incapacity of those sent over to command them. General Shirley, who was
appointed to that command, had been superseded by Lord London; and this
nobleman soon after returning to England, three several commanders were put at
the head of separate operations; the most important being that designed against
Cape Breton, was commanded by General Amherst. The taking possession of this
island, and its fortress, was a conquest greatly wished by all our colonies, as
it had always been a convenient harbor to the enemy, which, from thence
annoyed our trade with impunity. It was also a convenient situation for
carrying on their fishery; a branch of commerce of the utmost benefit to the
French nation. The fortress of Louisburg was strengthened with all the
assistance of art; the garrison was numerous; the commander vigilant; and every
precaution taken to prevent a descent. An account of the operations of a siege
is tedious; be it sufficient to say, that the English surmounted every obstacle
with the most amazing intrepidity; their former timidity seemed now converted
into persevering resolution; the place was surrendered by capitulation; and our
troops, long used to disappointment and repulse began to boast of victory in
their turn.

Two other operations were carried on in America at the same time, the one
under General Abercrombie, against Crown Point and Ticonderago; the other, more
to the southward, against fort Du Quesne; the latter expedition was successful;
but that against Crown Point and Ticonderago was attended with its usual bad
fortune. This was now the second time that the English army had attempted to
penetrate into those hideous wilds by which nature had secured the French
encroachments in that remote part of America; Braddock was fallen in the
attempt; his rashness contributed to his defeat; and too much caution, perhaps,
was the fault of his successor. Much time was spent in marching to the place of
action; and the enemy were thus perfectly prepared to give the English troops a
warm reception. They were found entrenched under the fort of Ticonderago,
behind a breast-work raised eight feet high, and still farther secured by
felled trees, with their branches pointing outward. These difficulties,
however, the English attempted to surmount; but as the enemy, being secure
themselves, took aim at leisure; a terrible carnage of the assailants ensued,
and the General, after repeated efforts, was obliged to order a retreat. The
English army, however, was still superior to that of the enemy, and might, it
was supposed, have gone onward with success, if supported by their artillery,
which had not yet arrived; but the General felt, too sensibly, the terrors of
the late defeat, to remain in the vicinity of a victorious enemy; he therefore
reimbarked his troops, and returned to his camp at Lake George, from whence he
had taken his departure.

The success of this campaign, however, was, upon the whole, greatly in favor
of the English. The taking of fort Du Quesne served to remove from our colonies
the terror of the incursions of barbarians, and interrupted that continued
correspondence, which by a chain of forts, one part of the French settlements
had with the other. The ministry too discovered a spirit of vigorous resolution
hitherto unknown, in this part of the world; and the next campaign promised
more brilliant successes.

Accordingly, in the opening of the next session, 1759, the ministry seemed
sensible that a single effort carried in such wide extended dominions, would
never bring the enemy into subjection; it was therefore resolved to attack them
in several different parts of this extensive Empire at once. It was therefore
proposed to attack the French in all their places of strength at the same time
Preparations were therefore made, and expeditions went forward against three
different parts of the northern continent of America. General Amherst,
commander in chief, with a body of twelve thousand men, was to attack Crown
Point that had hitherto been the reproach of the English army. General Wolf
was, at the opposite quarter, to enter the river St. Lawrence, and undertake
the siege of Quebec, the capital of the French dominions in this part of the
world, while General Prideaux and Sir William Johnson were to attempt a fort
near the cataract of Niagara. This last expedition was the first successful.
The fort of Niagara was a place of great importance, and served to command all
the communication between the northern and western French settlements. The
siege was soon commenced by the English, but General Prideaux was killed in the
trenches by the bursting of a cohorn; so that the whole success of the
expedition fell to General Johnson, and his good fortune. He omitted nothing to
promote the vigorous measures of his predecessor, but added all his own
popularity. The French knew the importance of this fort, and attempted to
relieve it. Johnson attacked them with his usual intrepidity and success; in
less than an hour their whole army was put to the route, and the garrison,
beholding the defeat of their countrymen, surrendered prisoners of war. Nor was
General Amherst less successful, though, without meeting an enemy, upon his
march to Crown Point, he found both that fort and Ticonderago deserted and
destroyed. There now, therefore, remained but one grand and decisive blow to
put all North America in possession of the English. This was the taking of
Quebec, a city handsomely built, populous, and flourishing. Admiral Saunders
commanded the naval part of the expedition; that by land was committed to the
conduct of General Wolf. This young soldier, who was not yet thirty-five, had
distinguished himself on many former occasions, particularly in the siege of
Louisburg, a part of the success of which was justly ascribed to him, who, unin
debted to family or connexions had raised himself by merit to his present
command. The war in this part of the world had hitherto been carried on with
extreme barbarity; and each side seemed to have adopted the savage manners of
the Indians, whose country they disputed. Wolf, however, disdained these base
proceedings, and carried on all the terrors of war with the humanity of a truly
civilized European. A description of the siege of this city may instruct a
soldier, but can scarcely inform a citizen; be it sufficient to observe, that
its beginning appeared extremely unpromising to the besiegers; and repeated
repulses even served to abate the hopes of the commander. I know, said he, that
the affairs of Great Britain require the most vigorous measures; but then the
courage of an handful of brave men should be exerted only where there is some
hope of a favorable event. At present the difficulties are so various that I
am at a loss how to determine. However, he resolved, though now sinking under
fatigue and sickness, to make one vigorous attempt before he gave up all; and
accordingly, in the night, part of his troops, with great difficulty made
themselves masters of an hill that commanded the town. A battle ensued;
Montcalm, the French commander, resolved not to survive the defeat of his
country. Wolf, on the other side, resolved to conquer or die. Both commanders
had their wish; both fell; but the English were victorious. The circumstances
attending the death of Wolf served to give an example like that of the noble
Theban. He, in the beginning of the engagement, received a wound in the hand,
which he dissembled, wrapping it round with his handkerchief, to stop the
effusion of blood; he advanced with unconcern: a second ball, was more fatal;
it pierced his breast, so that, unable to proceed, he leaned on the shoulder of
a soldier who was near him. Now, struggling in the agonies of death, and just
departing, he heard a voice cry, they run; he seemed to revive a moment at the
sound, and, asking who ran, was informed the French; expressing his wonder that
they ran so soon, and unable to gaze any longer, he sunk on the soldier's
breast, and his last words were, I die happy. Perhaps the loss of such a man
was greater to the nation than the conquering of all Canada was advantageous;
but it is the misfortune of humanity, that we can never know true greatness
till that moment when we are going to lose it.

The surrender of the city was the consequence of this victory, and, with it,
the total cession of all Canada. The French, it is true, made, in the ensuing
season, a vigorous effort to retake it; but, by the good conduct of our
Governor, the town held out till relieved by an English fleet, under the
command of Lord Colville. Thus did this campaign make ample reparation for all
the losses that had been hitherto sustained by the English. The French had now
no force capable of making any resistance; they held out the war now, not with
hopes of victory, but honorable capitulation; one place after another was
invaded; Montreal, at last, surrendered; and, in a short time, a country, which
their own writers have represented as being more extensive than the Roman
Empire, fell totally under the power of his Britannic Majesty.

How far the extending dominion tends to the increasing the strength of a
nation, is an object worthy consideration. The splendor of victory should
never dazzle the eye of reason. No people ever could call their country
powerful, if it were not populous. For political force depends upon the small
frontier to be defended; and the vicinity of an army to every place to be
invaded; but extended Empire takes away both these advantages, and, before the
soldier can traverse half his proper territories, his country may have already
felt all the horrors of invasion. Whatever joy therefore our country might have
felt at these immense acquisitions, of remote territory, I own it gives me no
very pleasing prospect. The manufactures, the trade, and the riches of these
distant countries, can never recompense for the continual drain of useful and
industrious subjects, that must be derived from the mother country to people
them. Wherever the lower sort of people in any kingdom can fly from labor,
they will be ready to go; yet, upon the industry, and the valor of these
alone, every kingdom must hope for security. Not the effeminate, and the
luxurious, can defend their country in the day of battle; they may increase
timidity by their example, but opulence can never give true relief. The
Spaniards and the Portuguese were much more powerful before they divided their
strength into all the torrid climates of Southern America. The state thus got
riches, but lost men; they had gold, but could not regain industry. Thus are
their nations now incapable of defending themselves against powerful foreign
invasion. The immense wealth of the Indies that every year comes home to their
ports goes to enrich a few; their subjects are either in the extremes of wealth
or poverty; the rich have only slaves beneath them, who hate those for whom
they must labor; the poor have no acquisitions, nor property, to defend; so
that their armies are composed either of wretches pressed into the service, who
only seek for opportunities not to fight, but to fly; or of men, rich and
noble, courageous from pride, yet weak from luxury. Such is not, as yet, the
case of England, nor will ever be, if a passion for conquest is not mistaken
for national prosperity.

I am, etc.

LETTER XXIX.
THE success of our arms in America was achieved by moderate efforts; on the
contrary, in Europe the efforts we made, and the operations of our great ally
the King of Prussia, were astonishing, yet produced no very signal effects.
Safety was all that could be expected; and this was secured contrary to all
human expectation. You have just seen that Monarch surrounded by enemies; the
greatest and most formidable powers of Europe; you have seen almost the whole
power of the continent united against, and hovering over, his devoted
dominions; and the only allies that remained to him bound by treaty to retire,
and give him no assistance. In this terrible situation he still adhered to his
fortitude, and, relying on his natural subjects alone, resolved never to
abandon his claims. Such was the desperate condition of his affairs; yet they
were still rendered more hopeless, when he was informed that his only friend,
the Monarch of that generous people which had hitherto supplied him with money
and stores, was going to forsake him, and leave him to irremediable ruin. It
was thus he expostulated with the doubting Monarch upon this occasion: Is it
possible that your Majesty can have so little fortitude and constancy, as to be
dispirited by a small reverse of fortune. Are our affairs so ruinous that they
cannot be repaired? Consider the step you have made me undertake, and remember
that you are the cause of all my misfortunes. I should never have abandoned my
former alliances but for your flattering assurances. I do not now repent of the
treaty concluded between us; but I entreat you will not ingloriously leave me
at the mercy of my enemies, after having brought upon me all the powers of
Europe. The French and Imperialists, after a successful summer campaign, were,
at this time, which was the depth of winter, sat down to the siege of Leipsic.
His Prussian Majesty dreaded the capture of this important city, and soon,
unexpectedly, seemed to rise up before it. Such was the terror of his arms,
even vanquished as he had been, that his approach raised the siege, and the
French, though superior in number, retreated. He, at length, overtook them at a
village called Rosbach, and gained so complete a victory, that night alone
saved their whole army from destruction. The Austrians were, in another part of
the Empire, still victorious, and had taken the Prince of Bevern, his
generalissimo, prisoner. The King, after a dreadful march of two hundred miles,
in the depth of winter, came up with them near Breslau, disposed his inferior
forces with his usual judgment, and obtained another bloody victory, in which
he took not less than fifteen thousand prisoners. Breslau, with a garrison of
ten thousand men, surrendered soon after, These successes dispirited the enemy,
and raised his allies to new hopes.

After the capitulation of Closter-Severn was signed, between the Duke of
Cumberland and the Duke of Richelieu, both sides began to complain of
infractions. The Hanoverians accused the rapacity of the French General, and
the insolent brutality of his soldiers; while the French retorted the charge of
insurrection against them, and began to think of treating as a conquered enemy
those whom they had only bound by treaty as neutrals. Treaties have never been
preserved longer than interest or compulsion bound them; political faith is a
word without meaning; the French oppressed the Hanoverians; the latter resumed
their arms; and each side complained, as usual, of infraction. A General was
not long wanting to assemble the collecting army. Prince Ferdinand of Brunswic
put himself at their head, began by skirmishing with success; and, at last,
were in a capacity of becoming formidable to their late victors. From this time
the King of Prussia sought the enemy upon more equal terms than ever; often
victorious, sometimes repulsed; but ever active and formidable. To name his
victories, the towns he took, the dangers he escaped, and the losses he
suffered, would take up more time than I would choose to grant to such accounts,
or you should bestow. Never was the art of war carried to such a pitch as by
him. In this war Europe saw, with astonishment, campaigns carried on in the
midst of winter; great and bloody battles fought, yet producing no visible
advantage to the victors. At no time, since the days of heroism, were such
numbers destroyed, so many towns taken, so many skirmishes fought, such
stratagems practiced, or such intrepidity shown. Armies now were considered as
composing one single machine, directed by the General, and animated with one
will. From the commentary of these campaigns, succeeding Generals will take
their lessons for devastation, and improve in the arts of increasing human
calamity.

England was, all this time, happily retired from the calamities which drenched
the rest of Europe in blood; yet, from her natural military eagerness, seemed
desirous of sharing those dangers of which she was only a spectator. This
passion for carrying on a continental war, was not less pleasing to the Monarch
from his native attachments, than to the people from their natural propensity
to arms. As soon as it was known that Prince Ferdinand had put himself at the
head of the Hanoverian army, his Britannic Majesty, in a speech at the opening
of the session of parliament, observed, that the late successes in Germany had
given an happy turn to his affairs, which it would be necessary to improve. The
commons therefore granted liberal supplies both for the service of the King of
Prussia, and for enabling the army formed in the Electorate of Hanover, to act
vigorously in conjunction with him. Soon after it was considered, that men
would be a more grateful supply than money. The minister who had first come
into power and popularity, by opposing such measures, was now prevailed upon to
enter into them with even greater ardour than any of his predecessors. The
hopes of putting a speedy end to this war, by vigorous measures, his
connexions, and, perhaps, the pleasure he found in giving his Majesty pleasure,
incited him eagerly into a continental war. It is certain, no minister could
more powerfully second a warlike Monarch's intentions; that spirit of
enterprise which had, in a measure, taken birth with his administration, he
could now direct at will. The passion for military honor seemed diffused
through all ranks of people; and it only wanted a channel in which to flow. In
order to indulge this general inclination, the Duke of Marlborough was sent
into Germany with a small body of British forces to assist Prince Ferdinand,
where they behaved with bravery, and conspired in promoting that Prince's
successes. Each victory they gained, however, only served as a pretext to call
over new forces from Britain, while the English ministry were taught to believe
that every last battle would be decisive. The battle of Crevelt was fought, in
which the Hanoverians and English had the advantage; but it produced no effect.
The victory of Minden followed; but laurels seemed to be all that England
reaped from the conquered field. After these two victories it was supposed,
that one reinforcement more of British forces would terminate the war in our
favor; a reinforcement was therefore sent. The British troops in Germany now
amounted to above thirty thousand men, yet no advantage of any consequence was
the result of this formidable assistance. War was the trade of some Generals,
and, it must be allowed, a gainful trade it was. Let me therefore, here again,
pass over this continued repetition of marchings, skirmishes, and rencounters,
nor load the page with names of German Generals, too difficult to be pronounced
by an English tongue, and equally grating to a patriot ear. The victories of
either side might, in fact, be considered as a compact by which something was
to be lost on either side, and no advantage to be acquired. The English, at
length, began to open their eyes to their own interest; nor could all the
splendours of victory so far blind them, as not to see that they were waging
unequal war, and assuming new loads of taxes for conquests they could neither
preserve nor enjoy. Such were the growing discontents of the people, when the
King, who had inspired these measures, unexpectedly died. On the twenty-fifth
day of October, George II, without any previous disorder, was found by his
domestic servants, expiring in his chamber. He had arisen at his usual hour,
and observed to his attendants, that as the weather was fine, he would walk
out. In a few minutes after this, being left alone, he was heard to fall down
upon the floor. The noise of his fall brought his attendants into the room, who
lifted him into bed, where he desired, in a faint voice, that the Princess
Amelia might be sent for; but before her arrival he expired. George II. died in
the 77th year of his age, and the 33d of his reign, in the midst of victory;
and, at that very period, when the universal enthusiasm of conquest began to
subside for more sober reflections. If any Monarch was happy in the peculiar
mode and time of his death, it was he. The factions which had been nursing in
his reign, had not yet come to maturity; and all their virulence threatened to
fall upon his successor. He was himself of no shining abilities; and,
consequently, while he was suffered to guide his German dominions, he entrusted
the care of Britain to his ministers at home. However, as we stand too near
this Monarch to view his real character without partiality, take the following
characters of him, by two writers of opposite sentiments.

"As to the extent of his understanding (says one) or the splendor of his
virtue, we rather wish for opportunities of praising, than undertake the task
ourselves. His public character was marked with a predilection for his native
country, to which he sacrificed all other motives."

On the other hand, says his panegyrist, "On whatever side we look upon his
character, we shall find ample matter for just and unsuspected praise. None of
his predecessors in the throne of England lived to so great an age, or enjoyed
longer felicity. His subjects were still improving under him in commerce and
arts; and his own economy set a prudent example to the nation, which, however,
they did not follow. He was, in his temper, sudden and violent; but this,
though it influenced his behavior, made no change in his conduct, which was
generally guided by reason. He was plain and direct in his intentions, true to
his word, steady in his favor and protection to his servants; nor parting even
with his ministers till compelled to it by the violence of faction. In short,
through the whole of life he appeared rather to live for the cultivation of
useful virtues than splendid ones; and, satisfied with being good, left others
their unenvied greatness."

I am, etc.

LETTER XXX.
I Am sorry that praise bestowed on living merit is often found to injure the
goodness it applauds. The character of the successor of George the second
deserves the warmest panegyric; and all who love their country only wish for a
continuance of that spirit, and that virtue which has hitherto appeared in him.
Never did Monarch come to the throne at a more critical period; the nation,
flushed with conquest, yet tired of war; expecting the lowest submission from
their humbled enemies, yet murmuring under the immense load of their taxes. One
part of the people acquiring immense wealth by the continuance of hostilities;
another reduced almost to bankruptcy. Besides this, he saw the throne hedged
round by ignorance and faction, men intent only on their own interests, and
willing to persuade Monarchy that whatever conduced to their own wishes was
directed for the welfare of the kingdom. It was in this disposition of things,
that George III. came to the crown. The kingdom began to divide into two
parties; or, more properly speaking, the very same individuals seemed to wear,
at once, a face of joy and discontent. They felt all the triumphs of their
successes, but justly dreaded the consequences of an expensive continuance of
them. The numberless victories they gained by sea continued to keep them in
spirits, and induced them to supply the immense expenses of the year with
cheerfulness. During the whole period of the war succeeding the execution of
Admiral Byng, nothing could be carried on with more spirit and resolution, than
all our naval engagements. In every enterprise the superior bravery, skill, and
dexterity of the English were obvious. Often with forces very much
disproportioned, they took their adversaries ships, and effectually disabled
the enemies force by sea.

No history can furnish examples of such numerous fleets, or more active
commanders. This desire for victory seemed even to diffuse itself to the lowest
officers; and the captains of privateers seemed as much enamoured of conquest
as with a desire of gain. The Admirals, Hawke, How, Boscawen, Pocock, etc.
were always victorious; the Captains, Tyrrel, Foster, Gilchrist, Lockhart, and
others, often fought at a disadvantage, but never without honor. As an
instance of the intrepid spirit of our seamen in this war, I shall mention one
action which posterity, if it were only singly supported, might look upon as
incredible. The annals of mankind cannot show an effort of more desperate
courage than was exerted under the command of captain William Death, commander
of the Terrible privateer. He had, in the beginning of his cruize, made prize
of a rich merchant-ship, and with this was returning home to England in
triumph, when he had the misfortune to fall in with the Vengeance privateer of
St. Malo, much his superior in force, he having but twenty-six guns, the enemy
thirty-six, and a proportionable number of men. The Terrible's prize was soon
taken, and converted against her; but, though so unequally matched, captain
Death maintained a furious engagement that cannot be paralleled in the annals
of any country. The French commander and his second were killed, with two
thirds of his company; but much more dreadful was the slaughter on board the
Terrible. When the enemy boarded it, they only found one scene of slaughter,
silence, and desolation. Of two hundred men only sixteen were found remaining,
and the ship itself so shattered as scarcely to be kept above water.

Such were the dear-bought naval victories of France; and such was the
obstinacy of the English, even when defeated, that the court of Versailles, at
length, seemed to demand peace at any rate. To this request the English were
ready to accede, and Plenipotentiaries were sent from either court to negociate
so wished-for a reconciliation. France sent to London Mr. Bussy, a man rather
skilled in the arts of negotiation than the open integrity becoming the
minister of a great nation. England sent over, in exchange, Mr. Stanley, to
Paris.

It seemed to be a fundamental principle in this treaty, which, however, proved
ineffectual, that each country was to be considered as possessors of their
respective conquests; and that if any such were to be given up on one side, it
was to be only in exchange for such as had been made by the other. Upon these
terms it is obvious, that the English were likely to be great gainers by a
treaty, as they had taken several places and dominions from the French, and had
lost only Minorca. Whether the French had a real desire to proceed upon such
terms is uncertain; however, they soon gave the English ministry sufficient
reasons to be dissatisfied with their proceedings. Mr. Pit, who had for a long
time been successful, actuated all the English measures, and guided their
councils, had ever disdained that pedantry of political refinement, of which
others so vainly boasted; he negociated therefore in a plain simple manner; his
guide, sincerity; and his only object, his country's good. Several points were
agreed upon between each nation, that gave great hopes that an accommodation
might speedily be the result. The French agreed to give up all Canada, a fort
upon the river Senegal in Africa, and to restore Minorca. The chief objects in
debate were, the privilege they claimed of continuing to fish upon the Banks of
Newfoundland, and of having the damages repaired which they sustained by the
taking of their shipping before a declaration of war. These two points were
warmly negotiated on either side, not without hopes of speedy adjustment, when,
unexpectedly, the whole treaty was, at once, set aside by the interposition of
the Spanish minister, who desired to have the interests of Spain also included
in the treaty. Mr. Pit very justly considered, that as Spain had no part in
the war, so it was impertinent in that power to intermeddle in a treaty of
peace; and he regarded this interposition in its true light, namely, that of a
confederacy between France and Spain mutually to support each other's interest.
Confident therefore of his own integrity, and, perhaps, also too much elated by
popular applause, he began to treat the French negotiator with a great share of
haughtiness, of which he complained to his court at home; and he was soon
recalled.

This conduct of Mr. Pit might have justly incurred reproach, had he had no
private intimations of a secret alliance between France and Spain. The last
named power had actually entered into a family compact with France, by which
they engaged to carry on a war in conjunction. Of all this the English
secretary had been previously apprized, and proposed in the privy council to
anticipate the designs of Spain by an immediate declaration of war against her.
Vigor, dispatch, and resolution, characterized all the plans of this minister;
he found, however, in the privy council men who were willing to act with more
deliberation, and who desired a certainty of offense before they demanded a
reparation. Spain, they said, has yet given no certain proofs of their hostile
intentions; and the English minister at the court of Madrid still continues to
assure us of their pacific intentions. These remonstrances were answered by the
secretary, but without producing the desired conviction; seeing himself
therefore almost singular in his opinion, he was resolved to leave an assembly
where he knew himself maligned; and he threw up the direction of measures,
which, to use his own expression, he was no longer allowed to guide. The
council was, at that time, divided between two parties, who were both equally
pleased at his resignation. One part consisted of those who were at the head of
affairs during the preceding reign; the other such as had been taken into
favor in this; neither were displeased at the removal of a man whose
popularity threw them into the shade, and whose vehemence controlled their
moderation. But this popular minister's being removed, did not restore
unanimity to the council. The parts which were held together by his presence,
now disunited, and a dissension began, which still continues to subsist.

The declaration of war with Spain, soon after, showed how well-grounded Mr.
Pitt's measures were, when he proposed a former rupture. However, the union of
France and Spain, and the disunion of our own ministry at home, did not seem to
retard the progress of our arms. The island of Martinico was conquered by
Admiral Rodney and General Monckton; the island of St. Lucia surrendered soon
after to Captain Harvey; Granada was taken by Brigadier Walsh; and all the
neutral islands submitted to the English dominion. But a bolder blow was struck
against the Spaniards; a powerful fleet, and an army of fifteen thousand men,
was sent against the Havannah, the key of all their possessions in South
America. It made a noble resistance; but in the end was taken. And now the
enemies of Great Britain were humbled on every side; the French left without
trade or shipping; the source of Spanish oppulence interrupted; nothing
remained for them, but to ask for peace, upon such terms as we were pleased to
grant. A negotiation was accordingly once more begun between the three powers,
by the intervention of the King of Sardinia's Ambassador; the Duke of Bedford
was sent over to Paris, and the Duke De Nivernois came to London; and, at
length, the definitive treaty was signed at Paris by the Duke of Bedford, the
Duc De Praslin, and the Marquis De Grimaldi, and arrived in London February 19,
1763. In order to purchase peace the French gave up all Canada, their right to
the neutral islands, the fort of Senegal, and their right of fishing on the
coasts of Newfoundland and the gulf of St. Lawrence, but at a certain distance
from shore. Spain also gave up, on her part, the extensive country of Florida;
so that the English empire was thus greatly enlarged; and, if we compute its
strength by the quantity of land included in its dominions, it can now boast
more power than even the great Roman empire.

But no country should build upon remote strength; true power must always
subsist at home. When the branches of a large empire become more powerful than
the original stem, instead of assisting it is growth, they only overload and
exhaust it nourishment. The discontents, therefore, which many have expressed
at the conclusion of the late peace, that we did not insist upon harder terms,
and increase our possessions, were ill founded, since it is probable we are
already possessed of more than government can manage. There is ever a certain
extent of empire which politics are able to wield; beyond this her magnificence
is but empty pomp, and her size but corpulence.

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF ENGLISH EVENTS.
TABLE I. Of the Saxon Heptarchy.
A. D. 1. VORTIGERN first King of Kent 455 2. Kingdom of the South Saxons
contained Surry and Sussex, continued one hundred and thirteen years. Ella,
first King thereof, and 488 Ethelwolph, first Christian King, 3. Kingdom of the
West Saxons contained what we now call Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset,
Wilts, Berks, and Hampshire, continued three hundred years, began 519 Cherdick,
first King thereof, and Hingels, first Christian King. 4. Kingdom of
Northumberland at this time contained the counties of York, Durham, Lancaster,
Westmorland, Cumberland, and Nottinghamshire, and continued three hundred and
seventy-nine years, began to be so 527 Ella and Ida, the first Kings thereof,
and Edwin, the first Christian King. 5. Kingdom of Mercia contained the
counties of Oxford, Gloucester, Worcester, Salop, Cheshire, Stafford, Warwick,
Buckingham, Huntingdon, with part of Hertford, Northampton, Rutland, Lincoln,
Leicester, Derby, and Nottinghamshire: this kingdom contained two hundred and
two years, began 582 Cerdan was first King, and Peada the first Christian King.
6. Kingdom of the East Angles contained Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire:
This kingdom continued three hundred and fifty-three years, began 775 Uffa was
the first King thereof, Redwald the first Christian King, and Edmond the last
King, whom the Danes slew, and he was buried at a village then called
Heglisdune, but afterward (in honor to Edmond) called St. Edmond's Bury.

TABLE II. Of the chief British princes who contended with the Saxons for their
country's right.
A. D. 1. Vortigern, Vortimer his son, and Aurelius Ambrosius, from 393, to 497
2. Uter Pendragon 497 3. Arthur, son of Pendragon 516 Buried at Glastenbury 542
4. Constantine. son of Cador 542 Buried at Stonehenge. 5. Aurelius Conanus 545
6. Vortiporus 578 7. Malgo Conanus 581 8. Caractacus 586 9. Cadwin 639 10.
Cadwallo, or Cadwallin, his son 635 Gulielmus and Faustinus archbishops of
Canterbury. 11. Cadwallador, son of Cadwallo, 685 Buried at St. Peter's at Rome
689 A great pestilence, which lasted eleven years.

TABLE III. The most noted Kings of the Saxon heptarchy were
A. D. 1. Hengist, King of Kent, etc. 455 2. Edwin the Great, King of
Northumberland 626

TABLE IV. The Saxon monarchs.
A. D. 1. Egbert, crowned at Westminster 819 Buried at Westminster 826 2.
Ethelwolph, son of Egbert 836 Died at Stanbridge, buried at Westminster 857 3.
Ethelbert, first Christian King 860 Buried at Sherbourne 866 4. Ethelred 865
Died at Willington, buried at Westminster. 5. Elfred, or Alfred, fourth son of
Ethelwolph, anointed at Rome by Pope Leo, and crowned at Winchester 872 6.
Edward, the elder son of Alfred, crowned at Kingston 901 Died at Farringdon,
buried at Winchester 924 7. Ethelstan crowned at Kingston 924 Died at
Gloucester, buried at Malmsbury 940 8. Edmund, fifth son of Edward, crowned 940
Stabbed, and buried at Glastenbury 946 9. Edred, sixth son of Edward, 946
Buried at Winchester 955 10. Edwy, eldest son of Edmund, crowned at Kingston
955 Buried at Winchester 959 11. Edgar, surnamed the peaceable, crowned at
Kingston by Otho 959 Buried at Glastenbury 975 Elsius and Dunstan, Archbishops
of Canterbury. 12. Edward, surnamed the Martyr, crowned at Kingston, and buried
at Shaftsbury. 975 13. Ethelred, crowned at Kingston 978 The Danes destroyed by
the English, by a secret commission from the King, in every city, on the 30th
of November 1002 Ethelred died, buried at St. Paul's, 1016 14. Edmund, surnamed
Ironside, crowned at Kingston 1016 Canute, the Dane, besieged London 1017

TABLE V. Of the Danes.
A. D. 1. Canute crowned at London by Livingius 1017 Canute died, and buried at
Winchester 1035 Issue, Swein, Harold, and Hardicanute. 2. Harold, base son of
Canute, surnamed Harefoot, crowned at Oxford 1035 Died at Oxford, buried at
Winchester 1040 3. Hardicanute crowned at London 1040 He fell down dead at a
banquet at Lambeth, and was buried at Winchester 1042

TABLE VI. Of the Saxons between the Danes and William the Conqueror.
A. D. 1. Edward, called the Confessor, crowned at Winchester, by Edsine
Archbishop of Canterbury 1042 He died, and was buried at Westminster 1066 2.
Harold, son of Earl Goodwin, crowned 1066 William Duke of Normandy landed in
Sussex, Sept. 28. He challenged Harold in single combat, Oct. 13. Battle at
Hastings in Sussex, Saturday October 14.

TABLE VII. Of the Normans, etc.
A. D. 1. WILLIAM the Conqueror crowned 1066 Landfrank, Archbishop of
Canterbury 1066 William died at Roan in Normandy 1087 2. WILLIAM Rufus crowned
1087 Shot by accident by Sir Walter Tyrrel, Aug. 1 1100 3. HENRY I. named
Beauclerk, crowned at Westminster 1100 Henry died at St. Denis in Normandy 1135
4. STEPHEN crowned at Winchester by Corbell, Archbishop of Canterbury 1135
Stephen died at Dover, and was buried at Feversham.

TABLE VIII. The Saxon line restored.
A. D. 1. HENRY II. called Plantagenet, crowned at Westminster, by Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury 1154 Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury. Henry
died, and was buried at Font-Everard 1189 2. RICHARD I. crowned at Westminster,
by Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury 1189 His bowels were buried at Charron,
his head at Roan, and his body at Font-Everard 1199 3. JOHN crowned at
Westminster, by Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury 1199 He surrenders the crown
to the Pope's nuncio 1199 4. HENRY III. crowned by Magnus, Archbishop of
Canterbury 1216 St. Edmund, Archbishop of Canterbury 1257 Baliol college in
Oxford founded 1263 Henry died at St. Edmond's-Bury, buried at Westminster 1272
5. EDWARD I. surnamed Longshanks, crowned at Westminster, by Kilwarby 1272 Died
of a dysentery, and buried at Westminster 1307 6. EDWARD II. of Caernarvon,
crowned 1307 John Orford, Archbishop of Canterbury. King Edward resigned the
crown to his son 1327 7. EDWARD III. crowned eight days after his father's
resignation 1327 Now flourished the famous John Wickliffe, of the university of
Oxford. Edward married Philippa, daughter of William Earl of Hainault and
Holland. Edward died at Sheen, buried at Westminster 1377 8. RICHARD II.
crowned in the eleventh year of his age 1377 A rebellion in Kent, headed by Wat
Tyler and Jack Straw, with upwards of one hundred thousand. Richard charged
with the breach of his coronation oath, and committed to the Tower by Henry
Duke of Lancaster, to whom he resigns the crown 1399 Richard deposed 1399

TABLE IX. Of the line of Lancaster.
A. D. 1. HENRY IV. son of John of Gaunt, third son of Edward III. was crowned
at Westminster, by Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury 1399 Gunpowder first
invented 1400 A plague at London; upwards of thirty thousand died. King Henry
died of an apoplexy, in the forty-seventh year of his age, and fourteenth of
his reign; buried at Westminster 1413 2. HENRY V. crowned at Westminster 1413
Sir John Oldcastle prosecuted for heresy. Richard Plantagenet's conspiracy 1415
The King lands in Normandy with ten thousand men, and kills sixty thousand at
Agincourt. Sir John Oldcastle burned at St. Giles's 1418 The King dies in
France, in the thirty-fourth year of his age, and tenth of his reign 1422 3.
HENRY VI. of Windsor, crowned about the eighth month of his age 1422 Joan Arc
beats the English at Orleans 1429 Joan Arc taken, and burned for a witch at
Roan 1430 King Henry crowned at Westminster 1431 James Stuart (first of the
name) King of Scotland, murdered by his subjects 1447 Jack Cade enters London,
and is killed 1450 King Henry taken prisoner by the Yorkists 1460

TABLE X. Line of York.
A. D. 1. EDWARD IV. eldest son of Richard Duke of York, crowned at Westminster
1461 King Henry taken in disguise 1464 King Edward marries lady Gray 1465 The
Queen crowned at Westminster, and delivered of a daughter named Elizabeth,
afterward married to Henry VII. by which the houses of York and Lancaster were
united 1466 King Edward taken prisoner by the Earl of Warwick, etc. 1469 He
makes his escape, and obtains a victory over Warwick 1470 King Henry restored
by parliament, and Edward deemed a usurper 1471 Prince Henry, his son, killed
at Tewksbury, by order of Edward. King Henry stabbed in the Tower by Richard
Duke of Gloucester, about the fiftieth year of his age. He was buried first at
Chertsey, and afterward removed to Windsor. Printing (first practiced in
Germany in 1458) brought to England by William Caxton, mercer of London. King
Edward died at Westminster, and was buried at Windsor, in the forty-second year
of his age, and twenty-third year of his reign 1483 2. EDWARD V. succeeded his
father, in the eleventh year of his age 1483 Richard Duke of Gloucester, by his
insinuations made protector. 3. RICHARD III. usurped the throne, and crowned at
Westminster 1483 He causes his nephews Edward V. and Richard, to be murdered,
and buried obscurely in the Tower 1484 Richard killed at Bosworth, having
reigned two years and two months 1485

TABLE XI. The families of York and Lancaster united.
A. D. 1. HENRY VII. grandson of John of Gaunt, fourth son of Edward III.
crowned at Westminster, Oct. 30. 1485 Earl of Warwick and famous Perkins
executed 1499 A great plague in England 1500 Henry VII's chapel finished at
Westminster 1502 King Henry died at Richmond, in the fifty-third year of his
age, and the twenty-fourth of his reign, and buried in his chapel at
Westminster, April 1509 2. HENRY VIII. crowned at Westminster 1509 Princess
Mary (afterward Queen) born Feb. 18 1516 Lutheran religion spreads in Germany
1517 King Henry writes against Luther, for which Pope Leo X. gave him the title
of Defender of the Faith 1521 Wolsey pushes for being Pope, but is disappointed
1522 The King applies for a divorce from Rome 1529 Wolsey, charged with high
treason, is apprehended at York, and dies at Leicester on the road 1530 The
King abandons Queen Catharine, and is cited to Rome, but refuses 1531 Dr.
Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, with others, pronounce the divorce of
Catharine 1533 The King marries Anne Bullen. The Queen brought to bed of a
daughter, named Elizabeth, afterward Queen. The Pope insists upon Henry living
with Catharine; but the King and parliament now throw off all subjection to
Rome 1534 Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moore executed for denying the King's
supremacy 1535 Thomas Cromwell Blacksmith, of Putney, made Vicar General. Wales
united to England by act of parliament 1536 The Bible translated and printed in
English. Queen Catharine dies, in the fiftieth year of her age. King Henry
jealous of Anne Bullen; and Cranmer divorces her. She is executed in the Tower,
May 19. The King marries Jane Seymour, May 20. Queen Jane delivered of a son,
afterward Edward VI. and Jane died the third day 1537 The Bible first read in
churches in English 1538 The King marries Anne, sister of the Duke of Cleves,
and divorces her in six months, by the instigation of Archbishop Cranmer, etc.
1540 Thomas Cromwell beheaded for treason upon Tower Hill. The King marries lady
Catharine Howard. Queen Catharine Howard accused by Cranmer of incontinence,
and, without any trial, beheaded on Tower Hill, Feb. 13 1542 The King marries
lady Catharine Parr 1543 An act was made, that in case of failure of the issue
of Edward his son, the succession to Mary and Elizabeth 1544 King Henry died
Jan. 28, in the fifty-sixth year of his age, and thirty-eighth of his reign.

TABLE XII.
A. D. 1. EDWARD VI. son of Henry VIII. crowned at Westminster 1546 Edward
Seymour, Earl of Hertford, protector. Popish images burned 1547 Catharine
dowager marries Sir Thomas Seymour Lord High-Admiral, and dies in childbed
1548 Seymour attainted of treason, and beheaded 1549 The protector beheaded
1550 King Edward dies at Greenwich, in the sixteenth year of his age, and
seventh of his reign, and buried at Westminster 1553 2. MARY, only daughter of
Henry VIII. 1553 Lady Jane Gray proclaimed, July 10. Mary proclaimed, July 19.
Archbishop Cranmer, Guilford Dudley, and his wife, condemned for high treason.
Sir Thomas Wyat beheaded 1554 John Rogers, the first martyr of the times,
burned at London; and Bishop Hooper at Gloucester 1555 Bishop Ridley, Latimer,
and Archbishop Cranmer, burned. Archbishop Cranmer burned at Oxford, and is
succeeded by Cardinal Pool 1556 Calais (having been near two hundred years in
the possession of the English) surrendered to the French 1557 The Queen died of
a fever, November 17 1558 3. ELIZABETH succeeded her half-sister Mary by right
1558 Elizabeth crowned, Jan. 15, at Westminster. Mary Queen of Scots married to
the Dauphine 1559 The thirty-nine articles of religion established in
convocation 1561 The Queen of Scots, married to Henry Stuart (Lord Darnly) 1565
She is brought to bed of a son, afterward James I. of England 1566 Prince
James crowned King of Scotland 1567 Francis Drake returned from his voyage
round the globe in about three years 1580 Virginia made an English colony.
Tobacco first brought into England by Sir Walter Raleigh. Queen of Scots
beheaded at Fotheringhay castle, aged 46 1587 Spanish armada 1588 Died of the
plague in London 18,000 1593 Prince Charles, afterward King Charles I. born at
Dunferling castle 1600 Earl of Essex forms a design against the Queen, and is
executed, Feb. 25, in the Tower. The Queen died at Richmond, March 24, in the
seventieth year of her age, and forty-fifth year of her reign, and was buried
in Henry VIIth's chapel, at Westminster, April 28. 1603

TABLE XIII. Of the union of the two crowns.
A. D. 1. JAMES I. of England (and VI. of Scotland) son of Henry Stuart, Lord
Darnley, and Mary Queen of Scots 1603 King and Queen crowned at Westminster by
Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury. King James first styled King of Great
Britain 1604 Oath of allegiance first admitted. The Bible translated as now
used. Powder plot, Nov. 5 1605 Henry Garnet, the Jesuit, confessed his having a
hand in the plot, and was executed March 28, at the west end of St. Paul's 1606
Died of the plague this and the preceding year 61, 596. Prince Henry died Nov.
6, aged 19, buried at Westminster. New river water brought to London 1613 Sir
Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor, and George Villers (Baron of Whaddon and
Viscount Villers) master of the horse 1616 Charles, the King's second son,
(afterward King) Duke of Cornwall, created Prince of Wales, Nov. 4. Sir Walter
Raleigh executed 1618 A match between Prince Charles and Princess Henrietta,
daughter of Henry IV, of France 1624 The King died 27th of March, in the 23d
year of his reign, and in the 69th year of his age, and was interred in
Westminster Abbey, May 17.

TABLE XIV.
A. D. 1. CHARLES I. only surviving son of James 1625 His Queen Henrietta Maria
lands at Dover, and the marriage consummated at Canterbury, June 13, and arrive
at London the 16th. The King crowned at London, Feb. 2. Sir Francis Bacon died
April 9 1626 The King raises money by sale of the crown lands, etc. 1626 Bishop
Laud, Bishop Neale, and the Duke of Bucks, remonstrated against Dr. Lamb,
murdered by a mob 1627 John Felton hanged in chains for stabbing the Duke of
Buckingham, Nov. 19 1628 Bishop Laud made Chancellor of Oxford, April 12 1630
Charles, afterward King, born June 27. The King, with Bishop Laud, goes to
Scotland, and he is crowned at Holyrood house, June 18 1633 Prince James
(afterward King) born and baptized at Somerset house, Oct. 15. Archbishop Laud
aims at universal conformity, but is opposed. Princess Anne born March 17 1636
The Scots enter into covenant against the act of uniformity, the liturgy, etc.
1637 Mary de Medicis, the Queen's mother, arrives in England, Oct. 31 1638 The
Scots begin the war, and Lesley seizes Edinburgh, the regalia, etc. Feb. 20.
Thomas Viscount Wentworth subscribes twenty, and the Duke of Lenox forty,
thousand pounds, to carry on the war against the Scots, Jan. 12 1639 Prince
Charles, at the age of twelve, takes his seat in parliament 1640 London refuses
to lend the King 100,000 l. Scotch army enters England. Lesley beats Lord
Conway at Newborn, and the Scots make themselves masters of Newcastle, Durham,
etc. and seize the King's magazines, Aug. 27, 28, 29. The long parliament meet
Nov. 3. Earl of Stafford committed to the Tower. 1640 The commons vote 300,000
l. to supply the Scots. Bishop Laud committed to the Tower, March 1. Stafford
condemned and beheaded on Tower Hill, May 12 1641 The English massacred in
Ireland, by Sir Phelim O'Neal, etc. The King's magazines, forts, fleets, etc.
seized, Feb. 2. He flies to York, March 19. The King goes to Hull, but is
denied admittance by Sir John Hotham 1642 Dover castle seized by the
parliament. The Queen lands in Burlington bay in Yorkshire, with money, arms,
and ammunition, Feb. 28. Scotch and English army join under command of Lord
Fairfax, April 26 1644 The battle at Marston-Moor, by the Earl of Manchester,
Fairfax, and Lesley. Archbishop Laud is beheaded on Tower Hill, Jan. 10 1644
Fairfax and Cromwell new model the army, April 17 1645 Fairfax defeats the King
at Naseby, June 14. Fairfax returns to London in triumph, Nov. 12. The Scots
deliver the King up to the English, January 30 1646 The King taken at Holmby
house in Northamptonshire, by Cornet Joyce, Feb. 16. The King made close
prisoner, Jan. 17 1647 Lord Fairfax died at York, March 13. The Duke of York
escapes to Holland, April 22 1648 The King brought from Windsor to St. James's,
January 15. The King brought to a trial, Jan. 27. Murdered, Jan. 30, in the
forty-ninth year of the King's age, and twenty-fourth year of his reign.

TABLE XV.
A. D. Cromwell made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, August 13 1649 Sets sail for
Ireland, Aug. 16. He takes Drogheda by storm, Sept. 14. Charles II. arrives at
Jersey, Sept. 19. The Marquis of Montrose hanged 1650 The King arrives at
Scotland, June 23. General Fairfax resigns his commission, June 25. The King
proclaimed at Edinburgh cross, July 15. Cromwell invades Scotland, July 22 1650
Cromwell passes the Frith, and at Fife kills two thousand Scots, and takes
twelve hundred prisoners, July 1651 Charles II. enters England by Carlisle, at
the head of sixteen thousand men, and is proclaimed King, Aug. 6. At Worcester
the King's forces are routed, Sept. 3. The Speaker of the house, etc. meets
Cromwell at Acton, and conducts him to London in triumph, Sept. 12. The King
arrives at Forscan near Havre de Grace in France, Oct. 22. A sea fight, in
which Blake beats De Wit the Dutch Admiral, Oct. 28. Cromwell goes to the house
with a file of musketeers, commands the Speaker to leave the chair, April 20
1653 Cromwell's members choose Rouse for their Speaker, July 4 and 5. Cromwell
proclaimed Lord Protector in London, Westminster, etc. etc. December. The Queen
of Sweden resigns her crown, May 30 1654 Jamaica taken by Admiral Penn, May 3.
Spain declares war against England, Feb. 16. Cromwell gets a bill passed for
renouncing the pretended title of Charles Stuart, Sept. 26. The parliament
desire Cromwell to be vested with the title of King, April 4 1657 The officers
of the army oppose Cromwell's accepting the title, April 20. Cromwell taken ill
Aug. 12, and died Sept. 3, after being protector four years, eight months, and
eighteen days; aged sixty 1658 Richard Cromwell proclaimed Lord Protector,
Sept. 4. Prince Henry (the King's brother) created Duke of Gloucester, May 13
1659 Monk marches to London, takes up his quarters at Whitehall, Feb 4. The
parliament dissolved by act, having sat and continued, in various forms,
nineteen years, four months, and thirteen days, March 16 1659 The city of
London, and the fleet, declare for his majesty, May 3 1660 The King proclaimed
in London and Westminster, May 8. The King proclaimed in Ireland, May 14. The
King lands at Dover, and is received by General Monk, May 25. The King makes a
triumphant entry into the city of London, (being his birthday) May 29. Duke of
York made Lord High-Chancellor of England, June 1. Regicides executed, from the
10th to the 19th of October. Matthew Hale made Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, Nov. 7. The coronation solemnized with great pomp by Archbishop
Juxon, April 23 1661 Miles Corbet, John Okey, and John Barkstead, three
regicides, sent over from Holland, April 16, and executed the 19th 1662
Princess Mary, eldest daughter to the Duke of York, (married afterward to
William Henry Nassau Prince of Orange) born April 30. Dunkirk delivered to the
French, Oct. 17. Sir Robert Hyde made Lord Chief Justice, Oct. 19. An address
of both houses to banish all popish priests and jesuits, April 1. The city
lends his majesty one hundred thousand pounds to support the war against the
Dutch, June 21. Lady Anne, second daughter to the Duke of York, (afterward
Queen of England) born at St. James's, Feb. 6. George Fox (father, or leader of
the Quakers) confined in Scarborough-Castle, March 31 1665 The dreadful fire of
London, Sept. 2 1666 The Dutch sail up the Medway, at Chatham, June 11 1667 The
King laid the first stone of the foundation of the first pillar of the Royal
Exchange, Oct. 23, and the Duke of York the first stone of the second pillar,
Oct. 31. Bridge-Town, in Barbados, burnt down, April 23 1688 The Royal
Exchange first opened, Sept. 18 1669 Blood, and his confederates, apprehended
in attempting to carry off the crown out of the Tower, May 9 1671 Tobago, in
the West Indies, taken from the Dutch, December 20 1672 The test act passes the
royal assent, March 29 1673 Prince Rupert takes the command of the fleet upon
the Duke of York's resignation, April 9. Prince Rupert beats the Dutch, and
forces them into their harbors, April 28. Sir Thomas Osborn created Lord High
Treasurer, Aug. 15. An order of council that no Papist, or reputed Papist,
attempt to come to court, June 14. George Fitz-Roy, third natural son to King
Charles II. (by the Duchess of Cleveland) created Earl of Northumberland,
Viscount Falmouth, and Baron of Pontefract, Oct. 31. Princess Mary married to
the Prince of Orange at St. James's, Nov. 4 1677 Dr. Tongue, a physician,
reports a conspiracy against the King's life and the Protestant re-religion, by
the Jesuits, Aug. 11 1678 Dr. Tongue and Thomas Oats make oath of the plot
against the King, before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, Sept. 6. A dispute arises in
the house concerning excluding the Duke of York from succeeding to the crown,
Nov. 4. Ireland, Grove, and Pickering, convicted of the plot (executed 1679)
December 17. The commons order a bill to disable the Duke of York to succeed to
the crown, May 15 1679 Thomas Whitebread, Provincial of the Jesuits, with
Harcourt, Fenwick, Gavan, and Turner, tried and convicted, at the Old Bailey,
of high treason, June 18. Richard Langhorne, Esquire Counselor, convicted of high
treason, as being concerned in the plot, and is executed, July 14. Dangerfield
committed for high treason, Oct. 27. Lord Stafford convicted of high treason,
and beheaded, December 29 1680 His majesty constitutes the Duke of York High
Commissioner of Scotland, and to be his representative there, June 22 1681 Dr.
Oliver Plunket, titular Primate of Ireland, and Edward Fitz-Harris, Esquire
executed at Tyburn, for high treason, July 1. Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury
committed to the Tower for high treason, papers having been found upon him for
excluding the Duke of York, July 2. The famous Titus Oats turned out of his
lodgings at Whitehall, and discharged. The Earl of Shaftesbury tried at the Old
Bailey, for attempting to exclude the Duke of York; but the grand jury bring it
in ignoramus, November 24. The supposed plot for assassinating the King at Rye
house, in Hertfordshire, discovered, June 12 and 23 1683 William Lord Russel,
and the Earl of Essex, with Walcot, Hone, and Rouse, are convicted of high
treason, and sentenced to death, July 13. Lord Russel beheaded in
Lincoln's-inn-fields, July 21. Algernon Sidney convicted of being in the plot,
and beheaded on Tower Hill, Dec. 7. The King died at Whitehall in the
fifty-fifth year of his age, and the thirty-seventh year of his reign; buried
in Westminster Abbey.

TABLE XVI.
A. D. JAMES II. proclaimed King, Feb. 6 1684 Titus Oats found guilty of
perjury 1685 The Duke of Monmouth proclaimed King at Taunton, June 20. The Duke
of Argyle beheaded at Edinburgh, June 30. The Duke of Monmouth defeated near
Bridgewater, July 6. Monmouth beheaded on Tower hill, in the thirty-sixth year
of his age, July 15. The ecclesiastical commission opened 1686 The Bishop of
London suspended, Sept. 28. The King publishes a declaration for liberty of
conscience to all sects, Apr. 4 1687 The King sends his mandate to Magdalene
college Oxon, to elect Mr. Anthony Farmer (a Roman Catholic) their president,
April 11. The Pope's Nuncio admitted to an audience to their Majesty's at
Windsor, July 3. Father Edward Petre, a Jesuit, sworn of the privy council,
Nov. 11. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of St. Asaph, Ely,
Chichester, Bath, Wells, Peterborough, and Bristol, present a petition to his
Majesty, desiring him to dispense with the distributing and reading the
declaration for liberty of conscience, May 18. The Bishops sent to the Tower,
June 8. The seven Bishops brought to trial, June 29. The Prince of Orange sets
sail from Holland, Oct. 19. The Prince of Orange lands at Torbay, Nov. 1. The
Prince of Orange arrives at Exeter, Nov. 8. Lord Cornbury, Lord Churchill, the
Duke of Grafton, and many other Lords join the Prince of Orange, Nov. 22. The
Prince of Denmark, and the Duke of Ormond, desert the King, Nov. 24. The Queen,
and the young Prince, embark for France, Dec. 9. The King sends orders to the
Earl of Feversham to disband the army, and takes water at Whitehall stairs for
France, Dec. 10. The Prince of Orange arrives at Windsor. The King returns to
Whitehall, Dec. 16. The Prince of Orange issues a declaration for all officers,
magistrates, etc. to keep their places (except Papists) till further orders,
Dec. 30. The Archbishop, and seven other Bishops, fign the association, Jan.
16. 1688 The Commons resolve that the throne is vacant, Jan. 31. The Lords
agree to the same, Feb. 2. King James II. reigned three years nine months and
eleven days; the throne vacant two months and three days. The Princess of
Orange arrives at Whitehall, Feb. 12.

TABLE XVII.
A. D. WILLIAM-HENRY and MARY, Prince and Princess of Orange, proclaimed King
and Queen with the usual solemnity, Feb. 13. Admiral Herbert cruises upon the
Irish coast with thirty men of war, Feb. 27. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishops of Gloucester, Ely, Norwich, Bath, Wells, and Peterborough, refuse to
take the oaths to King William, March 1. King William orders sixty men of war
to be fitted out, March 2. King James sails from Breast with a body of French
troops to Ireland, March 5. The royal Scotch regiment, and Dumbarton's, declare
for King James; but they are beat by the Dutch under Ginghle, March 12. Prince
George of Denmark created Baron of Oakingham, Earl of Kendale, and Duke of
Cumberland, with precedence of all Dukes, by act of parliament, Apri. 9 1689
The King and Queen crowned at Westminster, by the Bishop of London, April 11.
Lord Chancellor Jefferies died in the Tower, and was buried there, April 18.
The King invites the French Protestants to England, April 29. War declared
against France, May 7. An act passes for disarming Papists, May 11. The King
settles three hundred pounds per Ann. upon Titus Oats for life, May 31. King
James coins brass money in Ireland, and sets the value of silver upon it, June
18. An act for abolishing episcopacy in Scotland received the royal assent,
July 22. Princess Anne delivered of a son, who was christened William, and
afterward created Duke of Gloucester, July 24. Duke Schomberg sets sail for
Ireland with ten thousand land forces, Aug. 12. The King gives Dr. Walker five
thousand pounds for defending Londonderry so bravely, Aug. 28. King William
embarks for Ireland the 11th of June. A battle upon the banks of the Boyne,
July 1. The King enters triumphant into Dublin, July 3. Sir Thomas Pilkington
re-elected Lord Mayor of London, Sept. 29. Dr. John Tillotson, Dean of St.
Paul's, consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, and succeeded by Dr. Sherlock to
the deanery, May 31 1691 Limerick in Ireland surrendered to the English, which
put an end to the wars there, Oct. 3. Queen Mary issues a proclamation for a
general fast, March 26 1692 The English and Dutch fleets, under Admiral Russel,
totally disperse the French fleet under Admiral Tourville, at La Hogue, May 19.
An earthquake in England, Sept. 8. King William returns to England, Oct. 20.
The King and Queen go to the Lord-Mayor's feast at Guildhall, Oct. 29. King
William embarked at Gravesend on March the 31st, and arrived in Holland, April
2. 1693 Admiral Rooke, with twenty-three men of war, with the Turkey fleet
under convoy, was met off Cape St. Vincent by the whole French fleet under
Admiral Tourville; the French took and destroyed twelve English and Dutch men
of war, and took about fourscore merchantmen, June 16. Hackney coaches
licensed and regulated 1694 Admiral Russel destroys one large French man of war
in the bay of Bartram, and took thirty-five merchantmen, May 11. A great fire
at Warwick, which burnt down the large church, and nearly three quarters of the
town, Sept. 5. The King returns from Holland to Canterbury, Nov. 9. Dr. John
Tillotson, Archbishop of Canterbury, died at Lambeth, in the sixty-fifth year
of his age, Nov. 22. The Commons vote a supply of four million seven hundred
thousand pounds for the ensuing year, Nov. 30. Queen Mary taken with the
smallpox at Kenfington, Dec. 21. Queen Mary died in the thirty-third year of
her age, and in the sixth year of her reign, December 28. WILLIAM III. An act
for rebuilding the town of Warwick, Feb. 11. Queen Mary, having lain in state
nine weeks at Whitehall, buried in Henry VII's chapel, and a funeral sermon
preached for her by Archbishop Tenison, March 5. An act for imprisoning Sir
Thomas Cook, Sir Basil Firebrace, Charles Bates, Esquire and James Craggs, May 3
169^ The massacre at Glenco, by the Earl of Argyle's regiment, May 9. The Royal
Sovereign, the largest man of war, burnt by accident, Jan. 27 169^ King James
came to Calais, in order to embark for England, with a body of French troops;
but Admiral Russel, with a fleet, appearing before Dunkirk, the scheme was
prevented, March 2. Charnock, King, and Keys, for conspiring against the life
of the King, are convicted, and executed at Tyburn, March 18. Sir John Friend
and Sir William Perkins are tried and convicted of high treason, in conspiring
the King's death, and creating a rebellion, and were executed at Tyburn, Apr. 3
1696 Brigadier Rookwood, Lowick, and Cranburn, executed at Tyburn, for being
concerned in the assassination plot, April 21. The King embarked at Margate for
Holland, April 25 1697 Peace with France proclaimed in London, Oct. 19. The
King returns to London, Nov. 16. A fire at Whitehall which consumed the whole,
except the banqueting house, Jan. 4. The Czar of Muscovy came to London,
January 11. A proclamation for banishing all Popish Priests and Jesuits, etc.
Feb. 8 1699 The King angry with the Commons for their resolutions in settling
the affair of the forfeited estates in Ireland, etc. etc. Feb. 21. The great
seal taken from Lord Summers, and given to Sir Nathan Wright, May 21 1700 The
King of Sweden gains a complete victory over the Muscovites, near Narva, Nov.
30. A convocation opened, and Dr. Hooper, Dean of Canterbury, chosen
prolocutor, Feb. 11. The commons come to a resolution concerning a further
limitation of the crown, March 11. John Earl of Marlborough made General of the
foot, Jan. 1 1701 King William goes to Holland, July 1. King James II. died of
a lethargy at St. Germans in France, in the eighty-sixth year of his age,
Sept. 6. King William concludes an alliance with the Emperor and States General
against France, called the Grand Alliance, Sept. 7. The King returns from
Holland, Nov. 5. An act passed the royal assent for the attainder of the
pretended Prince of Wales of high treason; and from this he was called the
Pretender in common, March 2. King William died at Kensington, in the
fifty-second year of his age, and fourteenth of his reign, and was buried in
Henry VII's chapel in Westminster abbey.

TABLE XVIII.
A. D. Queen ANNE, the only surviving child of James II. by the lady Anne Hyde,
eldest daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon. The Earl of Marlborough declared
Captain General of all her Majesty's forces both in England, and abroad, March
15. The Earl of Marlborough sent to Holland as ambassador and plenipotentiary,
March 28 1702 The Queen crowned at Westminster, April 23. War declared against
France by the Queen, the Emperor, and the States General. The English, under
Sir George Rooke, accompanied by the Dutch, attack the French fleet, and
Spanish galleons, at Vigo in Gallcia, Oct. 12. John Earl of Marlborough created
marquess of Blandford and Duke of Marlborough, December 14. Captain Kirby and
Captain Wade shot at Portsmouth, for betraying and deserting Admiral Benbow in
the engagement with Du Casse, Apr. 6 1703 Sir Cloudesley Shovel arrives in
Lisbon river, September 1. Charles III. King of Spain, arrived at Spithead, and
went to Windsor, Dec. 26. The English and Dutch forces, under the command of
Scomberg and Fagel, arrive at Portugal, April 23 1704 King Philip declares war
against the King of Portugal, and against King Charles III. and his allies,
Apr. 30. The confederate fleet, under the Prince of Hesse, land a large body of
troops in the bay of Gibraltar, and attacked that place July 21, and it
surrenders July 24. An engagement between Sir George Rook and the French, Aug.
13. The Emperor creates the Duke of Marlborough Prince of the Empire, Aug. 28.
The French and Spaniards besiege Gibraltar, Oct. 22. Admiral Leake sailed for
Lisbon with forces for Gibraltar, and arrive there, Nov. 9. The Duke of
Marlborough returns to England, Dec. 14. The Duke receives the thanks of both
houses of parliament for his great services, Dec. 14. An act for prohibiting
all trade with France, March 16. An order of council, by which the Dutch have
liberty to trade with France notwithstanding the act, March 19. King Stanislaus
crowned King of Poland, Oct. 20 1705 The Duke of Marlborough embarks for
Holland, to open the campaign, April 10 1706 The French and Spaniards lay siege
to Barcelona, May 1. The Duke of Marlborough obtains a complete victory over
the Elector of Bavaria and Marshal Villeroy, at Ramillies, May 12. The Marquis
das Minas, and the Earl of Galway, took possession of Madrid, (capital of
Spain) and Charles III. was, (on the 27th) proclaimed King, June 24. Prince
Eugene passes the Po in order to relieve Turin, July 6. Articles of Union
between England and Scotland, signed by the commissioners of both kingdoms,
July 22. George Augustus, electoral Prince of Hanover, created Baron of
Tewksbury, Viscount Northallerton, Earl of Milford-haven, Marquis and Duke of
Cambridge, Oct. 5. An act for settling the honor and dignities of John Duke of
Marlborough upon his posterity, annexing the manor of Woodstock and house of
Blenheim, to go with the said honors, Dec. 21. The French and Spaniards
entirely defeat the confederates at Almanza, April 14 1707 King Charles III. of
Spain proclaimed at Naples, July 31. The first parliament of Great Britain met,
Oct. 23. The Duke of Marlborough levels all the French lines between Ypres and
Lys, and put all Picardy under contribution, July 26 1708 Sir John Leake
arrives before Cagliari, the capital of Sardinia, and the whole island declares
for Charles III. of Spain, Aug. 12. The island of Minorca, with the commodious
harbor of Port-Mahon, taken by General Stanhope, and made to pay obedience to
Charles III. of Spain, Sept. 30. The town of Lisle taken, Oct. 23. Ghent
surrendered to the Duke of Marlborough, Dec. 30. Prince Eugene, the Duke of
Marlborough, and the Marquis de Torcy, met together at the Hague, to settle
preliminaries of peace, May 8 1709 The Pope, at last, acknowledges Charles III.
to be King of Spain, June 7. Dr. Henry Sacheverell's noted sermon preached
before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at St. Paul's, Nov. 5. Dr. Sacheverell
brought before the house, Dec. 15. Robert Walpole, Esquire made treasurer of the
navy, Jan. 13. The trial of Dr. Sacheverell, Feb. 27. The Duke of Ormond
declared Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Oct. 8 1710 The Abbot De la Bourlie stabs
Mr. Harley, at the Cockpit, Feb 28. The commons resolve, That fifty new
churches should be speedily erected, in and about London and Westminster, April
6 1711 The Duke of Marlborough turned out of all places, posts, or employments,
Dec. 30. Robert Walpole, Esquire expelled the house. The Duke of Ormond constituted
Captain General of all her Majesty's forces in Great Britain, Jan. 1. Robert
Walpole, Esquire committed to the Tower for corrupt practices. A suspension of arms
declared between Great Britain and France, for four months, Aug. 27 1712 The
Dutch refuse a cessation of arms, Sept. 30. Articles of peace signed at
Utrecht, March 30 1713 Peace proclaimed with great solemnity at London, May 5.
Dr. Atterbury created Bishop of Rochester, July 5. Spain, by the treaty of
peace signed at Utrecht, acknowledges the Protestant succession, and yields
Gibraltar, Minorca, and Port-Mahon, to Great Britain, etc. July 13. The
fortification of the harbor, and also the citadel of Dunkirk, entirely
demolished, April 26 1714 Her Majesty taken very ill, July 29. Died, Aug. 1.
Queen Anne died in the fiftieth year of her age, and the thirteenth year of her
reign.

TABLE XIX.
A. D. GEORGE I. George, Elector of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, succeeded to the
crown, Aug. 1. The Duke of Marlborough made a triumphant entry into London,
Aug. 4. King George I. proclaimed at Edinburgh, Aug. 5. The King proclaimed at
Dublin, Aug. 6. Queen Anne's remains privately interred in Westminster Abbey by
order of the King, Aug. 24. King George arrived at Greenwich, Sept. 18. The
Duke of Ormond removed from being Captain General, Sept. 20. King George
crowned at Westminster, Oct. 20. An order issued by his Majesty, prohibiting
the clergy to meddle with any state affairs in their sermons, Dec. 11. Prince
of Wales chosen Governor of the South Sea company, Feb. 18. The Duke of Ormond
retires to France, Aug. 6. 1715 Lewis XIV. King of France, died, Aug. 20. The
hon. James Murray joined the Earl of Mar, Oct. 4. The Earl of Derwentwater,
the Lord Viscount Kenmure, with the Earls of Nethisdale, Carnwath, and Winton,
join with Mr. Foster, with two hundred Scotch horse, Oct. 19. General Willis
and General Carpenter attack the rebels, Nov. 13. The principal prisoners
brought to London, Dec. 9. The Pretender lands at Peterhead near Aberdeen, Dec.
25. The Pretender makes his public entry into Perth, Jan. 10. Orders of council
for executing the Earls of Derwentwater and Nithisdale, and Lord Viscount
Kenmure, Feb. 24. Colonel Oxburgh executed at Tyburn, and his head set upon
Temple Bar, May 14 1716 Richard Gascoigne, Esquire executed at Tyburn, May 25.
Thomas Forster escaped out of Newgate, and Pit the keeper indicted for it,
July 6. Prince Eugene gains a complete victory over the Turks, near
Peter-Waradin, Aug. 5. The Czar of Moscovy comes to Holland, Dec. 30. The Duke
of Newcastle made Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's household, and his brother
Colonel Pelham, Vice-Chamberlain, April 20 1717 Prince Eugene gains a complete
victory over the Turks, near Belgrade, Aug. 5. Charles XII. King of Sweden,
killed at Frederickshall, Nov. 30 1718 War declared against Spain, Dec. 16.
Baron Gortz beheaded at Stockholm, Feb. 20. The Pretender arrived at Madrid,
was met by the Duke of Ormond, and received there with all honor and respect,
March 26 1719 The French invade Spain by land, April 10. Her Grace Erengard
Melosina, Duchess of Munster, created Baroness, Countess, and Duchess of Great
Britain, viz. Baroness of Glastenbury, Countess of Feversham, and Duchess of
Kendal. The King embarked for Holland, May 9. Arrives at St. James's, from
Hanover, Nov. 13. The King embarks at Greenwich, for Holland, Apr. 15 1720 The
King gave orders, that all such of the directors of the South Sea company as
were in, or had any employment under the crown, should be immediately
discharged his service, Jan. 11. Mr. Robert Knight stopped, by order of the
marquis Deprio, at Tirlemont, and committed prisoner to Antwerp castle, Feb.
Sir John Blount, chief projector of the South Sea bubble, sent for, but refuses
an examination. Colonel Charles Churchill sent to Vienna, in his Majesty's
name, to the Emperor, that he would be pleased to deliver up Mr. Knight,
prisoner in the castle of Antwerp, Feb. 13. The right hon. Robert Walpole, Esquire
made Chancellor and Under-treasurer of the Exchequer, and Henry Pelham, Esquire one
of the Commissioners for executing the office of Treasurer, Apr. 2 1721 An act
for granting the people called Quakers, a form of affirmation, removing the
difficulties they objected to relating to taking an oath, Feb. 12. Great
rejoicings on account of dissolving the septennial parliament, March 13.
Princess Amelia and Carolina inoculated for the smallpox, Apr. 17 1722 John
Churchill, Duke and Earl of Marlborough, died at Windsor, June 13. Christopher
Layer, Esquire and Charles Earl of Orrery, and William Lord North and Gray,
committed to the Tower for high treason, Sept. 20, 28, 29. Lewis XIV. of
France, crowned at Rheims, Oct. 15. The Bishop of Rochester sent to the Tower,
April 24 1723 The King embarks for Holland, June 3. Philip V. King of Spain,
resigns his crown to his eldest son, Don Lewis, Jan. 4. Pope Innocent XIII.
died, Feb. 25. Henry Pelham, Esquire made secretary at war of all his Majesty's
forces in Great Britain, March 28 1724 A severe edict published in France
against the Protestants, May 14. Dr. Henry Sacheverell died, June 5. Mr. Wood
had a patent for coining Irish halfpence, July 24. Thomas Parker, Earl of
Macclesfield, impeached of misdemeanors, May 6 1725 Thomas Parker, Earl of
Macclesfield, paid his fine of thirty thousand pounds, and released from the
Tower, July 22. The Spaniards invest Gibraltar, and open the trenches before
it, Feb. 22 1726 Sir Isaac Newton, Knt. died, in the eighty-fifth year of his
age, March 23. George I. King of Great Britain, Elector of Brunswick
Lunenburgh, etc. died at Osnaburg in Germany, being in the sixty-eighth year of
his age, and thirteenth year of his reign, June 10 1727

TABLE XX.
A. D. George II. proclaimed King the 27th of June 1727 Duke of Newcastle and
Lord Townshend, secretaries of states; Sir Robert Walpole, Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Arthur Onslow, Esquire chosen speaker, January 23, 1727-8. The Spaniards
continue their depredations in America, Jan. 1728 His Majesty purchases
Carolina for 800,000 l. 1729 The excise scheme on wines and tobacco brought
into the house, March 14 1733 The Princess of Wales delivered of a Prince the
24th of May, who was christened George, our present most gracious Sovereign
1738 Admiral Vernon took Porto-Bello, Nov. 5 1739 Lord Cathcart and Admiral
Vernon take Fort Charge from the Spaniards, March 24 1740 His Majesty takes the
part of the Queen of Hungary against the King of Prussia. The Spnniards invade
Georgia, and are repulsed 1742 The Earl of Stair sent into Flanders. The battle
of Dettingen, June 16 1743 The unsuccessful engagement off Toulon, between
Admiral Mathews's fleet and the combined squadrons of France and Spain 1744
Admiral Anson returns from his voyage round the world. Charles VII. dies 1745
War declared against France, March 10. The battle of Fontenoy, April 30. The
Chevalier lands in Scotland, July 27. Enters Edinburgh, Aug. 17. Defeats Sir
John Cope, Sept. 21. Takes Carlisle, Nov. 15. The battle of Falkirk, Jan. 17.
The decisive victory over the rebels at Culloden, April 15. An unsuccessful
attempt against Port l'Orient 1746 Anson and Warren intercept the French fleet,
May 30 1747 The battle of Val, June 21. The general peace by the treaty of Aix
la Chapelle proclaimed at London, Feb. 22 1749 Forts erected at the back of the
British settlements in America 1752 Attempts to seize Nova Scotia 1754 Boscawen
sent to protect that province 1755 Braddock defeated, July 9. Hessians called
over to defend the English 1756 Minorca taken. War declared against France, May
17. Canada conquered 1759 King George II. dies, Oct. 25, aged 77, after a reign
of 34 years 1760

TABLE XXI.
A. D. Our present Sovereign George III. succeeds to the throne, October 25.
His nuptials solemnized, Sept. 11 1761 His coronation, September 22.
Preliminary articles of peace signed at Fontainbleau, November 3.

FINIS.

