THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND. VOL. II.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, FROM The EARLIEST TIMES to the DEATH of GEORGE II. By
Dr. GOLDSMITH. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON, Printed for T. DAVIES, in Russel Street; BECKET and DE HONDT; and T.
CADELL, in the Strand. MDCCLXXI.

EDWARD I.
portrait of Edward I Hall sculp.

CHAP. XII. EDWARD I.
WHILE the unfortunate Henry was thus vainly struggling against the
ungovernable spirit of his subjects, his son and successor, Edward, was
employed in the Holy wars, where he revived the glory of the English name, and
made the enemies of Christianity tremble. He had arrived at the city of Acon in
Palestine, just as the Saracens were sitting down to besiege it. He soon
relieved the place, followed the enemy, and obtained many victories, which,
though splendid, were not decisive. Such, however, were the enemies' terrors at
the progress of his arms, that they resolved to destroy by treachery that
valiant commander, whom they could not oppose in the field. A tribe of
Mohammedan enthusiasts had long taken possession of an inaccessible mountain in
Syria, under the command of a petty prince, who went, in the Christian armies,
under the name of the Old Man of the Mountain, and whose subjects were called
Assassins; from whence we have since borrowed the name to signify a private
stabber. These men, wholly devoted to their commander, and enflamed with a
detestable superstition, undertook to destroy any Christian prince or leader,
who became obnoxious to their party. It was vain to threaten them with
punishment; they knew the dangers that awaited them, but, resolute to destroy,
they rushed upon certain death. Some time before, the capital of this tribe had
been taken by the Tartars, and the inhabitants put to the sword; yet there
still remained numbers of them, that were educated in that gloomy school of
superstition; and one of those undertook to murder the prince of England. In
order to gain admittance to Edward's presence, he pretended to have letters to
deliver from the governor of Joppa, proposing a negotiation; and thus he was
permitted to see the prince, who conversed with him freely in the French
language, which the assassin understood. In this manner he continued to amuse
him for some time, being permitted to have free egress and regress from the
royal apartments. It was on the Friday in Whitsun-week, that he found Edward
sitting in his apartment alone, in a loose garment, the weather being extremely
hot. This was the opportunity the infidel had so long earnestly desired; and
looking round to see if there were any present to prevent him, and finding him
alone, he drew a dagger from his breast, and attempted to plunge it into the
prince's bosom. Edward, had just time to perceive the murderer's intention,
and, with great presence of mind, received the blow upon his arm. Perceiving
the assassin about to repeat his blow, he struck him at once to the ground with
his foot; and wresting the weapon from his hand, buried it instantly in his
bosom. The domestics hearing a noise, quickly came into the room, and soon
wreaked their resentment on the perfidious wretch's body, who had thus abused
the laws of hospitality. The wound the prince had received was the more
dangerous, as having been inflicted with a poisoned dagger; and it soon began
to exhibit some symptoms that appeared fatal. He therefore expected his fate
with great intrepidity, and made his will, contented to die in a cause which he
was assured would procure him endless felicity. But his usual good fortune
prevailed; an English surgeon of extraordinary skill, by making deep incisions,
and cutting away the mortified parts, completed the cure, and restored him to
health in little more than a fortnight. A recovery so unexpected, was
considered by the superstitious army as miraculous; nor were there wanting
some, who alleged that he owed his safety to the piety of Eleanora his wife,
who sucked the poison from the wound to save his life, at the hazard of her
own. However this be, it is probable that the personal danger he incurred by
continuing the war in Palestine, might induce him more readily to listen to
terms of accommodation, which were proposed soon after by the sultan of
Babylon. He received that monarch's ambassadors in a very honorable manner,
and concluded a truce with him for ten years, ten weeks, and ten days. Having
thus settled the affairs of Palestine, in the best manner they would admit of,
he set sail for Sicily, where he arrived in safety, and there first heard the
news of the king his father's death, as well as that of his own son John, a boy
of six years of age. He bore the last with resignation, but appeared extremely
afflicted at the death of his father; at which, when the king of Sicily
expressed his surprise, he observed that the death of a son was a loss which he
might hope to repair, but that of a father was a loss irreparable.

Though the death of the king happened while the successor was so far from
home, yet measures had been so well taken, that the crown was transferred with
the greatest tranquillity. The high character acquired by the prince, during the
late commotions, had procured him the esteem and affection of all ranks of men;
and, instead of attempting to oppose, their whole wish was to see him once more
returning in triumph. But the prince, sensible of the quiet state of the
kingdom, did not seem in much haste to take possession of the throne; and he
spent near a year in France, before he made his appearance in England. The
honors he received from the great upon the continent; and the acclamations,
with which he was every where attended by the people, were too alluring to a
young mind to be suddenly relinquished: he was even tempted to exhibit proofs
of his bravery in a tournament, to which he was invited by the count de
Chalons, who defied him to a trial of his skill. Impressed with high ideas of
the chivalry of the times, he accepted the challenge; and proposed, with his
knights, to hold the field against all that would enter the lists. His usual
good fortune attended him; and his success had like to have converted a trial
of skill into a matter of bloody contention. The count de Chalons, being
enraged at being foiled, made a serious attack upon the English, in which some
blood was idly spilt; but Edward and his knights still maintained the
superiority. From Chalons Edward proceeded to Paris, where he was magnificently
entertained by Philip, king of France, to whom he did homage for the
territories the kings of England had possessed in that kingdom. From Paris he
set out for Gascony, to curb the insolence of Gaston, count Bearne, who had
rebelled in his absence. From thence he passed through Montreuil, where he
accommodated some differences between the English and Flemings. At length,
after various battles, dangers, and fatigues, he arrived in his native
dominions, amidst the loud acclamations of his people, and was solemnly crowned
at Westminster by the archbishop of Canterbury. The joy of all ranks upon this
occasion was inexpressible; the feasting continued a whole fortnight, at the
king's expense; five hundred horses were turned loose, as the property of those
who could catch them. The king of Scotland, with several other princes, graced
the solemnity; and did homage for those territories they held under the English
crown. Nothing, therefore, remained to complete the felicity of the people but
the continuance of such prosperity; and this they had every reason to expect
from the king's justice, his economy, and his prudence.

As Edward was now come to an undisputed throne, the opposite interests were
proportionably feeble. The barons were exhausted by long mutual dissensions:
the clergy were divided in their interests, and agreed only in one point, to
hate the pope, who had for some time drained them, with impunity: the people,
by some insurrections against the convents, appear to have hated the clergy
with equal animosity. These disagreeing orders only concurred in one point,
that of esteeming and reverencing the king. In such a conjuncture, therefore,
few measures could be taken by the crown that would be deemed oppressive; and
we accordingly find the present monarch often, from his own authority alone,
raising those taxes that would have been peremptorily refused to his
predecessor. However, Edward was naturally prudent; and, though capable of
becoming absolute, he satisfied himself with moderate power, and labored only
to be terrible to his enemies.

Land, he seemed to have no compassion upon their sufferings. Many were the
arbitrary taxes levied upon them; two hundred and eighty of them were hanged at
once, upon a charge of adulterating the coin of the kingdom; the goods of the
rest were confiscated, and all of that religion utterly banished the kingdom.
This severity was very grateful to the people, who hated the Jews, not only for
their tenets, but for their method of living, which was by usury and extortion.

But Edward had too noble a spirit to be content with the applause this petty
oppression acquired; he resolved to march against Lewellyn, prince of North
Wales, who had refused to do homage for his dominions, and seemed bent upon
renouncing all dependence upon the crown of England. The Welsh had for many
ages enjoyed their own laws, language, customs, and opinions. They were the
remains of the ancient Britons, who had escaped the Roman and Saxon invasions,
and still preserved their freedom and their country, uncontaminated by the
admission of foreign conquerors. But as they were, from their number, incapable
of withstanding their more powerful neighbors on the plain, their chief
defense lay in their inaccessible mountains, those natural bulwarks of the
country. many ages before defended his ancestors against all the attempts of
the Norman and Saxon conquerors. But Edward, equally vigorous and cautious,
having explored every part of his way, pierced into the very center of
Lewellyn's territories, and approached the Welsh army in its last retreats.
Lewellyn at first little regarded the progress of an enemy, that he supposed
would make a transient invasion, and then depart; but his contempt was turned
into consternation, when he saw Edward place his forces at the foot of the
mountains, and hem up his army, in order to force it by famine. Destitute of
magazines, and cooped upon in a narrow corner of the country, without
provisions for his troops, or pasturage for his cattle, nothing remained but
death, or submission; so that the unfortunate Welsh prince, without being able
to strike a blow for his independence, was at last, obliged to submit at
discretion, and to receive such terms as the victor was pleased to impose.
Lewellyn consented to pay fifty thousand pounds, as a satisfaction for damages;
to do homage to the crown of England; to permit all other barons, except four
near Snowdon, to swear fealty in the same manner; to relinquish the country
between Cheshire and the river Conway; to do justice to his own family, and to
deliver hostages for the security of his submission.

and to reduce that people to such an abject state, that they should never
after be able to revolt, or distress their more peaceable neighbors. At first,
however, the king's endeavors were not attended with their usual success;
having caused a bridge of boats to be laid over the river Menay, a body of
forces, commanded by lord Latimer, and de Thonis, passed over before it was
completely finished, to signalize their courage against the enemy. The Welsh
patiently remained in their fortresses till they saw the tide flowing in beyond
the end of the bridge, and thus cutting off the retreat of the assailants. It
was then that they poured down from their mountains with hideous outcries; and,
with the most ungovernable fury, put the whole body that had got over to the
sword. This defeat revived the sinking spirits of the Welsh; and it was now
universally believed by that poor superstitious people, that heaven had
declared in their favor. A story ran, that it was foretold, in the prophecies
of Merlin, that Lewellyn was to be the restorer of Brutus's empire in Britain:
a wizzard had prognosticated, that he should ride through the streets of London
with a crown upon his head. These were inducements sufficiently strong to
persuade this prince to hazard a decisive battle against the English. With this
view, he marched into Radnorshire; and passing the river Wey, his troops were
surprised and defeated by Edward Mortimer, while he himself was absent from his
army, upon a conference with some of the barons of that country. Upon his
return, seeing the dreadful situation of his affairs, he ran desperately into
the midst of the enemy, and quickly found that death he so ardently sought for.
One of the English captains recognizing his countenance, severed his head from
his body, and it was sent to London, where it was received with extreme
demonstrations of joy. The brutal spirit of the times will sufficiently appear
from the barbarity of the citizens on this occasion: the head being encircled
in a silver coronet, to fulfill the prediction of the wizzard, it was placed by
them upon a pillory, that the populace might glut their eyes with such an
agreeable spectacle. David, the brother of this unfortunate prince, soon after
shared the same fate; while his followers, quite dispirited by the loss of
their beloved leader, obeyed but slowly, and fought with reluctance. Thus being
at last totally abandoned, he was obliged to hide himself in one of the obscure
caverns of the country; but his retreat being soon after discovered, he was
taken, tried, and condemned, as a traitor. His sentence was executed with the
most vigorous severity; he was hanged, drawn and quartered, only for having
bravely defended the expiring liberties of his native country, and his own
hereditary possessions. With him expired the government, and the distinction of
his nation. It was soon after united to the kingdom of England, made a
principality, and given to the eldest son of the crown. Foreign conquests might
add to the glory, but this added to the felicity of the kingdom. The Welsh were
now blended with the conquerors; and in the revolution of a few ages, all
national animosity was entirely forgotten.

At the time of the conquest, however, the Welsh submitted with extreme
reluctance; and few nations ever bowed to a foreign yoke with greater
indignation. The bards of the country, whose employment consisted in rehearsing
the glorious deeds of their ancestors, were particularly obnoxious to the king,
who, considering that while they continued to keep the ancient flame alive, he
must expect no peace in his new acquisitions, ordered them to be massacred,
from motives of barbarous policy, at that time not uncommon. This severity he
is said to have softened by another measure, equally politic, and far less
culpable. In order to flatter their vanity, and amuse their superstition, he
left his queen to be delivered in the castle of Caernarvon; and afterward
presented the child, whose name was Edward, to the Welsh lords, as a native of
their country, and as their appointed prince. The lords received him with
acclamations of joy, considering him as a master, who would govern them as a
distinct people from the English, there being at that time another heir
apparent to the English crown. But the death of the eldest son, Alphonso, soon
after made young Edward, who had been thus created prince of Wales, heir also
to the English monarchy; and ever since the government of both nations has
continued to flow in one undivided channel.

This great and important conquest being achieved, paved the way for one of
still more importance, though not attended with such permanent consequences.
Alexander III. king of Scotland, had been killed by a fall from his horse,
leaving only Margaret, his granddaughter, heir to the crown, who died some
time after. The death of this princess produced a most ardent dispute about the
succession to the Scottish throne, being claimed by no less than twelve
competitors. That nation being thus divided into as many factions as there were
pretenders, the guardians of the realm would not undertake to decide a dispute
of so much consequence. The nobility of the country were no less divided in
their opinions; and, after long debates, they at last unanimously agreed to
refer the contest to the determination of the king of England. The claims of
all the other candidates were reduced to three; who were the descendants of the
earl of Huntington by three daughters; John Hastings, who claimed in right of
his mother, as one of the co-heiresses of the crown; John Baliol, who alleged
his right, as being descended from the eldest daughter, who was his
grandmother; and Robert Bruce, who was the actual son of the second daughter.
In this contest, which was referred to Edward, he pretended the utmost degree
of deliberation; and although he had long formed his resolution, yet he ordered
all enquiries to be made on the subject, that he might be master of the
arguments that could be advanced on any side of the question. In this research,
he soon discovered that some passages in old chronicles might be produced to
favor his own secret inclinations; and without further delay, instead of
admitting the claims of the competitors, he boldly urged his own; and, to
second his pretensions, advanced with a formidable army to the frontiers of the
kingdom.

The Scottish barons were thunderstruck at these unexpected pretensions; and
though they felt the most extreme indignation at his procedure, yet they
resolved to obey his summons to meet at the castle of Norham; a place situated
on the southern banks of the Tweed, where he convened the parliament of that
country. He there produced the proofs of his superiority, which he alleged
were unquestionable, and desired their concurrence with his claims; at the same
time advising them to use deliberation, and to examine all his allegations with
impartial justice. To a proposal that appeared in itself so unreasonable, no
immediate answer could be given; for where all is defective, it is not easy to
submit to the combating a part: the barons, therefore, continued silent; and
Edward interpreting this for a consent, addressed himself to the several
competitors to the crown; and, previous to his appointing one of them as his
vassal, he required their acknowlegement of his superiority. He naturally
concluded that none of them would venture to disoblige the man who was
unanimously appointed to be the arbitrator of his pretensions. Nor was he
deceived; he found them all equally obsequious on this occasion. Robert Bruce
was the first who made the acknowlegement, and the rest quickly followed his
example. Edward being thus become the superior of the kingdom, undertook next
to consider which of the candidates was the fittest to be appointed under him;
or it may be, as they appeared all indifferent to him, which had the justest
claim. In order to give this deliberation the appearance of impartiality, an
hundred commissioners were appointed, forty of them being chosen by the
candidates who were in the interests of John Baliol; forty by those in the
interests of Robert Bruce; and twenty, who were chosen by Edward himself.
Having thus fitted matters to his satisfaction, he left the commissioners to
sit at Berwick; and went southward, to free their deliberations from all shadow
of restraint. The subject of the dispute ultimately rested in this question,
Whether Baliol, who was descended from the elder sister, but farther removed by
one degree, was to be preferred before Bruce, who was actually the younger
sister's son? The rights of inheritance, as at present generally practiced over
Europe, were even at that time pretty well ascertained; and not only the
commissioners, but many of the best lawyers of the age, universally concurred
in affirming Baliol's superior claim. Edward, therefore, pronounced sentence in
his favor; and that candidate, upon renewing his oath of fealty to England,
was put in possession of the Scottish kingdom, and all its fortresses, which
had been previously put into the hands of the king of England.

Baliol being thus placed upon the Scottish throne, less as a king than as a
vassal, Edward's first step was sufficient to convince that people of his
intentions to stretch the prerogative to the utmost. Instead of gradually
accustoming the Scots to bear the English yoke, and of sliding in his new power
upon them by slow and imperceptible degrees, he began at once to give them
notice of his intentions. A merchant of Gascony had presented a petition to
him, importing, that Alexander, the late king of Scotland, was indebted to him
a large sum, which was still unpaid, notwithstanding all his solicitations to
Baliol, the present king, for payment; Edward eagerly embraced this opportunity
of exercising his new right, and summoned the king of Scotland to appear at
Westminster, to answer in person the merchant's complaint. Upon subjects
equally trivial, he sent six different summonses, at different times, in one
year; so that the poor Scottish king soon perceived that he was possessed of
the name only, but not the authority of a sovereign. Willing, therefore, to
shake off the yoke of so troublesome a master, Baliol revolted, and procured
the pope's absolution from his former oaths of homage. To strengthen his hands
still more, he entered into a secret treaty with Philip, king of France; which
was the commencement of an union between these two nations, that for so many
succeeding ages were fatal to the interests of England. To confirm this
alliance, the king of Scotland stipulated a marriage between his eldest son,
and the daughter of Philip de Valois.

Edward, to whom these transactions were no secret, endeavored to ward the
threatened blow, by being the first aggressor; and accordingly summoned John to
perform the duty of a vassal, and to send him a supply of forces against an
invasion from France, with which state he had for some time been at variance.
He also summoned him to surrender some of his principal forts, and to appear at
a parliament which was held at Newcastle. None of these commands, as he well
foresaw, being complied with, he resolved to enforce obedience by marching a
body of thirty thousand foot, and four thousand horse, into the heart of the
kingdom of Scotland. As the Scottish nation had little reliance on the vigor,
or the courage of their king, they had assigned him a council of twelve
noblemen to assist; or more properly speaking, to superintend his proceedings.
They raised an army of forty thousand men for the present emergency, and
marched them away to the frontiers, which Edward was now preparing to attack.
But some of the most considerable of the Scottish nobility, among whom were
Robert Bruce and his son, endeavored to ingratiate themselves with Edward by
an early submission, which served not a little to intimidate those who still
adhered to their king. The progress, therefore, of the English arms was
extremely rapid; Berwick was taken by assault; Sir William Douglas, the
governor, made prisoner, and a garrison of seven thousand men put to the sword.
Elated by these advantages, Edward dispatched the earl Warenne, with ten
thousand men, to lay siege to Dunbar; and the Scotch, sensible of the
importance of that place, advanced with their whole army, under the command of
the earls Mar, Buchan, and Lenox, to relieve it. Although the superiority of
numbers was greatly on their side, yet courage and discipline was entirely on
that of the English. The conflict was of short continuance; the Scots were soon
thrown into confusion, and twenty thousand of their men were slain upon the
field of battle. The castle of Dunbar, with all its garrison, surrendered the
day following; and Edward, who was now come up with the main body of his army,
led them onward into the country to certain conquest. The castles of the
greatest strength and importance opened their gates to him almost without
resistance; and the whole southern part of the country acknowleged the
conqueror. The northern parts were not so easily reducible, being defended by
the inaccessible mountains, and intricate forests, that deform the face of that
country. To make himself master of this part of the kingdom, Edward reinforced
his army with numbers of men levied in Ireland and Wales, who, being used to
this kind of desultory war, were best qualified to seek, or pursue the latent
enemy. But Baliol made these preparations unnecessary; he found that a ready
submission was more safe and easy than a fierce resistance drawn out among
mountainous deserts, and those solitudes, made still more dreadful by famine.
He hastened, therefore, to make his peace with the victor, and expressed the
deepest repentance for his former disloyalty. To satisfy him still further, he
made a solemn resignation of the crown into his hands; and the whole kingdom
soon after followed his example. Edward thus master of the kingdom, took every
precaution to secure his title, and to abolish those distinctions, which might
be apt to keep the nation in its former independence. He carefully destroyed
all records and monuments of antiquity, that inspired the people with a spirit
of national pride. He carried away a stone, which the traditions of the vulgar
pretended to have been Jacob's pillow, on which all their kings were seated,
when they were anointed. This, the ancient tradition had assured them, was the
mark of their government; and wherever it was placed, their command was always
to follow. The great seal of Baliol was broke; and that unhappy monarch himself
was carried as a prisoner to London, and committed to custody in the Tower. Two
years afterward he was restored to his liberty, and banished to France, where
he died in a private station, without making any further attempts to reinstate
himself upon the throne; happier perhaps in privacy, than if gratified in the
pursuits of ambition.

The cessation which was given to Edward by those successes, in his insular
dominions, induced him to turn his ambition to the continent, where he expected
to recover a part of those territories that had been usurped from his crown,
during the imbecility of his predecessors. There had been a rupture with
France some time before, upon a very trifling occasion. A Norman and English
ship met off the coast, near Bayonne; and having both occasion to draw water
from the same spring, there happened a quarrel for the preference. This
scuffle, in which a Norman was slain, produced a complaint to the king of
France, who desired the complainant to take his own revenge, and not bring such
matters before him. This the Normans did shortly after; for seizing the crew of
a ship in the channel, they hanged a part of them, together with some dogs, in
the presence of all their companions. This produced a retaliation from the
English cinque ports; and the animosity of the merchants on both sides being
wrought up to fury, the sea became a scene of piracy and murder. No quarter was
given on either side; the mariners were destroyed by thousands; and at last the
affair became too serious for the sovereigns of either side to continue any
longer unconcerned spectators. Some ineffectual overtures were made for an
accommodation; but Edward seeing that it was likely to come to an open rupture,
gave orders for having his territory of Guienne, upon the continent, put into a
posture of defense. Nor was he remiss in making treaties with several
neighboring princes, whose assistance he purchased, though greatly to the
diminution of his scanty revenues. He even sent an army, collected in England
from the jails, which had been filled with robbers in the former reign, and who
were now made serviceable to the state. These, though at first successful, under
the command of John de Bretagne, earl of Richmond, were, however, soon repulsed
by the French army, under the command of Charles, brother to the king of
France. Yet it was not easy to discourage Edward from any favorite pursuit.

The king finding his attempts upon that quarter unsuccessful, resolved to
attack France upon another, where he hoped that kingdom would be more
vulnerable. He formed an alliance with John, earl of Holland, by giving him his
daughter Elizabeth in marriage; and also with Guy, earl of Flanders, whose
assistance he procured, for the stipulated sum of seventy-five thousand pounds.
From these assistances he entertained hopes of being once more able to recover
his hereditary dominions; and he accordingly set himself earnestly about
providing money for such an arduous undertaking. This was not obtained without
the greatest struggles with his clergy and the people; so that when he came to
take the field in Flanders, at the head of an army of fifty-thousand men, the
proper season of action was lost; wherefore the king of France, and he were
glad to come to an accommodation, by which they agreed to submit their
differences to the arbitration of the pope. By his mediation it was agreed
between them, that their union should be cemented with a double marriage; that
of Edward with Margaret, Philip's sister; and that of the prince of Wales with
Isabella, the French monarch's daughter. Philip was prevailed on to restore
Guienne to the English. He agreed also, to abandon the king of Scotland, upon
condition that Edward should in like manner neglect the earl of Flanders. Thus,
after a very expensive war, the two monarchs were obliged to sit down just
where they began; and, instead of making preparations against each other, they
resolved to turn the weight of their power upon their weaker neighbors.

But though this expedition was thus fruitlessly terminated, yet the expenses
which were requisite for fitting it out, were not only burdensome to the king,
but even, in the event, threatened to shake him on his throne. In order at
first to set the great machine in movement, he raised considerable supplies by
means of his parliament; and that august body was then first modelled by him
into the form in which it continues to this day. As a great part of the
property of the kingdom was now, by the introduction of commerce, and the
improvement of agriculture, transferred from the barons to the lower classes of
the people, so their consent was thought necessary for the raising any
considerable supplies. For this reason, he issued writs to the sheriffs,
enjoining them to send to parliament along with two knights of the shire, (as
in the former reign) two deputies from each borough within their county; and
these provided with sufficient powers from their constituents, to grant such
demands as they should think reasonable for the safety of the state. The
charges of these deputies were to be borne by the borough which sent them; and
so far were they from considering their deputation as an honor, nothing could
be more displeasing to any borough than to be thus obliged to send a deputy, or
to any individual than to be thus chosen. However, the authority of these
commoners increased by time. Their union gave them weight; and it became
customary among them, in return for the supplies which they had granted, to
prefer petitions to the crown for the redress of those grievances, under which
they supposed the nation to labor. The more the king's necessities increased,
the more he found it expedient to give them an early redress, till from
requesting, the commons proceeded to requiring; and, having all the property of
the nation, they by degrees began to be possessed of the power. Such was the
constitution of that parliament, to which Edward applied for assistance against
France. He obtained from the barons and knights, a grant of the twelfth of
their movables, from the boroughs an eighth; and from the clergy he resolved
to exact a fifth: but he there found an unexpected resistance. This body of
men, who had already felt the weight of his necessities, resolved to avail
themselves of any pretext rather than thus submit to such an heavy and
disproportioned imposition. The pope had some time before issued a bull,
prohibiting the clergy from paying taxes to any temporal prince, without
permission from the sea of Rome; and those of England now pleaded conscience,
in refusing to comply with the king's demand. They alleged, that they owed
obedience to two sovereigns, a spiritual and a temporal; but that their eternal
happiness bound them to obey one, while only their worldly safety led them to
acknowledge the commands of the other. Edward was somewhat mortified at their
refusal, but employed their own arguments with great force against them. He
refused them his temporal protection, ordered his judges to receive no cause
brought before them by the clergy, but to hear and decide all causes, in which
they were defendants; to do every man justice against them; and to deny them
justice even under the greatest injury.

In this outlawed situation, they suffered numberless hardships from every
ruffian, while the king's officers remained unconcerned spectators of the
ravages committed upon them, without incurring the hatred of oppressive or
vindictive cruelty. Whenever the clergy ventured from home, they were
dismounted from their horses, and robbed of their clothes; the primate himself
was attacked on the highway, and stripped of all his equipage and furniture.
These severities, at length, prevailed; and the clergy agreed to lay the sums
they were taxed in some church appointed them, which were to be taken away by
the king's officers. Thus at once they obeyed the king, without incurring the
censures of the pope. But though these sums were very great, yet they were by
no means adequate to the wants of the state. New taxes were, therefore,
arbitrarily imposed. Edward laid a duty of forty shillings a sack upon wool; he
required the sheriffs of each county to supply him with two thousand quarters
of wheat, and as many of oats, without considering the manner they were to be
obtained. These he levied by way of loans, promising to pay an equivalent,
whenever the exigencies of the state were less pressing. Such various modes of
oppression were not suffered without murmuring. The clergy were already
disgusted to a man; the people complained at those extortions they could not
resist; while many of the more powerful barons, jealous of their own
privileges, as well as of national liberty, gave countenance to the general
discontent.

The first symptoms of this spirit of resistance appeared, upon the king's
ordering Humphry Bohun, the constable; and Roger Bigod, the marshall of
England, to take the command of an army that he proposed to send over into
Gascony, while he himself intended to make a diversion on the side of Flanders.
But these two powerful noblemen refused to obey his orders, alleging, that
they were obliged by their offices to attend him only in the wars, and not to
conduct his armies. A violent altercation ensued. The king, addressing himself
to the constable, cried out, "Sir earl, by God, you shall either go or be
hanged." To which the haughty baron replied, "Sir king, by God, I will neither
go, nor be hanged." This opposition quite defeated his scheme for the conquest
of Guienne. He found he had driven prerogative a little too far; and with that
presence of mind which always brought him back, when he had the least gone
beyond the line of discretion, he desired to be reconciled to his barons, to
the church, and to his people. He therefore pleaded the urgent necessities of
the crown; and promised, upon his return from Flanders, whither he was then
going, to redress all grievances, to restore the execution of the laws, and to
make his subjects compensation for the losses which they had sustained. These
professions served pretty well to allay the kindling discontents of the nation,
during his absence abroad, except that the ensuing parliament only the two
noblemen, attended by a great body of cavalry and infantry, took possession of
the city gates, and obliged the king's council to sign the Magna Charta, and to
add a clause, to secure the nation for ever against all impositions and taxes,
without the consent of parliament. This the council readily agreed to sign; and
the king himself, when it was sent over to him in Flanders, after some
hesitation, thought proper to do the same. These concessions he again confirmed
upon his return; and though it is probable he was averse to granting them, yet
he was at last brought to give a plenary consent to all the articles that were
demanded of him. Thus, after the contest of an age, the Magna Charta was
finally established; nor was it the least circumstance in its favor, that its
confirmation was procured from one of the greatest and boldest princes that
ever swayed the English scepter.

But though the confirmation of this charter was obtained without much
violence, yet it is probable, that the disturbance given by Scotland about the
same time, might have hastened its final execution. strength, and amazing
intrepidity; eagerly desirous of independence, and possessed with the most
disinterested spirit of patriotism. To this man had resorted all those who were
obnoxious to the English government; the proud, the bold, the criminal, and the
ambitious. These, bred among dangers and hardships themselves, could not
forbear admiring in their leader a degree of patience, under fatigue and
famine, which they supposed beyond the power of human nature to endure; he
soon, therefore, became the principal object of their affection and their
esteem. His first exploits were confined to petty ravages, and occasional
attacks upon the English. As his forces increased, his efforts became more
formidable; every day brought accounts of his great actions; his party was
joined first by the desperate, and then by the enterprizing; at last, all who
loved their country came to take shelter under his protection. Thus reinforced,
he formed a plan of surprising Ormesby, the unworthy English minister, who
resided at Scone; but though this tyrant escaped the meditated irruption, yet
his effects served to recompense the insurgents. From this time, the Scots
began to grow too powerful for the English that were appointed to govern them;
many of their principal barons joined the insurgents; Sir William Douglas was
among the foremost openly to avow his attachment; while Robert Bruce more
secretly favored and promoted the cause. To oppose this unexpected
insurrection, the earl Warrenne collected an army of forty thousand men in the
north of England, and prepared to attack the Scots, who had by this time
crossed the borders, and had begun to ravage the country. He suddenly entered
Annandale, and came up with the enemy at Irvine, where he surprised their
forces, who, being inferior in number, capitulated, and promised to give
hostages for their future fidelity. Most of the nobility renewed their oaths,
and joined the English army with reluctance, waiting a more favorable occasion
for vindicating their freedom. Wallace alone disdained submission; but, with
his faithful followers, marched northwards, with a full intention to protract
the hour of slavery as long as he could. In the mean time, the earl of Warrenne
advanced in the pursuit, and overtook him, where he was advantageously posted,
in the neighborhood of Stirling, on the other side of the river Forth. The
earl perceiving the favorable ground he had chosen, was for declining the
engagement; but being pressed by Cressingham; a proud man, whose private
revenge operated over his judgment, the old earl was at last obliged to comply,
and he passed over a part of his army to begin the attack. Wallace allowing
such numbers of the English to get over as he thought himself superior to,
boldly advanced upon them before they were completely formed, and put them
entirely to the rout. Part of them were pursued into the river that lay in the
rear, and the rest were cut to pieces. Among the slain was Cressingham himself,
whose memory was so extremely odious to the Scotch, that they flead his dead
body, and made saddles of his skin. Warrenne retired with the remains of his
army to Berwick, while his pursuers took such castles, as were but ill provided
for a siege. Wallace returned into Scotland, after having thus, for a time,
saved his country, laden with an immense plunder, with which he for a while
dispelled the prospect of famine, that seemed to threaten the nation.

Edward, who had been over in Flanders, while these misfortunes happened in
England, authority, and secure his former conquests. As the discontents of the
people were not as yet entirely appeased, he took every popular measure that he
thought would give them satisfaction. He restored to the citizens of London a
power of electing their own magistrates, of which they had been deprived in the
latter part of his father's reign. He ordered strict enquiries to be made
concerning the quantity of corn, which he had arbitrarily seized for the use of
his armies, as if he intended to pay the value to the owners. Thus having
appeased, if not satisfied, all complaints, he levied the whole force of his
dominions; and at the head of an hundred thousand men, he directed his march to
the North, fully resolved to take vengeance upon the Scots for their late
defection.

It may easily be supposed, that the Scots, even if united, were but ill able
to resist such an army, commanded by such a king; but their own mutual
dissensions served to render them still more unequal to the contest, and to
prepare Edward's way to an easy triumph. The Scotch were headed by three
commanders, who each claimed an equal share of authority; these were the
steward of Scotland, Cummin of Badenoch, and William Wallace, who offered to
give up his command, but whose party refused to follow any other leader. The
Scotch army was posted at Falkirk, and there proposed to abide the assault of
the English. They were drawn up in three separate divisions, each forming a
complete body of pikemen, and the intervals filled up with archers. Their horse
were placed in the rear, and their front was secured with palisadoes.

Edward, though he saw that the advantage of situation was against him, little
regarded such a superiority, confident of his skill and his numbers; wherefore,
dividing his forces also into three bodies, he led them to the attack. Just as
he advanced at the head of his troops, the Scotch set up such a shout, that the
horse, upon which the king rode, took fright, threw and afterward kicked him
on the ribs, as he lay on the ground; but the intrepid monarch, though sorely
bruised with his fall, quickly mounted again with his usual alacrity, and
ordered the Welsh troops to begin the attack. These made but a feeble
resistance against the Scotch, who fought with determined valor; but Edward
seeing them begin to decline, he advanced in person at the head of another
batallion; and having pulled up the palisadoes, charged the enemy with such an
impetuosity, that they were no longer able to resist. In this distress, Wallace
did all that lay in the power of man to sustain and avert the shock; but the
division commanded by Cummin quitting the field, both the divisions of the lord
steward, as well as that of Wallace, lay exposed to the English archers, who at
that time began to excel those of all other nations. Wallace, for a while,
maintained an unequal contest with his pikemen; but finding himself in danger
of being surrounded, he was at last obliged to give way, and slowly to draw off
the poor remnant of his troops behind the river Carron. Such was the famous
battle of Falkirk, in which Edward gained a complete victory, leaving twelve
thousand of the Scotch, or, as some will have it, fifty thousand, dead upon the
field of battle, while the English had not an hundred slain.

A blow so dreadful, had not as yet entirely crushed the spirit of the Scotch
nation; and after a short interval, they began to breathe from their
calamities. knowing how prejudicial that envy would prove to the interests of
his country, he resigned the regency of the kingdom, and humbled himself to a
private station. He proposed Cummin as the properest person to supply his room;
and that nobleman endeavored to show himself worthy of this pre-eminence. He
soon began to annoy the enemy; and not content with a defensive war, he made
incursions into the Southern counties of the kingdom, which Edward had imagined
wholly subdued.

But it was not easy for any circumstances of bad fortune to repress the
enterprizing spirit of the king. fleet furnished the land army with all
necessary provisions; while these marched securely along, and traversed the
kingdom from one end to the other, ravaging the open country, taking all the
castles, and receiving the submissions of all the nobles. This complete
conquest, employed Edward for the space of two years; but he seemed, by the
severity of his conduct, to make the natives pay dear for the trouble to which
they had put him. He abrogated all the Scottish laws and customs; he
endeavored to substitute those of England in their place; he entirely razed or
destroyed all their monuments of antiquity; and endeavored to blot out even
the memory of their former independence and freedom. There seemed to remain
only one obstacle to the final destruction of the Scottish monarchy, and that
was William Wallace, who still continued refractory; and wandering with a few
forces from mountain to mountain, still preserved his native independence and
usual good fortune. But even their feeble hopes from him were soon
disappointed; he was betrayed into the king's hands by Sir John Monteith, his
friend, whom he had made acquainted with the place of his concealment, being
surprised by him as he lay asleep in the neighborhood of Glasgow. The king,
willing to strike the Scotch with an example of severity, ordered him to be
conducted in chains to London, whither he was carried amidst infinite crowds of
spectators, who flocked to see a man that had often filled the whole country
with consternation. On the day after his arrival, he was brought to his trial,
as a traitor, at Westminster Hall, where he was placed upon an high chair, and
crowned with laurel in derision. Being accused of various imputed crimes, he
pleaded not guilty, and refused to own the jurisdiction of the court,
affirming, that it was equally unjust and absurd to charge him with treason
against a prince whose title he had never acknowledged; and as he was born
under the laws of another country, it was cruel to try him by those to which he
was a stranger. The judges disregarded his defense; for considering Edward as
the immediate sovereign of Scotland, they found him guilty of high treason, and
condemned him to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, the usual punishment for such
offenses. This sentence was executed with the most rigorous punctuality; and
his head and quarters were exposed in the chief cities of England. Such was the
wretched end of a brave man, who had through a course of many years, with
signal perseverance and conduct, defended his native country against an unjust
invader.

Robert Bruce was among those on whom the cruel fate of Wallace had made the
deepest impression. This nobleman, whom we have already seen as competitor for
the crown, and whose claims, though set aside by Edward, were still secretly
pursued, was now actually in the English army. He never was sincerely attached
to the English monarch, whom he was in some measure compelled to follow; and an
interview with Wallace, sometime before that champion was taken, confirmed him
in his resolution to set his country free. But as he was now grown old and
infirm, he was obliged to give up the flattering ambition of being the
deliverer of his people, and to leave it in charge to his son, whose name was
Robert Bruce also, and who conceived the project with ardour. This young
nobleman was brave, active, and prudent; and a favorable conjuncture of
circumstances seemed to conspire with his aims. John Baliol, whom Edward had
dethroned, and banished into France, had lately died in that country; his
eldest son continued a captive in the same place; there was none to dispute his
pretensions, except Cummin, who was regent of the kingdom; and he also was soon
after brought over to second his interests. He, therefore, resolved upon
freeing his country from the English yoke; and although he attended the court
of Edward, yet he began to make secret preparations for his intended revolt.
Edward, who had been informed not only of his intentions, but of his actual
engagements, contented himself with setting spies round him to watch his
conduct, and ordered all his motions to be strictly guarded. Bruce was still
busily employed in his endeavors, unconscious of being suspected, or even of
having guardians set upon his conduct; but he was taught to understand his
danger, by a present sent him, by a young nobleman of his acquaintance of a
pair of gilt spurs, and a purse of gold. This he considered as a warning to
make his escape, which he did, by ordering his horses to be shod with their
shoes turned backwards, to prevent his being tracked in the snow, which had
then fallen.

His dispatch was considered then as very great; Edward; and Bruce was
resolved, in the first place, to take vengeance upon him for his perfidy.
Hearing that he was then at Dumfries, he went thither, and meeting him in the
cloisters of a monastery belonging to the Gray Friars, reproached him, in
severe terms, with his treachery; and drawing his sword, instantly plunged it
in his breast. Sir Thomas Kirkpatrick, one of Bruce's friends, asking him soon
after if the traitor was slain, and Bruce answering that he believed so, "what,
replied the other, only belief; I will secure him;" and and going back to where
Cummin was receiving absolution at the altar, he stabbed him to the heart. It
is a disagreeable reflection, that actions begun in this manner should,
nevertheless, terminate in success.

Bruce had by this action not only rendered himself the object of Edward's
resentment, but involved all his party in the same guilt. They had now no
resource left, but to confirm, by desperate valor, what they had begun in
cruelty; and they soon expelled such of the English forces, as had fixed
themselves in the kingdom. Bruce was solemnly crowned king, by the bishop of
St. Andrew's, in the abbey of Scone; and numbers flocked to his standard,
resolved to confirm his pretensions. Thus, after twice conquering the kingdom,
and as often pardoning the delinquents; after having spread his victories in
every quarter of the country, and receiving the most humble submissions, the
old king saw, that his whole work was to begin afresh; and that nothing but the
final destruction of the inhabitants could give him assurance of tranquillity.
But no difficulties could repress the arduous spirit of this monarch, who, though
now verging toward his decline, yet resolved to strike a parting blow, and to
make the Scotch once more tremble at his appearance. He vowed revenge against
the whole nation; and averred, that nothing but reducing them to the completest
bondage could satisfy his resentment. He summoned his prelates, nobility, and
all who held by knights service, to meet him at Carlisle, which was appointed
as the general rendezvous; and, in the mean time, he detached a body of forces
before him into Scotland, under the command of Aymer de Valence, who began the
threatened infliction by a terrible victory over Bruce, near Methuen, in
Perthshire. That warlike commander fought with great obstinacy; he was thrice
dismounted from his horse in the action, and as often recovered: but at last he
was obliged to fly, and take shelter, with a few followers, in the Western
Isles. The earl of Athole, Sir Simon Fraser, and Sir Christopher Seton, who had
been taken prisoners, were executed as traitors on the spot. Immediately after
this dreadful blow, the resentful king himself appeared in person, entering
Scotland with his army divided into two parts, and expecting to find, in the
opposition of the people, a pretext for punishing them. But this brave prince,
who was never cruel but from motives of policy, could not strike the poor
submitting natives, who made no resistance. His anger was disappointed in their
humiliations; and he was ashamed to extirpate those, who only opposed patience
to his indignation. It was chiefly upon the nobles of the country that the
weight of his resentment fell. The sister of Bruce, and the countess of Buchan,
were shut up in wooden cages, and hung over the battlements of a fortress, and
his two brothers fell by the hands of the executioner. The obstinacy of this
commander served to inflame the king's resentment. He still continued to excite
fresh commotions in the Highlands; and, though often overcome, persisted in a
seemingly fruitless opposition. Edward therefore, at last, resolved to give no
quarter; and at the head of a great army entered Scotland, from whence he had
lately retreated, resolving to exterminate the whole body of those insurgents,
who seemed so implacably averse to his government. Nothing lay before the
refractory Scotch, but prospects of the most speedy and terrible vengeance;
while neither their valor, nor their mountains, were found to grant them any
permanent protection. But Edward's death put an end to their apprehensions, and
effectually rescued their country from total subjection. He sickened, and died
at Carlisle, of a dysentery; enjoining his son, with his last breath, to
prosecute the enterprise, and never to desist, till he had finally subdued the
kingdom. He expired, shape agreeable except from the extreme length and
smallness of his legs, from whence he had the appellation of Longshanks. He
seemed to have united all those advantages which, in that age, might be
considered as true glory. He gained renown by his piety in the Holy Land; he
fixed the limits of justice at home; he confirmed the rights of the people; he
was the most expert at martial exercises of any man in the kingdom; and was
allowed to be a conqueror, by his success over the kingdom of Scotland.
Succeeding times have, with great justice, questioned the merit of some of
these claims; but none can deny him comparative excellence, if they look upon
those princes, who either went before, or have succeeded. Edward, by his first
wife, Eleanor of Castile, had four sons, and eleven daughters; of the last,
most died young; of the former, Edward the second alone, his heir and
successor, survived him.

If we turn to the state of the people during his administration, we shall
find, that England acquired not only great power, but great happiness, under
his protection. The barons, who might, during this period, be considered as a
junto of petty tyrants, ready to cry out for liberty, which they alone were to
share, were kept under; and their combinations were but feeble and ill
supported. The monarch was in some measure absolute, though he was prudent
enough not to exert his power. He was severe, indeed; and some people tax this
severity as a stain upon his memory; but let it be remembered, that he was the
first who began to distribute indiscriminate justice. Before his time, the
people who rose in insurrections were punished in the most cruel manner, by the
sword of the gibbet; while, at the same time, the nobility, who were really
guilty, were treated with a degree of lenity, which encouraged them to fresh
insurrections. But what gave Edward's reign a true value with posterity, was
the degree of power, which the people began to assume during this period. The
king considered the clergy and barons in some measure as rivals; and to weaken
their force, he never attempted to control the slow, but certain, advances made
by the people, which, in time, entirely destroyed the power of the one, and
divided the authority of the other.

EDWARD II.
portrait of Edward II Hall sculp.

CHAP. XIII. EDWARD II. surnamed of CAERNARVON.
THE pleasure which the people generally feel at the accession of a new prince,
effaces their sorrow for the deceased; the faults of the one are known and
hated, while the other, from novelty, receives imputed merit. Much, therefore,
was expected from the young prince, and all orders hastened to take the oath of
allegiance to him. He was now in the twenty-third year of his age, of an
agreeable figure, of a mild harmless disposition, and apparently addicted to
few vices. But he soon gave symptoms of his unfitness to succeed so great a
monarch as his father; he was rather fond of the enjoyment of his power, than
of securing it; and, lulled by the flattery of his courtiers, he thought he had
done enough for glory, when he had accepted the crown. Instead, therefore, of
prosecuting the war against Scotland, according to the injunctions he had
received from his dying father, he took no steps to check the progress of
Bruce; his march into that country being rather a procession of pageantry, than
a warlike expedition. Bruce, no longer dreading a great conqueror in the field,
boldly issued from his retreats, and even obtained a considerable advantage
over Aymer de Valence, who commanded the English forces. Young Edward looked
tamely on; and, instead of repressing the enemy, endeavored to come to an
accommodation. The English barons, who had been kept under during the preceding
reign, now saw that the scepter was fallen into such feeble hands,

To confirm the inauspicious conjectures that were already formed of this
reign, Edward recalled one of his favorites, who was banished during his
father's reign, being accused of corrupting the prince's morals. The name of
this much loved youth was Piers Gavestone, the son of a Gascon knight, who had
been employed in the service of the late king. This young man soon insinuated
himself into the affections of the prince; and, in fact, was adorned with every
accomplishment of person and mind, that were capable of creating affection: but
he was utterly destitute of those qualities of heart and understanding that
serve to procure esteem. He was beautiful, witty, brave, and active; but then
he was vicious, effeminate, debauched, and trifling. These were qualities
entirely adapted to the taste of the young monarch, and such as he could not
think of living without. He therefore took Gavestone into his particular
intimacy, and seemed to think no rewards equal to his deserts. Even before his
arrival at court from exile, he endowed him with the whole earldom of Cornwall,
which had lately fallen to the crown. He married him soon after to his own
niece, and granted him a sum of two and thirty thousand pounds, which the late
king had reserved for the maintenance of one hundred and forty knights, who had
undertaken to carry his heart to Jerusalem.

These accumulated favors did not fail to excite the jealousy and indignation
of the barons; and Gavestone was no way solicitous to soften their resentment.
Intoxicated with his power, he became haughty and overbearing. He treated the
English nobility, from whom it is probable he received marks of contempt, with
scorn and derision. Whenever there was to be a display of pomp or magnificence,
Gavestone was sure to eclipse all others; and he not only mortified his rivals
by his superior splendor, but his by superior insolence.

The barons were soon after still more provoked to see this presumptuous
favorite appointed guardian of the realm, during a journey the king was
obliged to make to Paris, to espouse the princess Isabella, to whom he had been
long since betrothed. They were not remiss, therefore, upon the arrival of this
princess, who was imperious and intriguing, to make her of their party, and to
direct her animosity against Gavestone, which, to do him justice, he took
little care to avoid. A conspiracy was soon formed against him, at the head of
which queen Isabella, and the earl of Lancaster, a nobleman of great power,
were associated. They bound themselves by oath to expel Gavestone; and began to
throw off all reverence for the royal authority, which they saw wholly in the
possession of this overgrown favorite. At length, the king found himself
obliged to submit to their united clamor; and he sent Gavestone out of the
kingdom, by appointing him lord lieutenant of Ireland. But this compliance was
of short duration; the weak monarch, long habituated to his favorite, could
not live without him; and having obtained a dispensation from the pope for his
breach of faith, he once more recalled Gavestone, and even went down to Chester
to receive him on his first landing from Ireland. A parliament was soon after
assembled, where the king had influence sufficient to have his late conduct
approved; and this served only to increase his ridiculous affection, and to
render Gavestone still more odious. This infatuated creature himself forgetting
his past misfortunes, and unmindful of future danger, resumed his former
ostentation and insolence, and made himself every day some new enemy.

It was easy to perceive, that a combination of the nobles, while the queen
secretly assisted their designs, would be too powerful against the efforts of a
weak king, and a vain favorite. They were resolved upon the fall of Gavestone,
even though that of Edward himself should be involved in the same ruin. They
soon, therefore, assembled, in a tumultuary parliament, contrary to the king's
express command, attended with a numerous retinue of armed followers; and began
their first usurpations, by giving laws to the king. could very patiently
submit to; but when he learned that Gavestone was to be banished for ever from
his dominions, he no longer was master of his temper; but removing to York,
where he was at a small distance from the immediate terror of the confederated
power, he instantly invited Gavestone back from Flanders, whither the barons
had banished him; and declaring his punishment and sentence to be illegal, he
openly reinstated him in all his former splendours. their animosity. In the
mean time, Gavestone was besieged in Scarborough by the earl of Pembroke; and
had the garrison been sufficiently supplied with provisions, that place would
have been impregnable. But Gavestone, sensible of the bad condition of the
garrison, took the earliest opportunity to offer terms of capitulation. He
stipulated, that he should remain in Pembroke's hands as a prisoner for two
months; and that endeavors should be used, in the mean time, for a general
accommodation. But Pembroke had no intention that he should escape so easily;
he ordered him to be conducted to the castle of Deddington, near Banbury,
where, on pretense of other business, he left him with a feeble guard, which
the earl of Warwick having notice of, he attacked the castle in which the
unfortunate Gavestone was confined, and quickly made himself master of his
person. The earls of Lancaster, Hereford, and Arundel, were soon apprized of
Warwick's success, and informed that their common enemy was now in custody at
Warwick castle. Thither, therefore, they hasted with the utmost expedition, to
hold a consultation upon the fate of their prisoner. This was of no long
continuance; they unanimously resolved to put him to death, as an enemy to the
kingdom, and gave him no time to prepare for his execution. They instantly had
him conveyed to a place called Blacklowhill, where a Welsh executioner,
provided for that purpose, severed the head from the body. There appeared a
deeper spirit of cruelty now entering into the nation, than had been known in
times of barbarity and ignorance. It is probable, that the mutual slaughters
committed by the Christians and Saracens upon each other, in the Crusades, made
the people familiar with blood; and taught christians to butcher each other
with the same alacrity with which they were seen to destroy infidels, to whom
they seldom gave any quarter.

The king, at first, seemed to feel all the resentment which so sensible an
injury could produce; but equally weak in his attachment and his revenge, he
was soon appeased, and granted the perpetrators a free pardon, upon their
making a show of submission and repentance. An apparent tranquillity was once
more established among the contending parties; and that resentment which they
had exercised upon each other, was now converted against the Scotch, who were
considered as the common enemy. A war had been declared some time before with
this nation, in order to recover that authority over them, which had been
established in the former reign, and a truce was soon after concluded; but the
terms of it being ill observed on both sides, the animosities were kindled
afresh, and the whole military force of England was called out by the king,
together with very large reinforcements, as well from the continent, as other
parts of the English dominions. Edward's army amounted to an hundred thousand
men; while Bruce, king of Scotland, could bring but a body of thirty thousand
to oppose him. Both armies met at a place called Banockburn, in the kingdom of
Scotland, within two miles of Stirling; the one confident in numbers, the other
relying wholly on their advantageous position. Bruce had a hill on his right
flank, and a bog on his left; with a rivulet in front, on the banks of which he
had caused several deep pits to be dug, with sharp stakes driven into them, and
the whole carefully concealed from the view of the enemy. The onset was made by
the English; and a very furious engagement ensued between the cavalry on both
sides. The fortune and intrepidity of Bruce gave the first turn to the day. He
engaged in single combat with Henry de Bohun, a gentleman of the family of
Hereford; and at one stroke clove his skull with his battleax to the chine. So
favorable a beginning was only interrupted by the night; but the battle
renewing at the dawn of the ensuing day, the English cavalry once more
attempted to attack the Scotch army; but unexpectedly found themselves
entangled among those pits which Bruce had previously made to receive them. The
earl of Gloucester, the king's nephew, was overthrown and slain: this served to
intimidate the whole English army; and they were soon still more alarmed by the
appearance of a fresh army, as they supposed it to be, that was preparing, from
a neighboring height, to fall upon them in the rear. This was only composed of
waggoners and attendants upon the Scottish camp; who had been supplied by the
king, with standards, and ordered to make as formidable an appearance as they
could. The stratagem took effect; the English, intimidated by their losses, and
distracted by their fears, began to fly on all sides; and throwing away their
arms, were pursued with great slaughter, as far as Berwick.

Edward himself narrowly escaped by flight to Dunbar, where he was received by
the earl of March, and thence conveyed in safety by sea to Berwick. This
battle was decisive in favor of the Scotch. It secured the independence of the
crown of that kingdom; and such was the influence of so great a defeat upon the
minds of the English, that for some years after no superiority of numbers could
induce them to keep the field against their formidable adversaries.

Want of success is ever attended with want of authority. of their country, as
to foment new animosities, and strengthen every foreign confederacy.

A confirmed opposition generally produces an opposite combination. The king
finding himself thus steadily counteracted in all his aims, had no other
resource but in another favorite, on whom he reposed all confidence, and from
whose connexions he hoped for assistance. The name of this new favorite was
Hugh Despenser, a young man of a noble English family, of some merit, and very
engaging accomplishments. His father was a person of a much more estimable
character than the son; he was venerable from his years, and respected through
life for his wisdom, his valor, and his integrity. But these excellent
qualities were all diminished and vilified, from the moment he and his son
began to share the king's favor. The turbulent barons, and Lancaster at their
head, regarded him as a rival, and taught the people to despise those
accomplishments that only served to eclipse their own. The king, equally weak
and unjust in his attachments, instead of profiting by the wisdom of his
favorites, endeavored to strengthen himself by their power. For this purpose
he married the younger Spenser to his niece; he settled upon him some very
large possessions in the marches of Wales; and even dispossessed some lords
unjustly of their estates, in order to accumulate them upon his favorite. This
was a pretext the king's enemies had been long seeking for; the earls of
Lancaster and Hereford flew to arms; and the lords Audley and Ammori, who had
been dispossessed, joined them with all their forces. Their first measure was
to require the king to dismiss or confine his favorite, the young Spenser,
menacing him, in case of a refusal, with a determination to obtain by force,
what should be denied to their importunities. This request was scarce made,
when they began to show their resolution to have redress, by pillaging and
destroying the lands of young Spenser, and burning his houses. The estates of
the father soon after shared the same fate; and the insurgents having thus
satiated themselves with the plunder of this most opulent family, marched up to
London, to inflict with their own hands, that punishment which had been denied
to their remonstrances. Finding a free entrance into the city, they so
intimidated the parliament that was then sitting, that a sentence was procured
of perpetual exile against the two Spensers, and a forfeiture of their fortune
and estates. But an act of this kind, extorted by violence, was not likely to
bind the king any longer than necessity compelled him. Some time after, having
assembled a small army to punish one of the barons, who had offered an
indignity to the queen, he thought it a convenient opportunity to take revenge
on all his enemies at once, and to recall the two Spensers, whose company he so
ardently desired. In this manner the civil war was kindled afresh, and the
country once more involved in all the horrors of slaughter and devastation.

The king had now got the start of his adversaries, and hastened by forced
marches toward the borders of Wales, where the enemy's chief power lay.
Lancaster, however, was not slow in making head against him; having summoned
together all his vassals and retainers, and being joined by the earl of
Hereford. Still farther to strengthen his party, he formed an alliance with the
king of Scotland, with whom he had long been privately connected. But his
diligence on this occasion proved ineffectual; the king at the head of thirty
thousand men pressed him so closely, that he had not time to collect his forces
together; and, flying from one place to another, he was at last stopped in his
way toward Scotland by Sir Andrew Harcla, who repulsed his forces in a
skirmish in which the earl of Hereford was slain, and Lancaster himself taken
prisoner. As he had formerly shown little mercy to Gaveston, there was very
little extended to him upon this occasion. He was condemned by a court martial;
and led, mounted on a lean horse, to an eminence near Pomfret, in circumstances
of the greatest indignity, where he was beheaded by a Londoner. The people,
with whom he had once been a favorite, seemed to have quite forsaken him in
his disgrace; they reviled him, as he was led to execution, with every kind of
reproach; and even his own vassals seemed eager to remove suspicion by their
being foremost to insult his distress. About eighteen more of the principal
insurgents were afterward condemned and executed in a more legal manner, while
others found safety by escaping to the continent.

A rebellion, thus crushed, served only to increase the pride and rapacity of
young Spenser; most of the forfeitures were seized for his use; and in his
promptitude to punish the delinquents, he was found guilty of many acts of
rapine and injustice. He himself laid the train for his own future misfortunes,
and an occasion soon offered for putting it into effect against him. number of
these, was the expulsion of the Spensers, against whom she had conceived a
violent hatred, from their great influence over the king.

In consequence of this resolution, she protracted the negotiation for some
time, and being at last required by the king to return, she replied, that she
would never again appear in England, till Spenser was removed from the royal
presence and banished the kingdom. By this reply, she gained two very
considerable advantages; she became popular in England, where Spenser was
universally disliked; and she had the pleasure of enjoying the company of a
young nobleman, whose name was Mortimer, upon whom she had lately placed her
affections. This youth had, in some former insurrection, been condemned for
high treason, but had the sentence commuted into perpetual imprisonment in the
Tower. From thence, however, he had the good fortune to escape into France, and
soon became distinguished among his party for his violent animosity to Spenser.
The graces of his person and address, but particularly his dislike to the
favorite, rendered him very acceptable to the queen; so that, from being a
partizan, he became a lover, and was indulged with all the familiarities that
her criminal passion could confer. The queen's court now, therefore, became a
sanctuary for all the malcontents who were banished their own country, or who
chose to come over. A correspondence was secretly carried on with the
discontented at home; and nothing now was aimed at, but to destroy the
favorites, and dethrone the king.

revolt in her favor; three prelates, the bishops of Ely, Lincoln, and
Hereford, brought her all their vassals; and Robert de Watteville, who had been
sent to oppose her progress, deserted to her with all his forces.

In this exigence, the unfortunate Edward vainly attempted to collect his
friends, and bring the malcontents to their duty; he was obliged to leave the
capital to the resentment of the prevailing party; and the populace,
immediately upon his desertion, flew out into those excesses which are the
consequence of brutality unrestrained by fear. They seized the bishop of
Exeter, as he was passing through the city, beheaded him without any form of
trial, and threw his body into the Thames. They also seized upon the Tower, and
agreed to show no mercy to any who should oppose their attempts. In the mean
time, the king found the spirit of disloyalty was not confined to the capital
alone, but diffused over the whole kingdom. He had placed some dependence upon
the garrison which was stationed in the castle of Bristol, under the command of
the elder Spenser; but they mutinied against their governor, and that
unfortunate favorite was delivered up, and condemned by the tumultuous barons
to the most ignominious death. He was hanged on a gibbet in his armor, his
body was cut in pieces and thrown to the dogs, and his head was sent to
Winchester, where it was set on a pole, and exposed to the insults of the
populace. Thus died the elder Spenser, in his ninetieth year, whose character
even the malevolence of party could not tarnish. He had passed a youth of
tranquillity and reputation; but his fond compliance with his son's ambition, at
length involved his age in ruin, though not disgrace.

Young Spenser, the unhappy son, did not long survive the father; he was taken
with some others who had followed the fortunes of the wretched king, in an
obscure convent in Wales, and the merciless victors resolved to glut their
revenge, in adding insult to cruelty. The queen had not patience to wait the
formality of a trial; but ordered him immediately to be led forth before the
insulting populace, and seemed to take a savage pleasure in feasting her eyes
with his distresses. The gibbet erected for his execution was fifty feet high;
his head was sent to London, where the citizens received it in brutal triumph,
and fixed it on the bridge. Several other lords also shared his fate; all
deserving pity indeed, had they not themselves formerly justified the present
inhumanity, by setting a cruel example.

In the mean time the king, who hoped to find refuge in Wales, was quickly
discovered, and closely pursued by his triumphant enemies. Finding no hopes of
succor in that part of the country, he took shipping for Ireland; but even
there his wretched fortune seemed willing to persecute him; he was driven back
by contrary winds, and delivered up to his adversaries, who expressed their
satisfaction in the grossness of their treatment. He was conducted to the
capital, amidst the insults and reproaches of the people, and confined in the
Tower. A charge was soon after exhibited against him; in which no other crimes
but his incapacity to govern, his indolence, his love of pleasure, and his
being swayed by evil counselors, were objected against him. His deposition was
quickly voted by parliament; he was assigned a pension for his support, his son
Edward, a youth of fourteen, was fixed upon to succeed him, and the queen was
appointed regent during the minority.

The deposed monarch but a short time survived his misfortunes; he was sent
from prison to prison, a wretched outcast, of respect and pity, he was taken
out of his hands, and delivered over to lord Berkeley, Montravers, and Gournay,
who were entrusted with the charge of guarding him month about. Whatever his
treatment from lord Berkeley might have been, the other two seemed resolved,
that he should enjoy none of the comforts of life, while in their custody. They
practiced every kind of indignity upon him, as if their design had been to
accelerate his death by the bitterness of his sufferings. Among other acts of
brutal oppression, it is said, that they shaved him for sport in the open
fields, using water from a neighboring ditch. The genius of the people must
have been greatly debased, or they would never have permitted such indecencies
to be practiced on a monarch, whose greatest fault was the violence of his
friendships. He is said to have borne his former indignities with patience, but
all fortitude forsook him upon this occasion; he looked upon his merciless
insulters with an air of fallen majesty, and bursting into tears, exclaimed,
that the time might come, when he would be more decently attended. This,
however, was but a vain expectation. As his persecutors saw that his death
might not arrive, even under every cruelty, till a revolution had been made in
his favor, they resolved to rid themselves of their fears, by destroying him
at once. Accordingly, his two keepers, Gournay and Montravers, came to Berkley
castle, where Edward was then confined; and having concerted a method of
putting him to death without any external signs of violence, they threw him on
a bed, holding him down by a table, which they placed over him. They then ran
an horn pipe up his body, through which they conveyed a red hot iron; and thus
burnt his bowels, without disfiguring his body. By this cruel artifice, they
expected to have their crime concealed; but his horrid shrieks, which were
heard at a distance from the castle, soon gave a suspicion of the murder; and
the whole was soon after divulged, by the confession of one of the accomplices.
Misfortunes like his, must ever create pity; and a punishment so
disproportionate to the sufferer's guilt, must wipe away even many of those
faults, of which Edward was justly culpale. He left behind him four children;
two sons, and two daughters: Edward was his eldest son and successor; John,
died young; Jane was afterward married to David Bruce king of Scotland; and
Eleanor was married to Reginald, count of Gueldres.

EDWARD III.
portrait of Edward III Hall sculp.

CHAP. XIV. EDWARD III.
THE parliament, by which young Edward was raised to the throne, during the
life of his father, appointed twelve persons as his privy council, to direct
the operations of government. Mortimer, the queen's paramour, who might
naturally be set down as one of the members, artfully excluded himself, under a
pretended show of moderation; but at the same time he secretly influenced all
the measures that came beneath their deliberation. He caused the greatest part
of the royal revenues to be settled on the queen dowager, and he seldom took
the trouble to consult the ministers of government in any public undertaking.
The king himself was so besieged by the favourite's creatures, that no access
could be procured to him, and the whole sovereign authority was shared between
Mortimer and the queen, who took no care to conceal her criminal attachment.

A government so constituted, could not be of long continuance; and the
slightest shock was sufficient to overturn that power, which was founded
neither in strength nor virtue. An irruption of the Scotch gave the first blow
to Mortimer's credit; and young Edward's own abilities contributed to its ruin.
The Scotch, who had no connection with either party, were resolved to take
advantage of the feeble state of the nation; and, without regarding the truce
that subsisted between the two kingdoms, attempted to surprise the castle of
Norham. This commencement of hostilities, they soon after seconded by a
formidable invasion on the northern counties, with an army of twenty thousand
men. Edward, even at this early age, discovered that martial disposition, for
which he was afterward so famous. He resolved to intercept them in their
retreat; and began his march in the middle of July,

It was in this situation, that the first breach was discovered between the
king and Mortimer, the queen's favorite. The young monarch, all ardour to
engage, resolved that night, at all hazards, not to allow the ravagers to
escape with impunity; but Mortimer opposed his influence to the valor of the
king, and prevented an engagement, which might be attended with the most
destructive consequences to his authority, whether he won, or lost the day.
Shortly after, the Scotch, under the command of Douglas, made an irruption into
the English camp by night, and arrived at the very tent in which the king was
sleeping. But the young monarch happening to wake in the critical moment, made
a valiant defense against the enemy; his chamberlain and chaplain died fighting
by his side; and he thus had time given him to escape in the dark. The Scotch
being frustrated in their design upon the king, were contented to decamp for
their own country, leaving their tents standing, without any person behind
them, except six English prisoners, whose legs they had broken, to prevent
their carrying intelligence to their countrymen. The escape of the Scotch was
as disagreeable a circumstance to the English army, as the valor of the young
king was applauded and admired. The failure on one part was entirely ascribed
to the queen's favorite; and the success on the other, to the king's own
intrepidity. The people began to wish for a removal of that authority, which
stood between them and the monarch; and spared no pains to aggravate their
faults of the governors, or to extol the rising merit of their young sovereign.

Mortimer now saw himself exalted to a very precarious situation; and was
resolved, on any terms, to procure a peace with Scotland, in order to fix his
power more firmly at home. A treaty was accordingly concluded between the two
nations, in which the English renounced all title to sovereignty over the
sister kingdom; and the Scotch, in return, agreed to pay thirty thousand marks
as a compensation. The next step that Mortimer thought necessary for his
security, was to seize the earl of Kent, brother to the late king, an harmless
and well meaning person, who, under a persuasion that his brother was still
alive, and concealed in some secret prison, entered into a design of restoring
him to liberty, and reinstating him in his former power. Him therefore,
Mortimer resolved to destroy; and summoning him before parliament, had him
accused, condemned, and executed, even before the young king had time to
interpose in his favor. In proportion as Mortimer thus got rid of his enemies,
he was careful to enrich himself with their spoils. The estate of the
unfortunate earl was seized upon for the use of the favourite's youngest son;
the immense fortunes of the Spensers were in like manner converted to his use.
Thus his power became invidious, and his corrupt morals made it still more
formidable.

It was in this posture of affairs, that Edward resolved to shake off an
authority that was odious to the nation, and particularly restrictive upon him.
But such was the power of the favorite, that it required as much precaution to
overturn the usurper, as to establish the throne. The queen and Mortimer had
for some time chosen the castle of Nottingham for the place of their residence;
it was strictly guarded, the gates locked every evening, and the keys carried
to the queen. It was, therefore, agreed between the king, and some of his
barons, who secretly entered into his designs, to seize upon them in this
fortress; and for that purpose, Sir William Eland, the governor, was induced to
admit them by a secret subterraneous passage, which had been formerly contrived
for an outlet, but was now hidden with rubbish, and known only to one or two.
It was by this, therefore, the noblemen in the king's interests entered the
castle in the night; and Mortimer, without having it in his power to make any
resistance, was seized in an apartment adjoining that of the queen's. It was in
vain that she endeavored to protect him; in vain she entreated them to spare
her "gentle Mortimer;" the barons, deaf to her entreaties, denied her that
pity, which she had so often refused to others. Her paramour was condemned by
the parliament, which was then sitting, without being permitted to make his
defense, or even examining a witness against him. He was hanged on a gibbet at
a place called Elmes, about a mile from London, where his body was left hanging
for two days after. A similar sentence passed against some of his adherents,
particularly Gournay, and Montravers, the murderers of the late king; but these
had time to elude punishment, by escaping to the continent. The queen, who was
certainly the most culpable, was shielded by the dignity of her situation; she
was only discarded from all share of power, and confined for life, to the
castle of Risings, with a pension of three thousand pounds a year. From this
confinement, she was never after set free; and though the king annually paid
her a visit of decent ceremony, yet she found herself abandoned to universal
contempt and detestation; and continued for above twenty five years after, a
miserable monument of blasted ambition.

Edward being thus freed from the control of usurped authority, resolved to
become popular, by an expedient which seldom failed to gain the affections of
the English. He knew that a conquering monarch was the fittest to please a
warlike people. The weakness of the Scottish government, which was at that time
under a minority, gave him a favorable opportunity of renewing hostilities;
and the turbulent spirit of the nobles of that country still more contributed
to promote his aims. A new pretender also started up to that throne, namely,
Edward Baliol, whose father John had been crowned king of Scotland, and Edward
resolved to assist him in his pretensions. He therefore gave him permission to
levy what forces he was able in England; and with not above three thousand
adventurers, thus fortuitously united, Baliol gained a considerable victory
over his countrymen, in which twelve thousand of their men were slain. This
victory, which was followed by some others, so intimidated the Scotch, that
their armies dispersed, and the kingdom seemed as if subdued by an handful of
men. Baliol, by one of those unexpected turns of fortune, common enough in
barbarous times, was crowned king at Scone; and every nobleman, who was most
exposed to danger, submitted to his authority. But he did not long enjoy his
superiority; by another turn equally sudden, he was attacked and defeated by
Sir Archibald Douglas, and obliged to take refuge in England once more, in a
miserable condition.

An attempt thus unsuccessfully made by Baliol, only served to inflame the
ardour of Edward, who very joyfully accepted of that offer of homage and
superiority, which it was Baliol's present interest to make. He therefore
prepared, with all his force, to reinstate the deposed king of Scotland, in a
government which would ever after be subordinate to his own. He accordingly
prevailed upon his parliament to give him a supply, which they reluctantly did;
and, with a well-disciplined army, he laid siege to Berwick, which capitulated
after a vigorous defense. It was in attempting to relieve this city, that a
general engagement ensued between the Scotch and the English. It was fought at
Hallidown hill, a little north of Berwick, with great obstinacy on both sides;
but the fortune of Edward prevailed. Douglas, the Scottish general, was slain,
and soon after the whole army put to the route. This victory was, in a great
measure, obtained by the expertness of the English archers, who now began to be
famous over Europe for their peculiar skill. All the Scottish nobles of chief
distinction were either slain, or taken prisoners; near thirty thousand of
their men fell in the action,

This kingdom, which had for a long time discontinued its animosities against
England, began to be an object of Edward's jealousy and ambition. A new scene
began to be opened in France, which operated for more than a century, in
subjecting that country to all the miseries of war, till Europe at last began
to doubt, whether it was annexed to England by right of arms, or of succession.
France, at that period, was neither the extensive, nor the powerful kingdom we
see it at this day. Many great provinces have been added to it since that
period, particularly Dauphiny, Provence, and Franche Comte; and the government
was still more feeble, by those neighboring princes, who were pretended
subjects to the king, but, in reality, formidable rivals of his power. At the
time we are speaking of, that kingdom was particularly unfortunate; and the
king shared in the general calamity. The three sons of Philip the Fair, in full
parliament, accused their wives of adultery; and, in consequence of this
accusation, they were condemned and imprisoned for life. Lewis Hutin, the
successor to the crown of France, caused his wife to be strangled, and her
lovers to be flead alive. After his death, as he left only a daughter, his next
brother, Philip the Tall, assumed the crown, in prejudice of the daughter; and
vindicated his title by the Salic law, which laid it down, that no female
should succeed to the crown. This law, however, was not universally
acknowleged, nor sufficiently confirmed by precedents, to procure an easy
submission. They had hitherto enquired but slightly in France, whether a female
could succeed to the kingdom; and as laws are only made to regulate what may
happen by what has happened already, there were no facts upon which to ground
the opinions on either side of the question. There were, in reality, precedents
to countenance both claims, and thus to keep mankind in suspense. The
parliament of France had often adjudged the succession to women, as Artois was
formerly given to a female, in prejudice of the male heir. The succession of
Champagne had been, on some occasions, given to the daughters; while, on
others, they were judged unqualified to succeed. We thus see that right changed
with power; and justice, in such a case, was unknown, or disregarded. In the
present instance, the younger brother of the late king, Charles the Fair,
jealous of his elder brother's fortune, opposed his pretensions, and asserted,
that the late king's daughter was rightful heir to his crown. The cause, thus
warmly contested between the two brothers, was at last carried before the
parliament of France; and they decided, upon the Salic law, in favor of Philip
the Elder. This monarch enjoyed the crown but a short time; and dying, left
only daughters to succeed him. Charles, therefore, without a male opponent,
seized the crown, and enjoyed it for some time; but he also dying, left his
wife pregnant. As there was now no apparent heir, the regency was contested by
two persons, who laid their claims upon this occasion. Edward the third urged
his pretensions, as being by his mother Isabella, who was daughter to Philip
the Fair, and sister to the three last kings of France, rightful heir to the
crown. Philip Valois, on the other hand, put himself in actual possession of
the government, as being next heir by the male succession. He was, therefore,
constituted regent of France; and the queen-dowager being unfortunately, some
time after, brought to bed of a daughter, he was unanimously elected king. He
was crowned amidst the universal congratulations of his subjects; received the
appellation of Philip the Fortunate; and to this he added those qualities which
might merit good fortune, namely, justice and virtue. Among other instances of
his felicity, he might reckon that of the homage paid him by Edward, his rival,
which he came to offer at Amiens. However, as strength generally inspires
ambition, this homage was soon followed by a war; and Edward disputed that
crown, of which he had just before declared himself a vassal.

A brewer of Ghent was one of those who gave the greatest assistance to Edward
in this war, and determined him to assume the title of king of France. This
citizen's name was James Ardevelt, a man grown too powerful for a subject; and
one of those who, according to Machiavel, kings ought to flatter, or destroy.
This citizen had, for some time, governed his countrymen with a more absolute
sway than had ever been assumed by any of their lawful sovereigns. He placed
and displaced magistrates at his pleasure. He was accompanied by a guard, who,
on the least signal from him, instantly assassinated any man who had the
misfortune to fall under his displeasure. With the assistance of this man,
therefore, Edward resolved to undertake the conquest of France. He first,
however, in a formal manner, consulted his parliament on the propriety of the
undertaking, obtained their approbation, received a proper supply of wool,
which he intended to barter with the Flemings; and being attended with a body
of English forces, and several of his nobility, he sailed over into Flanders,
big with his intended conquests.

Edward's first step was to assert his claim to the French crown; to assume the
title of king of the country, and brand Philip, his rival, with the title of
Usurper.

The first great advantage gained by the English was in a naval engagement on
the coast of Flanders, in which the French lost two hundred and thirty ships,
and had thirty thousand of their seamen, and two of their admirals slain. None
of Philip's courtiers, it is said, dared to inform him of the event, till his
jester gave him a hint, by which he discovered the loss he had sustained. This
victory, together with some successful operations that soon after followed,
brought on a truce, which neither side seemed willing to break, till the
ambition of Edward was once more excited by the invitation of the count de
Mountfort, who had possessed himself of the province of Brittany, and applied
to Edward to second his claims. An offer of this kind entirely coincided with
Edward's most sanguine desires. He immediately saw the advantages arising from
such a proposal. He was happy in the promised assistance of Mountfort, an
active and valiant prince, closely united to him by interest, and thus opening
to him an entrance into the heart of France. On the other hand, he could have
no hopes from the side of Flanders, as he was obstructed by those numerous
fortifications which had been raised on that frontier. These flattering
prospects, however, were for a while damped by the imprisonment of Mountfort,
whose aims being discovered, he found himself besieged in the city of Nantz,
and taken. But Jane of Flanders, his wife, soon made up for the loss of her
husband. This lady, who was one of the most extraordinary women of her age,
courageously undertook to support the falling fortunes of her family. She
assembled the inhabitants of Rennes, where she then resided; and carrying her
infant son in her arms, deplored her misfortunes, and attempted to inspire the
citizens with an affection for her cause. The inhabitants of Nantz instantly
espoused her interests, and all the other fortresses of Brittany embraced the
same resolution; the king of England was apprized of her efforts in his favor,
and entreated to send her succors with all possible expedition to the town of
Hennebone, in which place she resolved to sustain the attacks of the enemy. She
was not deceived in her opinion of the enemies vigilance and activity. Charles
de Blois, Philip's general, anxious to make himself master of so important a
fortress as Hennebone, and still more to take the countess a prisoner, sat down
before the place with a large army, and conducted the siege with indefatigable
industry. The defense was no less vigorous; several sallies were made by the
garrison, in which the countess herself was still the most active, and led on
to the assault. Observing one day that their whole army had quitted the camp to
join in a general storm, she sallied out by a postern at the head of three
hundred horse, set fire to the enemies tents and baggage, put their sutlers and
servants to the sword, and occasioned such an alarm, that the French desisted
from the assault, in order to cut off her communication with the town. Thus
intercepted, she retired to Auray, where she continued five or six days; then
returning at the head of five hundred horse, she fought her way through one
quarter of the French camp, and returned to her faithful citizens in triumph.
But mere unsupported valor could not repel all the encroachments of an active
and superior enemy. The besiegers had at length made several breaches in the
walls; and it was apprehended that a general assault, which was hourly
expected, would be fatal. A capitulation was therefore proposed, and a
conference was already begun, when the countess, who had mounted on a high
tower, and was looking toward the sea with great impatience, descried some
ships at a distance. She immediately exclaimed that succors were arrived, and
forbid any further capitulation. She was not disappointed in her wishes; the
fleet she discerned carried a body of English gentlemen, with six thousand
archers, whom Edward had prepared for the relief of Hennebone, but who had been
long detained by contrary winds. They entered the harbor, under the conduct of
Sir Walter Manny, one of the most valiant commanders of his time. This relief
served to keep up the declining spirits of the Bretons, until the time
appointed by the late truce with Edward was expired, on which he was at liberty
to renew the war in greater form.

thousand sail, of all dimensions. He carried with him, besides all the chief
nobility of England, his eldest son, the prince of Wales (afterward surnamed
the black prince) a youth of about fifteen years old, and already remarkable
both for understanding and valor above his age. His army consisted of four
thousand men at arms; ten thousand archers, ten thousand Welsh infantry, and
six thousand Irish, all which he landed safely at La Hogue, a port it Normandy,
which country he determined to make the seat of the war.

The intelligence of Edward's landing, and the devastation caused by his
troops, who dispersed themselves over the whole face of the country, soon
spread universal consternation through the French court. The rich city of Caen
was taken and plundered by the English, without mercy; the villages and towns,
even up to Paris, shared the same fate; and the French had no other resource
but by breaking down their bridges, to attempt putting a stop to the invader's
career. In the mean time, Philip was not idle in making preparations to repress
the enemy. He had stationed one of his generals, Godemar de Faye, with an army
on the opposite side of the river Sum, over which Edward was to pass; while
he himself, at the head of an hundred thousand fighting men, advanced to give
the English battle. Edward thus, in the midst of his victories, unexpectedly
exposed to the danger of being enclosed and starving in an enemy's country,
published a reward to any that should bring him intelligence of a passage over
the river Sum. This was discovered by a peasant of the country; and Edward
had just time to get his whole army over the river, when Philip appeared in his
rear.

As both armies had for some time been in sight of each other, nothing was so
eagerly expected on each side as a battle; and although the forces were
extremely disproportioned, the English amounting only to thirty thousand, the
French to an hundred and twenty thousand; yet Edward resolved to indulge the
impetuosity of his troops, and put all to the hazard of a battle. He
accordingly chose his ground, with advantage, near the village of Crecy; and
there determined to await with tranquillity the shock of the enemy. He drew up
his men on a gentle ascent, and divided them into three lines. The first was
commanded by the young prince of Wales; the second was conducted by the earls
of Northampton and Arundel; and the third, which was kept as a body of reserve,
was headed by the king in person. As his small army was in danger of being
surrounded, he threw up trenches on his flank; and placed all his baggage in a
wood behind him, which he also secured by an entrenchment. Having thus made the
proper dispositions, he and the prince of Wales received the sacrament with
great devotion; and all his behavior denoted the calm intrepidity of a man
resolved on conquest, or death. He rode from rank to rank with a serene
countenance; bad his soldiers remember the honor of their country; and by his
eloquence animated the whole army to a degree of enthusiastic expectation. It
is said also by some that he first made use of artillery upon this occasion;
and placed in his front some pieces, which contributed not a little to throw
the enemy into disorder.

On the other side, Philip, impelled by resentment, and confident of his
numbers, was more solicitous in bringing the enemy to an engagement, than
prudent in taking measures for the success of it. He was advised by some of his
generals to defer the combat till the ensuing day, when his army would have
recovered from their fatigue, and might be disposed into better order, than
their present hurry permitted them to observe. But it was now too late; the
impatience of his troops was too great to be restrained; they pressed one upon
the other, and no orders could curb their blind impetuosity. They were led on,
however, in three bodies to oppose those of the English. The first line,
consisting of fifteen thousand Genoese cross-bow-men, were commanded by Anthony
Doria. The second body was led by the count Alencon, brother to the king, and
the king himself was at the head of the third.

About three in the afternoon, the famous battle of Crecy began, by the French
king's ordering the Genoese archers to charge; but they were so fatigued with
their march, that they cried out for a little rest before they should engage.
The count Alencon, being informed of their petition, rode up and reviled them
as cowards, commanding them to begin the onset without delay. Their reluctance
to begin, was still more increased by an heavy shower which fell that instant
and relaxed their bow strings; so that the discharge they made, produced but
very little effect. On the other hand, the English archers, who had kept their
bows in cases, and were favored by a sudden gleam of sunshine, that rather
dazzled the enemy, let fly their arrows so thick, and with such good aim, that
nothing was to be seen among the Genoese but hurry, terror, and dismay. The
young prince of Wales had presence of mind to take advantage of their
confusion, and to lead on his line to the charge. The French cavalry, however,
commanded by count Alencon, wheeling round sustained the combat, and began to
hem the English round. The earls of Arundel and Northampton, now came in to
assist the prince, who appeared foremost in the very shock; and wherever he
appeared, turning the fortune of the day. The thickest of the battle was now
gathered round him, and the valor of a boy filled even veterans with
astonishment; but their surprise at his courage could not give way to their
fears for his safety. Being apprehensive that some mischance might happen to
him in the end, an officer was dispatched to the king, desiring that succors
might be sent to the prince's relief. Edward, who had all this time, with great
tranquillity, viewed the engagement, from a windmill, demanded with seeming
deliberation if his son were dead; but being answered that he still lived, and
was giving astonishing instances of valor; "then tell my generals, cried the
king, that he shall have no assistance from me; the honor of this day shall be
his, let him show himself worthy the profession of arms, and let him be
indebted to his own merit alone for victory." This speech, being reported to
the prince and his attendants, it inspired them with new courage; they made a
fresh attack upon the French cavalry, and count Alencon, their bravest
commander, was slain. This was the beginning of their total overthrow: the
French being now without a competent leader, were thrown into confusion; the
Welsh infantry rushed into the midst of the conflict, and dispatched those with
their long knives who had survived the fury of the former onset. It was in vain
that the king of France himself, seemed almost singly to maintain the combat;
he endeavored to animate his few followers, both by his voice and example, but
the victory was too decisive to be resisted; while he was yet endeavoring to
face the enemy, John de Hainault seized the reins of his horse, and, turning
him round, carried him off the field of battle. In this engagement, thirty
thousand of the French were killed upon the field; and, among this number, were
John king of Bohemia, James king of Majorca, Ralph duke of Lorrain, nine
counts, four and twenty bannerets, twelve hundred knights, fifteen hundred
gentlemen, and four thousand men at arms. There is something remarkable in the
fate of the Bohemian monarch; who, though blind, was yet willing to share in
the engagement. This unfortunate prince, enquiring the fate of the day, was
told that all was lost, and his son Charles obliged to retire desperately
wounded; and that the prince of Wales bore down every thing before him. Having
received this information, blind as he was, he commanded his knights to lead
him into the hottest part of the battle against the young warrior; accordingly,
four of them rushed with him into the thickest part of the enemy, where they
were all quickly slain.

The whole French army took to flight, and were put to the sword by the
pursuers without mercy, till night stopped the carnage. The king, on his return
to the camp, flew into the arms of the prince of Wales and exclaimed, "My
valiant son, continue as you have begun; you have acquitted yourself nobly, and
are worthy of the kingdom that will be your inheritance." The next morning was
foggy, and a party of the militia of Rouen coming to join the French army, were
routed by the English at the first onset; many more also were decoyed by some
French standards, which the victors placed upon the mountains, and to which the
fugitives resorted, where they were cut in pieces without mercy. Never was a
victory more seasonable, or less bloody to the English than this.
Notwithstanding the great slaughter of the enemy, the conquerors lost but one
esquire, three knights, and a few of inferior rank. The crest of the king of
Bohemia was three ostrich feathers, with this motto, Ich Dien; which signifies,
in the German language, I serve. This was thought to be a proper prize to
perpetuate the victory; and it was accordingly added to the arms of the prince
of Wales, and it has been adopted by all his successors.

But this victory was attended with still more substantial advantages; for
Edward, as moderate in conquest, as prudent in his measures to obtain it,
resolved to secure an easy entrance into France for the future. With this view
he laid siege to Calais, that was then defended by John de Vienne, an
experienced commander, and supplied with every thing necessary for defense. The
king, however, knowing the difficulty of taking so strong a town by force,
resolved to reduce it by famine. He chose a secure station for his camp; drew
entrenchments round the city, and made proper provisions for his soldiers to
endure a winter campaign. These operations, though slow, were at length
successful. It was in vain that the governor made a noble defense, that he
excluded all the useless mouths from the city, which Edward generously
permitted to pass unmolested through his camp. It was at length taken, after a
twelvemonth's siege, the defendants having been reduced to the last extremity
by famine and fatigue. The obstinate resistance, made by the townsmen, was not
a little displeasing to Edward; and he had often declared, that when put in
possession of the place, he would take signal revenge for the numbers of men he
had lost during the siege. It was with great difficulty, therefore, that he was
persuaded to accept of their submission; and to spare their lives, upon
condition, that six of the most considerable citizens should be sent him, to be
disposed of as he should think proper; but on these he was resolved to wreak
his resentment, and he gave orders that they should be led into his camp,
bare-headed, and barefooted, with ropes about their necks, in the manner of
criminals just preparing for instant execution. When the news of this fierce
resolution was brought into the city, it spread new consternation among the
inhabitants. Who should be the men, that were thus to be offered up as victims
to procure the safety of all the rest; and by their deaths appease the victor's
resentment, was a fresh subject of dreadful enquiry. In this terrible suspense,
one of the principal inhabitants, whose name was Eustace de St. Pierre, walked
forward, and offered himself as willing to undergo any tortures that could
procure his fellow-citizens safety. Five more soon followed his noble example;
and these marching out like criminals, laid the keys of their city at Edward's
feet; but no submissions seemed sufficient to appease his resentment; and they
would in all probability have suffered death, had not the generosity of their
conduct affected the queen, who interceded in their behalf, and with some
difficulty obtained their pardon.

demand upon the continent. All the English were obliged to bring their goods
thither; and foreign merchants came to the same place to purchase them. By
these means, the city became populous, rich, and flourishing; and although it
had like to have been taken some time after by treachery, it continued for
above two centuries after in the possession of the English, and braved all the
military power of France.

The treachery, which had like to have restored it to the French, arose from
the perfidy of Aymer de Pavie, an Italian, who had been appointed governor of
the place. He agreed to deliver it up to the enemy, when his perfidy was
discovered by Edward, who obliged him to carry on the treaty, and to persuade
the enemy that he was still in their interests. Accordingly a day was appointed
for the admission of the French troops into the city; while the king, with a
strong body of forces, took care to prepare for their reception. All those who
entered the city were immediately cut to pieces; and the garrison, with Edward,
and Sir Walter Manny at their head, rushing out in pursuit of the rest, a
fierce and bloody engagement ensued, in which the king overthrew and took
Eustace de Ribaumont, a man of remarkable strength and valor, with his own
hand.

In this manner, the war between the English and French was carried on with
mutual animosity, a war which at once thinned the inhabitants of the invaded
country, while it drained that of the invaders. But a destruction still more
terrible than that of war contributed, at this time, to desolate the wretched
provinces of Europe. A pestilence, more dreadful than any mentioned in the
annals of history, which had already almost dispeopled Asia and Africa, came to
settle upon the western world with increased malignity. It is said to have
taken its origin in the great kingdom of Cathay, where it rose from the earth
with the most horrid and sulphurous stench, destroying all the inhabitants,
and even marking plants and minerals with its malignity. The fourth part of the
people were cut off; and it particularly raged with such violence in London,
that in one year's space, there were buried in the Charter House churchyard,
above fifty thousand persons. It was in the midst of this terrible infliction
from nature, were silently repairing by commerce and industry; these arts,
which were then despised by princes, were laying the seeds of future opulence,
and increased population. The arts of peace had for some time been revived in
Italy, and were gradually traveling westward; the refinements and the
pleasures of sense, every day began to improve, although intellectual
refinements were as yet totally unknown. Sensual enjoyments, must ever be
carried to some height before mankind can find leisure or taste for
entertainments of a more exquisite nature.

Nor was England free from internal wars during this dreary period. While
Edward was reaping victories upon the continent, the Scotch, ever willing to
embrace a favorable opportunity of rapine and revenge, invaded the frontiers
with a numerous army, headed by David Bruce their king. This unexpected
invasion, at such a juncture, alarmed the English, but was not capable of
intimidating them. Lionel, Edward's son, who was left guardian of England
during his father's absence, was yet too young to take upon him the command of
an army; but the victories on the continent, seemed to inspire even women with
valor: Philippa, Edward's queen, took upon her the conduct of the field, and
prepared to repulse the enemy in person.

This victory diffused an universal degree of joy through the nation; a captive
king was an object that flattered their pride, and they soon had new reasons
for exultation. Philip, who was surnamed the Fortunate, upon coming to the
crown of France, ended his life under the accumulation of every misfortune that
could render a king unhappy. John his son succeeded him on the throne, which
was but ill supported by Philip, and yet still worse by him. This weak, yet
virtuous prince, upon coming to the crown, found himself at the head of an
exhausted nation, and a divided and factious nobility. France at that time,
pretty much resembled England under the reign of a prince of the same name some
ages before. They had parliaments of barons despotic over their own hereditary
possessions; and they obliged John their king, to sign a charter very much
resembling the Magna Charta, which had formerly been signed by his namesake of
England. The warlike resources, therefore, of France and England, were at this
time very unequal. John was at the head of a nobility, that acknowledged no
subordination among each other; they led their dependent slaves to battle, and
obeyed their superiors only as it suited their inclination. Their king might
more justly be said to command a number of small armies under distinct leaders,
than one vast machine, operating with uniformity and united efforts. The French
barons paid their own soldiers, punished their transgressions, and rewarded
their fidelity. But the forces of England were under a very different
establishment; the main body of the English army was composed of soldiers
indiscriminately levied throughout the nation, paid by the king, and regarding
him alone as the source of preferment or disgrace. Instead of personal
attendance, the nobility contributed supplies in money; and there was only such
a number of nobles in the army as might keep the spirit of honor alive without
injuring military subordination.

It was in this state of things, that a short truce which had been concluded
between Edward and Philip was dissolved by the death of the latter; and Edward,
well pleased with the factions that then prevailed in France, was resolved to
seize the opportunity of increasing its distresses. Accordingly the Black
Prince was sent into France with his army, on board a fleet of an hundred sail;
and, landing in Gascony, carried his devastations into the heart of the
country. On the other hand, Edward himself made an irruption on the side of
Calais, at the head of a numerous army, and ravaged all the open country. In
the mean time John, who was as yet unprepared to oppose the progress of the
enemy, continued a quiet spectator of their insults; nor was it till the
succeeding summer's campaign, that he resolved to attack the Black Prince, the
country before him was too well guarded to prevent his advancing further; and
all the bridges behind were broken down, which effectually barred a retreat. In
this embarrassing situation, his perplexity was increased, by being informed,
that the king of France was actually marching at the head of sixty thousand men
to intercept him. He at first thought of retreating; but soon finding it
impossible, he determined calmly to await the approach of the enemy; and
notwithstanding the disparity of forces, to commit all to the hazard of a
battle.

It was at a place called Maupertuis, near Poictiers, that both armies came in
sight of each other. The French king might very easily have starved the English
into any terms he thought proper to impose: but such was the impatient valor
of the French nobility, and such their certainty of success, that it might have
been equally fatal to attempt repressing their ardour to engage. In the mean
time, while both armies were drawn out, and expecting the signal to begin, they
were stopped by the appearance of the cardinal of Perigord, who attempted to be
a meditator between them. However, John, who made himself sure of victory,
would listen to no other terms than the restitution of Calais; with which the
Black Prince refusing to comply, the onset was deferred till the next morning,
for which both sides waited in anxious suspense.

It was during this interval, that the young prince showed himself worthy of
conquest; he strengthened his post by new intrenchments; he placed three
hundred men in ambush, with as many archers, who were commanded to attack the
enemy in flank, during the heat of the engagement. Having taken these
precautions, and the morning beginning to appear, he ranged his army in three
divisions; the van commanded by the earl of Warwick; the rear by the earls of
Salisbury and Suffolk; and the main body by himself. In like manner, the king
of France arranged his forces in three divisions; the first commanded by the
Duke of Orleans; the second by the Dauphin, attended by his younger brothers;
while he himself led up the main body, seconded by his youngest and favorite
son, then about fourteen years of age. As the English were to be attacked only
by marching up a long narrow lane, the French suffered greatly from their
archers, who were posted on each side, behind the hedges. Nor were they in a
better situation upon emerging from this danger, being met by the black prince
himself, at the head of a chosen body of troops, who made a furious onset upon
their forces, already in great disorder. A dreadful overthrow ensued; those who
were as yet in the lane recoiled upon their own forces; while the English
troops, who had been placed in ambush, took that opportunity to increase the
confusion, and confirm the victory. The dauphin, and the duke of Orleans, were
among the first that fled. The king of France himself made the utmost efforts
to retrieve by his valor, what his rashness had forfeited; but his single
courage was unable to stop that consternation, which had now become general
through his army; and his cavalry soon flying, he found himself totally exposed
to the enemy's fury. He saw his nobles falling round him, valiantly fighting in
his defense, and his youngest son wounded by his side. At length, spent with
fatigue, and despairing of success, he thought of yielding himself a prisoner;
and frequently cried out, that he was ready to deliver himself to his cousin,
the prince of Wales. The honor of taking him, however, was reserved for a much
more ignoble hand; he was seized by Dennis de Morbec, a knight of Arras, who
had been obliged to fly his country for murder.

This success was, in a great measure, owing to the valor and conduct of the
black prince; but his moderation in victory was a nobler triumph than had ever
graced any former conqueror. He came forth to meet the captive monarch with an
air of pitying modesty; he remonstrated with him in the most humble manner,
when he began to complain of his misfortunes, that he still had the comfort
left of reflecting, that, though unsuccessful, he had done all that deserved to
ensure conquest; he promised, that a submissive deference to his dignity should
never be wanting to soften his captivity; and at table he actually refused to
sit down, but stood among the number of his prisoner's attendants, declaring,
that it did not become him, as a subject, to sit down in the presence of a king.



Two kings prisoners in the same court, and at the same time, were considered
as glorious achievements; but all that England gained by them was only glory.
Whatever was won in France, with all the dangers of war, and the expense of
preparation, was successively, and in a manner silently, lost, without the
mortification of a defeat. It may be easily supposed, that the treaties which
were made with the captive kings, were highly advantageous to the conquerors;
but these treaties were no longer observed, than while the English had it in
their power to enforce obedience. It is true, that John held to his engagements
as far as he was able; but by being a prisoner he lost his authority; and his
misfortunes had rendered him contemptible at home. The dauphin, and the states
of France, rejected the treaties he had been induced to sign; and prepared, in
good earnest, to repel the meditated invasions of the conqueror. All the
considerable towns were put into a posture of defense; it was in vain that
Edward alleged the obligation of the treaties which had been signed at London,
and plundered the country round to provoke an engagement. He, at length,
therefore, thought fit to listen to equitable terms of peace, which was at last
concluded, upon condition that king John should be restored to liberty, upon
paying a ransom of about a million and a half of our money. It was stipulated,
that Edward should for ever renounce all claim to the kingdom of France; and
should only remain possessed of the territories of Poictou, Xaintonge,
l'Agenois, Perigord, the Limousin, Quercy, Rouvergne, l'Angoumois, and other
districts in that quarter, together with Calais, Guisnes, Montreuil, and the
county of Ponthieu, on the other side of France. Some other stipulations were
made in favor of the allies of England, and forty hostages were sent to
England, as a security for the execution of all these conditions.

Upon John's return to his dominions, he found himself very ill able to ratify
those terms of peace that had been just concluded. He was without finances, at
the head of an exhausted state; his soldiers without discipline, and his
peasants without subordination. These had risen in great numbers; and one of
the chiefs of their banditti assumed the title of the Friend of God, and the
terror of Man. A citizen of Sens, named John Gouge, also got himself, by means
of his robberies, to be acknowledged king; and he soon caused as many
calamities by his devastations, as the real king had brought on by his
misfortunes. Such was the state of that wretched kingdom, upon the return of
its captive monarch; and yet, such was his absurdity, that he immediately
prepared for a crusade into the Holy Land, before he was well replaced on the
throne. Had his exhausted subjects been able to equip him for this chimerical
project, it is probable he would have gone through with it; but their miseries
were such, that they were even too poor to pay his ransom. This was a breach of
treaty that John would not submit to; and he was heard to express himself in a
very noble manner upon the occasion. "Though, says he, good faith should be
banished from the rest of the earth, yet she ought still to retain her
habitation in the breast of kings." In consequence of this declaration, he
actually returned to England once more, and yielded himself a prisoner, since
he could not be honorably free. It is said by some, that his passion for the
countess of Salisbury was the real cause of this journey; but we want at this
time the foundations for such an injurious report. He was lodged in the Savoy,
the palace where he had resided during his captivity; and soon after he closed
a long and unfortunate reign, by his death, which happened in about the
fifty-sixth year of his age.

Charles, surnamed the Wise, succeeded his father on the throne of France; and
this monarch, merely by the force of a finely conducted policy, and even though
suffering some defeats, restored his country once more to tranquillity and
power. He quelled and dissipated a set of banditti, who had associated
themselves under the name of Companions, and who had long been a terror to the
peaceable inhabitants. He had them enrolled into a body, and led them into the
kingdom of Castile against Peter, surnamed the Cruel, whom his subjects had
dethroned; and who, by means of an alliance with the English, endeavored to
get himself reinstated upon the throne. In consequence of these alliances, the
English and French again came to an engagement; their armies on the one side
commanded by the black prince; on the other, by Henry of Transtamarre, and
Bertrand du Guesclin, one of the most consummate generals, and accomplished
characters of the age in which he lived. However, the usual good fortune of the
English prince prevailed;

Nevertheless these victories, were attended with very few good effects. The
English, by their frequent supplies, had been quite exhausted, and were unable
to continue an army in the field. Charles, on the other hand, cautiously
forbore coming to any decisive engagement; but was contented to let his enemies
waste their strength in attempts to plunder a fortified country. When they were
retired, he then was sure to sally forth, and possess himself of such places as
they were not strong enough to defend. He first fell upon Ponthieu; the
citizens of Abbeville opened their gates to him; those of St. Valois, Rue, and
Crotoy, imitated the example; and the whole country was, in a little time,
reduced to total submission. The southern provinces were, in the same manner,
invaded by his generals with equal success; while the black prince, destitute
of supplies from England, and wasted by a cruel and consumptive disorder, was
obliged to return to his native country, leaving the affairs of the south of
France in a most desperate condition.

In this exigence, the resentment of the king of England was excited to the
utmost pitch; and he seemed resolved to take signal vengeance on his enemies of
the continent. But the fortunate occasion seemed now elapsed; and all his
designs were marked with ill success. The earl of Pembroke, and his whole army,
were intercepted at sea, and taken prisoners by Henry, king of Castile. This
nobleman in person attempted to embark with an army for Bourdeaux; but was
detained by contrary winds, and obliged to lay aside the expedition. Sir Robert
Knolles, one of his generals on the continent, at the head of thirty thousand
men, was defeated by Bertrand du Guesclin; while the duke of Lancaster, at the
head of twenty five thousand men, had the mortification of seeing his troops
diminished one half by flying parties, without ever coming to a battle. Such
was the picture that presented itself to this victorious monarch in the decline
of life; and this might well serve as a lesson to the princes of the age, that
more permanent advantages are obtained by wisdom than by valor. Added to his
other uneasinesses, he had the mortification to see his authority despised at
home. It was in vain that he sought refuge, in his age, from the complaints of
his subjects, in the arms of a favorite mistress, whose name was Alice Pierce;
this only served to exasperate his people the more against him, and to turn
their indignation into contempt. But what of all other things served to gloom
the latter part of this splendid reign, was the approaching death of the black
prince, whose constitution showed but too manifestly the symptoms of a speedy
dissolution. This valiant and accomplished prince died in the forty-sixth year
of his age, leaving behind him a character without a single blemish; and a
degree of sorrow among the people, that time could scarcely alleviate. His
affability, clemency, and liberal disposition, have been celebrated by
different historians. Though born in an age, in which military virtues alone
were held in esteem, he cultivated the arts of peace; and seemed ever more
happy in deserving praise, than in obtaining it.

The king was most sensibly affected with the loss of his son; and tried every
art to remove his uneasiness; he had banished his concubine some time before
from his presence, but took her again, in hopes of finding some consolation in
her company. He removed himself entirely from the duties and burdens of the
state, and left his kingdom to be plundered by a set of rapacious ministers. He
did not survive the consequences of his bad conduct; but died about a year
after the prince, at Shene, in Surry, deserted by all his courtiers, even by
those who had grown rich by his bounty. He expired in the sixty-fifth year of
his age, and the fifty-first of his reign; a prince more admired than loved by
his subjects, and more an object of their applause, than their sorrow.

even though in the humblest station. This was the time when chivalry was at
its highest pitch; and many of the successes of England were owing to that
romantic spirit, which the king endeavored to diffuse, and of which he was the
most shining example. It was this spirit that, in some measure, served to
soften the ferocity of the age; being a mixture of love, generosity, and war.
Instead of being taught the sciences, the sons of the nobility were brought
into the field as soon as they were able, and instructed in no other arts but
those of arms; such as the method of sitting on horseback, of wielding the
lance, running at the ring, flourishing at a tournament, and addressing a
mistress. To attain these, was considered as the sum of all human acquirements;
and though war made their only study, yet the rules of tactics, encampments,
stratagems, and fortifications, were almost totally disregarded.

It was in this reign that the order of the garter was instituted; "Honi soit
qui mal y pense;" Evil to him, that evil thinks. This accident it is said gave
rise to the order and the motto, it being the spirit of the times, to mix love
and war together, and for knights to plume themselves upon the slightest tokens
that their mistresses were pleased to bestow.

Edward left many children by his queen Philippa of Hainault; his eldest son,
the black prince, died before him, but left a son, named Richard, who succeeded
to the throne; Edward's second son was Lionel, duke of Clarence; the third was
called John of Gaunt, from the place of his birth, and was afterward created
duke of Lancaster. The fourth son was Edmund, earl of Cambridge, and afterward
duke of York; the fifth son was Thomas, duke of Gloucester, the most ambitious
and enterprizing of all his family. There were several daughters also; but as
there is nothing material in their history, we shall pass over their names
without further notice.

RICHARD II.
portrait of Richard II Hall sculp.

CHAP. XV. RICHARD II.
RICHARD II. came to the throne of his grandfather, when as yet but eleven
years of age, and found the people discontented and poor, the nobles proud and
rebellious. A spirit of profusion had entered into the kingdom with the spirit
of gallantry; which, while it produced indolence and rapacity among the higher
orders, produced want and disobedience among the poor.

As the king was a minor, the government was vested in the hands of his three
uncles, the dukes of Lancaster, York, and Gloucester; the difference of whose
dispositions, it was supposed, would serve to check the defects of each other.
Lancaster, though experienced during the late reign in government, was neither
popular nor enterprizing; York was indolent and weak; Gloucester, turbulent,
popular, and ambitious. Under the secret influence of those, without any
regency being appointed, the whole system of government was kept together for
some years; the authority established during the former reign, still continuing
to operate in this.

But though government was carried on, yet it was not without many commotions,
arising either from the impatience of the people, or the ambition of the great:
as the late king had left the kingdom involved in many dangerous and expensive
wars; and as these demanded large and constant supplies, the murmurs of the
people increased in proportion. Nor were they lessened by the manner of
carrying on these expeditions; which, in general were languid, and upon the
whole unsuccessful. The duke of Lancaster laid claim to the crown of Castile,
and made a fruitless expedition; the war with France produced no enterprise of
luster, and that with with Scotland was rather unsuccessful. The expenses,
however, of the armaments to face the enemy on every side, and a want of
economy in the administration, entirely exhausted the treasury; and a new tax
of three groats, on every person above fifteen, was granted by parliament as a
supply. The indignation of the people had been for some time increasing, but a
tax so unequitable, in which the rich paid no more than the poor, kindled the
resentment of the latter into flame.

Notwithstanding the numbers who by war, by a residence in towns, and by other
means had become free, yet there was still multitudes in the country, who had
lands in villenage, that were only slaves to the lords from whom they held.
These had seen the advantages of liberty, from its effects upon those of equal
rank who had gone to live in towns; and they panted for a participation of
those advantages. Several of these had become opulent enough to purchase their
freedom; but by an unjust act of parliament in this reign, these purchases were
declared of no validity. This act the peasants considered as an infraction of
the laws of humanity, and such indeed it must be allowed to have been. But it
had long been the prescriptive manner of reasoning, to have no regard for the
rights of a certain class of men, who were supposed too low for justice. The
seeds of discontent were still more cultivated by the preaching of several men,
who went about the country, inculcating the natural equality of mankind; and
consequently, the right that all had to an equal participation of the goods of
nature. Hitherto we have seen popular insurrections only in towns; but we now
find the spirit of freedom gaining ground in the country. Our citizens at first
began to perceive their own strength; and not till after did the peasantry, who
had been annexed to the soil, claim a share in those advantages. We in this
first instance, find a knowledge of the rights of humanity, diffusing itself
even to the very lowest of the people, and exerting itself in rude and terrible
efforts for freedom.

The minds of the peasants, being thus prepared for insurrection, the manner of
collecting this unjust poll-tax, soon furnished them with a pretext for
beginning the revolt. It began in Essex, where a report was industriously
spread, that the peasants were to be destroyed, their houses burned, and their
farms plundered. A blacksmith, well known by the name of Wat Tyler, was the
first that excited them to arms. The tax-gatherers coming to this man's house,
while he was at work, demanded payment for his daughter, which he refused,
alleging that she was under the age mentioned in the act. One of the brutal
collectors insisted on her being a full grown woman; and immediately attempted
giving a very indecent proof of his assertion. This provoked the father to such
a degree, that he instantly struck him dead with a blow of his hammer. The
standers by applauded his spirit; and, one and all, resolved to defend his
conduct. He was considered as a champion in the cause, and appointed the leader
and spokesman of the people. It is easy to imagine the disorders committed by
this tumultuous rabble; the whole neighborhood rose in arms; they burnt and
plundered wherever they came, and revenged upon their former masters, all
those insults which they had long sustained with impunity. As the discontent
was general, the insurgents increased in proportion as they approached the
capital. The flame soon propagated itself into Kent, Hertfordshire, Surry,
Sussex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and Lincoln. They were found to amount to
above an hundred thousand men, by the time they were arrived at Blackheath;
from whence they sent a message to the king, who had taken shelter in the
Tower, desiring a conference with them. With this message Richard was desirous
of complying, but was intimidated by their fierce demeanor. In the mean time
they had entered the city, burning and plundering the houses of such as were
obnoxious, from their power, or remarkable for their riches. They broke into
the Savoy palace, belonging to the duke of Lancaster, and put several of his
attendants to death. Their animosity was particularly levelled against the
lawyers, to whom they showed no mercy. Such was the vehemence of their fury,
that the king began to tremble for his own safety; and, knowing that the Tower
was not capable of standing against an assault, he went out among them, and
desired to know their demands. To this they made a very humble remonstrance,
requiring a general pardon, the abolition of slavery, freedom of commerce in
market towns, and a fixed rent instead of those services required by the tenure
of villenage. As these requests were reasonable, the king soon complied; and
charters were accordingly made out, ratifying the grant. In the mean time,
another body of these insurgents had broke into the Tower, and murdered the
chancellor, the primate, and the treasurer, with some other officers of
distinction. They then divided themselves into bodies, and took up their
quarters in different parts of the city. At the head of one of these was Wat
Tyler, who led his men into Smithfield, where he was met by the king, who
invited him to a conference, under a pretense of hearing and redressing his
grievances. Tyler ordering his companions to retire, till he should give them a
signal, boldly ventured to meet the king in the midst of his retinue; and
accordingly began the conference. The demands of this demagogue are censured by
all the historians of the time, as insolent and extravagant; and yet nothing
can be more just than those they have delivered for him. He required that all
slaves should be set free; that all commonages should be open to the poor as
well as the rich, and that a general pardon should be passed for the late
outrages. Whilst he made these demands, he now and then lifted up his sword in
a menacing manner; which insolence so raised the indignation of William
Walworth, then mayor of London, attending on the king, that, without
considering the danger to which he exposed his majesty, he stunned Tyler with a
blow of his mace; while one of the king's knights riding up, dispatched him
with his sword. The mutineers, seeing their leader fall, prepared themselves to
take revenge; and their bows were now bent for execution, when Richard, though
not yet quite sixteen years of age, rode up to the rebels, and, with admirable
presence of mind, cried, out, "What, my people, will you then kill your king?
be not concerned for the loss of your leader; I myself will now be your
general; follow me into the field, and you shall have whatever you desire." The
awed multitude immediately desisted; they followed the king as if mechanically
into the fields, and there he granted them the same charter that he had before
given to their companions.

These grants, for a short time, gained the king great popularity; and it is
probable it was his own desire to have them continued; but the nobles had long
tasted the sweets of power, and were unwilling to admit any other to a
participation. The parliament soon revoked these charters of enfranchisement
and pardon; the low people were reduced to the same slavish condition as
before, and several of the ringleaders were punished with capital severity. The
insurrections of the barons against their kings, are branded in our history
with no great air of invective; but the tumults of the people against the
barons, are marked with all the virulence of reproach.

The cruelty which was exercised against the popular leaders upon this
occasion, created no small enmity against the king. He had first granted them a
charter, which implied the justice of their demands; and he was seen, soon
after, weak enough to revoke what he had before allowed the justice of. It is
probable also, that his uncles were not backward in increasing this general
dislike against him; as by that means they were more like to continue in their
present authority. His own capricious conduct, indeed, might very well
countenance them in the restrictions they placed upon him; as he very soon
testified an eager desire to govern, without any of the requisites to fit him
for such a difficult undertaking: he soon discovered an attachment to
favorites, without any merit on their side to entitle them to such flattering
distinctions. Robert Vere, earl of Oxford, a young man, whose person was
faultless, but whose morals were debauched, had acquired an entire ascendant
over him. This nobleman was first created marquis of Dublin, and then duke of
Ireland, with the entire sovereignty, during life, of that island. He gave him
his own cousin in marriage; and soon after permitted him to repudiate her for
another lady, of whom he was enamoured. He soon became the channel through
which all royal favor passed to the people; and he possessed all the power,
while the king had only the shadow of royalty.

A partiality in princes ever produces animosity among their subjects. Those
noblemen, who were either treated with disrespect by the favorite, or who
thought that they had themselves better pretensions to favor, instantly took
the alarm, and combined against him. At the head of this association were
Moubray earl of Nottingham, Fitz Alan earl of Arundel, Percy earl of
Northumberland, Montacute earl of Salisbury, and Beauchamp earl of Warwick.
These uniting, resolved on the destruction of the favorite; and they began by
marking out Michael de la Pole, who was then chancellor, and Oxford's chief
friend and supporter, as the first object of their vengeance. He was
accordingly impeached in parliament; and although nothing material was alleged
against him, such was the interest of the conspiring barons that he was
condemned, and deprived of his office.

From punishing his ministers, they soon after ventured to attack the king in
person. Under a pretense that he was as yet unable to govern, arms at Haringay
Park, near Highgate, at the head of a body of men, more than sufficient to
intimidate the king, and all his adherents. These insurgents, sensible of their
own power, were now resolved to make use of the occasion; and began by
demanding of the king the names of those who had advised him to his late rash
measures. A few days after they appeared armed in his presence, and accused, by
name, the archbishop of York, the duke of Ireland, the earl of Suffolk, and Sir
Robert Tresilian, one of the judges who had declared in his favor, together
with Sir Nicholas Bember, as public and dangerous enemies to the state. It was
now too late for the opposite party to attempt any other vindication of their
conduct than by arms. The duke of Ireland fled into Cheshire, where he
attempted to raise a body of forces; but was quickly obliged to fly into
Flanders, on the arrival of the duke of Gloucester with a superior army. Soon
after the king was obliged to summon a parliament; an accusation was drawn up
against five of his counselors; of these only Sir Nicholas Bember was present;
and he was quickly found guilty, condemned, and executed, together with Sir
Robert Tresilian, who had been discovered and taken during the interval. But
the blood of one or two was not sufficient to satiate the resentment of the
duke of Gloucester; lord Beauchamp of Holt was shortly after condemned and
executed; and Sir Simon Burley, who had been appointed the king's governor,
shared the same fate, although the queen continued for three hours on her knees
before the duke, imploring his pardon.

It might be supposed, that after such a total subversion of the royal power,
there would be no more struggles, during this reign, between the prince and his
nominal subjects; but whether from the fluctuation of opinions among the
people, or from the influence of a military force, which had been lately levied
against France, we find Richard once more resolving to shake of that power,
which had long controled him, and actually bringing the parliament to second
his resolutions.

In an extraordinary council of the nobility, enjoyed. The lords answering, in
some confusion, that he had certainly an indisputable right to take upon
himself the government of the kingdom: "Yes, replied he, I have long been under
the government of tutors; and I will now first show my right to power by their
removal." He then ordered Thomas Arundel, whom the commissioners had lately
appointed chancellor, to give up the seal, which he next day delivered to
William of Wickham, bishop of Winchester. He next removed the duke of
Gloucester, the earl of Warwick, and other lords of the opposition, from the
council. The bishop of Hereford lost his office of treasurer; the earl of
Arundel was deprived of the post of high-admiral; all the great officers of the
household, as well as the judges, were changed; and all the offices felt the
influence of this extraordinary revolution.

The king being thus left at liberty to conduct the business of government at
discretion, began by showing many marks of moderation toward those who before
had endeavored to depress his power; he seemed to be entirely reconciled to
his uncles; and he remitted some subsidies which had been granted him, that
acquired him for a time the affections of the people. But he wanted those arts
that are usually found to procure a lasting respect; he was fond of luxurious
pleasures, and idle ostentation; he admitted the meanest ranks to his
familiarity; and his conversation was not adapted to impress them with a
reverence for his morals or abilities. His military talents, on which mankind
then placed the greatest value, were seldom exerted, and never with any great
success. The French war was scarce heard of; and some successful inroads of the
Scotch, particularly that which brought on a disputed victory at Otterbone,
were only opposed by those barons whose possessions lay along the frontier. He
gained indeed some reputation for arms in Ireland; but his successes there were
too insignificant to give him a decisive character. From thence, the small
regard which the public bore his person, disposed them to murmur against his
administration, and to receive with avidity every complaint which discontent,
or ambition, suggested to his prejudice.

Whether the duke of Gloucester was secretly displeased with this mean
disposition in his royal nephew, or wanted to make himself king by fomenting
jealousies against him, must remain for ever unknown; but certain it is, that
he used every art to increase the aversion of the nation against him, and to
establish his own popularity. He represented the peace which had been just then
concluded with France, to his will. This parliament, as he was apprized, passed
whatever acts he thought proper to dictate; they annulled for ever the
commission of fourteen, which had usurped upon his authority; they repealed all
those acts which had condemned his former ministers; and revoked the general
pardon which the king had granted, upon his assuming the reins of government
into his own hands. In consequence of this, several of the party of Gloucester
were impeached, condemned, and executed. Fitz-Alan, archbishop of Canterbury,
was banished the kingdom, and his temporalities sequestered. The earl of
Arundel vainly attempted to plead the king's general pardon, to stop his
execution; the earl of Warwick showing signs of contrition, had his life
spared, but was banished to the Isle of Man. The greatest criminal yet
remained; and a warrant was accordingly issued to the earl marshall, governor
of Calais, to bring over the duke of Gloucester to take his trial, as the rest
had done. It is probable this nobleman would have shared the same fate with the
rest of his party; but he was privately dispatched in prison, being smothered,
as it afterward appeared, between two pillows, by his keepers.

The death of a nobleman so popular as the duke, did not fail to increase those
animosities, which had already taken deep root in the kingdom. The
aggrandisement of some new favorites, contributed still more to make the king
odious; but though he seemed resolved, by all his actions, to set his subjects
against him, it was accident that gave the occasion for his overthrow. After
the destruction of the duke of Gloucester, and the heads of that party, a
misunderstanding broke out among those noblemen, who had joined in the
prosecution. The duke of Hereford appeared in parliament, and accused the duke
of Norfolk of having spoken seditious words against his majesty, in a private
conversation. Norfolk denied the charge; gave Hereford the lie; and offered to
prove his innocence by single combat. As proofs were wanting for legal trial,
the lords readily acquiesced in that mode of determination; the time and place
were appointed; and the whole nation waited with anxious suspense for the
event. At length the day arrived, on which this duel was to be fought; and as
combats of this kind were then very prevalent, it may not be amiss to describe
the ceremonies on that occasion. Hereford, the chalenger, first appeared on a
white charger, gaily caparisoned, armed at all points, and holding his drawn
sword. When he approached the lists, the marshall demanded his name and
business; to which he replied, "I am Henry of Lancaster, duke of Hereford, come
hither according to my duty, against Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, a false
traitor to God and the king, the realm and me." Then taking the oath that his
quarrel was just and true, he desired to enter the lists, which being granted,
he sheathed his sword, pulled down his beaver, crossed himself on the forehead,
seized his lance, passed the barrier, alighted, and sat down in a chair of
green velvet, placed at one end of the lists. He had scarce taken his seat when
the king came into the field with great pomp, attended by the lords, the count
de St Pol, who came from France on purpose to see this famous trial, and ten
thousand men at arms, to prevent tumults and disturbances. His majesty being
seated in his chair of state, the king at arms proclaimed, that none but such
as were appointed to marshal the field, should presume to touch the lists upon
pain of death. Then another herald proclaimed aloud, "Behold here Henry of
Lancaster, duke of Hereford, who has entered the lists to perform his devoir
against Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, on pain of being counted false and
recreant." Just then the duke of Norfolk appeared in arms, mounted upon a
barbed horse, with a coat of arms of crimson velvet embroidered with lions of
silver, and mulbery trees; and having taken his oath before the constable and
marshall, entered the field, exclaiming aloud, "God defend the right." Then
alighting from his horse, he placed himself in a chair of crimson velvet
opposite to his antagonist, at the other end of the lists. After which, the
marshall having measured their lances, delivered one to the challenger, and
sent a knight with the other to the duke of Norfolk; and proclamation was made
that they should prepare for the combat. Accordingly, mounting their horses,
and closing their beavers, they fixed their lances in rest, and the trumpets
sounded the charge. The duke of Hereford began his career with great violence;
but, before he could join his antagonist, the king threw down his warder, and
the heralds interposed. By the advice and authority of his parliamentary
commissioners, he stopped the combat, and ordered both the combatants to leave
the kingdom. The duke of Norfolk he banished for life, but the duke of Hereford
only for ten years. Thus the one was condemned to exile without being charged
with any offense, and the other without being convicted of any crime. The duke
of Norfolk was overwhelmed with grief and despondence at the judgment awarded
against him; he retired to Venice, where, in a little time after, he died of a
broken heart. Hereford's behavior on this occasion was resigned and
submissive, which so pleased the king, that he consented to shorten the date of
his banishment four years; and he also granted him letters patent, ensuring him
the enjoyment of any inheritance which should fall to him during his absence.
But nothing could be more fluctuating than Richard's promises or friendship.
The earl of Hereford retiring into Flanders, and from thence to Paris, found
there a very favorable reception from the French king. He even opened a treaty
of marriage with the daughter of the duke of Berry, uncle to the king of
France; but was prevented from completing the alliance by the interest of
Richard, who, dreading the increasing power of the banished earl, sent over the
earl of Salisbury to Paris, with instructions to break the match. Such an
unexpected injury could not fail to aggravate the resentment of Hereford; but
he had still more cogent reasons for anger, upon the death of his father, the
duke of Lancaster, which happened shortly after. Richard, as we before
observed, had given him letters patent, empowering him to possess any
accidental successions that should fall to him while abroad; but being now
afraid of strengthening the hands of a man whom he had injured, he revoked
those letters, and retained the possession of the Lancaster estate to himself.

Such complicated injuries served to inflame the resentment of Hereford against
the king; and although he had hitherto concealed them, he now set no bounds to
his indignation; but even conceived a desire of dethroning a person who had
shown himself so unworthy of power. Indeed, no man could be better qualified
for an enterprise of this nature than the earl of Hereford: he was cool,
cautious, discerning, and resolute. He had served with distinction against the
infidels of Lithuania; and he had thus joined to his other merits, those of
piety and valor. He was the idol of the soldiery, and the favorite of the
people; he was immensely rich, and by blood, or alliance, connected with all
the great families of the nation. On the other hand, the king finding himself
above all restraint, gave himself up to a soft effeminate life, regardless of
his own safety, and of the good of the public. His ministers following the
example of their sovereign, gave little attention to business; but saw, without
any concern, the honor of the nation sinking into contempt. In this situation,
all people naturally turned their eyes upon the banished earl, as the only
person from whom they could expect relief, or redress. He was stimulated by
private injuries; and had alliances and fortune sufficient to give weight to
his measures. The malcontents only waited for the absence of the king to put
their schemes in execution; and for these an opportunity was quickly offered.

The earl of March, presumptive heir to the crown, having been appointed the
king's lieutenant in Ireland, was slain in a skirmish with the natives of that
country, which so incensed Richard, that, unmindful of his precarious situation
at home, he resolved, with a numerous army, to revenge his death in person. The
duke of Lancaster (for that was the title which Hereford assumed, upon the
death of his father) being informed of Richard's departure for Ireland,
instantly embarked at Nantz, with a retinue of sixty persons, in three small
vessels, and landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire. The earl of Northumberland, who
had long been a malcontent, together with Henry Percy, his son, who, from his
ardent valor, was surnamed Hotspur, immediately joined him with their forces.
After this junction the concourse of people coming to list under his banner was
so great, that in a few days his army amounted to threescore thousand men.

The duke of York had been left guardian of the realm during Richard's absence;
but his efforts were ineffectual, as the most powerful persons who espoused the
king's interests were then actually with him in Ireland. The duke, however,
assembled a body of forty thousand men at St Alban's; but found them either
quite dispirited, or more attached to the cause of the rebels, than of the
crown. It had been Hereford's policy, from the beginning, to hide the real
motives of his expedition, and to give out that he only aimed at the recovery
of his patrimony and dukedom. Upon the present occasion, therefore, he
entreated the duke of York not to oppose a loyal and humble suppliant in the
recovery of his just rights; but to concur in a measure that was more likely to
promote the king's honor, than injure his interests. York was deceived by
these specious professions; he declared, that he would not only approve, but
assist him in his pretensions; and both armies meeting, embraced with
acclamations of joy.

Whilst these things were transacting in England, Richard continued in Ireland
in perfect security. Contrary winds, which at that time continued to blow for
three weeks together, prevented his receiving any news of the rebellion which
was begun in his native dominions. Upon the first information, therefore, he
immediately imprisoned the earl of Hereford's brothers, whom he had taken over
with him, and then resolved to go immediately over to fight the enemy in
person. Yet, ever wavering in his resolutions, he was persuaded to stay some
time longer, till he could prepare ships to transport all his forces together.
This delay completed his ruin; so that when he landed at Milfordhaven with a
body of twenty thousand men, he had the mortification to find that the duke of
York had already espoused the interests of his rival, and that his force was
every way inferior to that of the enemy. He now, therefore, saw himself in a
dreadful situation, in the midst of an enraged people, without any friend on
whom to rely; and forsaken by those, who, in the sunshine of his power, had
only contributed to fan his follies. His little army gradually began to desert
him, till at last he found that he had not above six thousand men, who followed
his standard. Thus, not knowing whom to trust to, or where to turn, he saw no
other hopes of safety, but to throw himself upon the generosity of his enemy,
and to gain from pity, what he could not obtain by arms. He, therefore, sent
Hereford word that he was ready to submit to whatever terms he thought proper
to prescribe; and that he earnestly desired a conference. For this purpose, the
earl appointed him to meet at a castle within about ten miles of Chester, "My
lord the king, returned the earl, with a cool respectful bow, I am come sooner
than you appointed; because your people say, that for one and twenty years you
have governed with rigor and indiscretion. They are very ill satisfied with
your conduct; but, if it please God, I will help you to govern them better for
the time to come." To this declaration the king made no other answer, but "Fair
cousin, since it pleases you, it pleases us likewise."

But Hereford's haughty answer was not the only mortification the unfortunate
Richard was to endure. After a short conversation with some of the king's
attendants, Hereford ordered the king's horses to be brought out of the stable;
and two wretched animals being produced, Richard was placed upon one, and his
favorite, the earl of Salisbury, upon the other. In this mean equipage they
rode to Chester; and were conveyed to the castle, with a great noise of
trumpets, and through a vast concourse of people, who were no way moved at the
sight. In this manner he was led triumphantly along, from town to town, amidst
multitudes who scoffed at him, and extolled his rival. Long live the good duke
of Lancaster, our deliverer! was the general cry; but as for the king, to use
the pathetic words of the poet, "None cried God bless him." Thus, after
repeated indignities, he was confined a close prisoner in the Tower; there if,
possible, to undergo a still greater variety of studied insolence, and flagrant
contempt. The wretched monarch, humbled in this manner, began to lose the pride
of a king with the splendours of royalty, and his spirits sunk to his
circumstances. There was no great difficultly, therefore, in inducing him to
sign a deed, by which he renounced his crown, as being unqualified for
governing the kingdom. Upon this resignation Hereford founded his principal
claim; but willing to fortify his pretensions with every appearance of justice,
he called a parliament, which was readily brought to approve and confirm his
claims. A frivolous charge of thirty-three articles was drawn up, and found
valid against the king; upon which he was solemnly deposed, and the earl of
Hereford elected in his stead, by the title of Henry IV. Thus began the contest
between the houses of York and Lancaster; which, for several years after,
deluged the kingdom with blood; and yet, in the end, contributed to settle and
confirm the constitution.

When Richard was deposed, the earl of Northumberland made a motion in the
house of peers, demanding the advice of parliament, with regard to the future
treatment of the deposed king. To this they replied, that he should be
imprisoned in some secure place, where his friends and partisans should not be
able to find him. This was accordingly put in practice; but while he still
continued alive, the usurper could not remain in safety. Indeed some
conspiracies and commotions, which followed soon after, induced Henry to wish
for Richard's death; in consequence of which, one of those assassins that are
found in every court, ready to commit the most horrid crimes for reward, went
down to the place of this unfortunate monarch's confinement, in the castle of
Pomfret; and, with eight of his followers, rushed into his apartment. The king
concluding their design was to take away his life, resolved not to fall
unrevenged, but to sell it as dearly as he could; wherefore, wresting a poleax
from one of the murderers, he soon laid four of their number dead at his feet.
But he was at length overpowered, and struck dead by the blow of a poll-ax;
although some assert, that he was starved in prison. Thus died the unfortunate
Richard, in the thirty-fourth year of his age, and the twenty-third of his
reign. Though his conduct was blameable, yet the punishment he suffered was
greater than his offenses; and in the end, his sufferings made more converts to
his family and cause, than ever his most meritorious actions could have
procured them. He left no posterity, either legitimate or otherwise.

It was during this reign, that John Wickliff, a secular priest, educated at
Oxford, began to propagate his doctrines; and he has the honor of being the
first person who had sagacity to see through the errors of the church of Rome,
and courage enough to attempt a reformation. He denied the doctrine of the real
presence, the supremacy of the church of Rome, and the merit of monastic vows.
He maintained that the scriptures were the sole rule of faith; that the church
was dependant on the state; that the clergy ought to possess no estates; and
that the numerous ceremonies of the church were hurtful to true piety. In
short, most of his doctrines were such as the wisdom of posterity thought fit
to establish; and Wickliff failed in being a reformer, only because the minds
of men were not yet sufficiently ripened for the truths he endeavored to
inculcate. The clergy of that age did not fail to oppose Wickliff with fury;
but as his doctrines were pleasing to the higher orders of the laity, he found
protection from their indignation. John of Gaunt was his particular friend and
favourer; and when summoned to appear before the bishop of London, that
nobleman attended him into the court; and defended him both from the resentment
of the clergy, and the rage of the populace. However, in process of time, he
had the satisfaction to see the people, who were at first strongly prejudiced
against him, entirely declaring in his favor; and although he was often cited
to appear before the prelates, yet, from the estimation he was held in, both
among the higher and lower ranks of the laity, he was always dismissed without
injury. In this manner he continued during a long life, to lessen the credit of
the clergy, both by his preaching and writings; and at last died of a palsy, in
the year 1385, at his rectory of Lutterworth, in the county of Leicester; while
the clergy took care to represent his death as a judgment from heaven, for his
multiplied heresies and impieties.

HENRY IV.
portrait of Henry IV Hall sculp.

CHAP. XVI. HENRY IV.
Virgin Mary to Thomas Becket, during his exile. The phial that contained this
precious balm had fallen into the hands of an hermit, who gave it to the duke
of Lancaster, assuring him, that all kings anointed with that oil, would become
true champions of the church. On the present occasion, being seized by Henry
among the other jewels of Richard, he was anointed with it in all the forms; at
the same time declaring, that he had ascended the throne by the right of
conquest, the resignation of Richard in his favor, and as the most direct
descendant of Henry the third, king of England. These were the formalities made
use of to hide his ambition, or perhaps quiet his own fears; for the heir of
the house of Mortimer, who had in the late reign been declared in parliament
the true heir of the crown, was still alive, although yet but a boy of seven
years of age. Him Henry detained, together with his younger brother, in an
honorable custody, at Windsor castle.

But notwithstanding these precautions for his security, Henry soon found that
the throne of an usurper is ever a bed of thorns. Such violent animosities
broke out among the barons, in the first session of his parliament, that forty
challenges were given and received, and forty gauntlets thrown down, as pledges
of the sincerity of their resentment. But though these commotions were
seemingly suppressed by his moderation for that time, yet they soon broke out
into rebellion; and a conspiracy was set on foot for seizing Henry at Windsor,
and replacing Richard on the throne, who was supposed to be yet alive. This
plot was set on foot by the earls of Rutland, Kent, Huntington, and lord
Spencer, whom Henry had degraded from superior titles, conferred upon them by
the late king. The particulars of their scheme were committed to writing, and
each of the confederates had a copy signed by all the rest. Among the number of
these, the duke of Aumerle was one, furnished with a paper, which he
unfortunately dropped out of his bosom, as he was sitting one day at dinner with
his father, the duke of York. The father perceiving something fall, privately
took it up, and to his great astonishment discovered the contents, which he
resolved, with all diligence, to discover to the king, and accordingly rode off
with the utmost expedition to Windsor, where the court resided at that
juncture. In the mean time, the son finding the sad mischance that happened,
and guessing the cause of his father's expedition, was resolved, if possible,
to prevent his information; and hastening by a shorter way, discovered the
whole to the king, and obtained the royal pardon before his father could
arrive, who coming soon after, produced the paper, with the names of the
conspirators.

In the mean time, while Henry employed the most vigorous efforts to dispel the
rising storm, the conspirators, finding their first intentions frustrated,
dressed up one of the late king's servants, named Maudlin, in royal robes,
giving out that he was the deposed monarch, whom they had taken from his
prison, and were willing to replace on the throne. Pity is a passion for which
the English have ever been remarkable; majesty in distress was an object
sufficient, at once, to excite their loyalty and compassion; and they
accordingly flocked in great numbers round the standard of the conspirators.
Their army soon became considerable, and encamped near Cirencester, while the
leaders took up their headquarters within the city; yet so careless or
inexperienced were they, that they neglected to place proper guards at the
gates and the avenues of the place. This was quickly perceived by the mayor of
the town, who was in the interests of the king; this magistrate assembling four
hundred men in the night, secured the gates, so as to exclude the army encamped
without, and then he attacked the chiefs within. The earls of Kent and
Salisbury were taken, after an obstinate resistance, and beheaded on the spot
by the mayor's order. The earls of Huntington, and lord Spencer, escaped over
the tops of the houses into the camp, in hopes of storming the town at the head
of their forces; but they quickly had the mortification to find the tents and
baggage abandoned by the soldiers, who, upon hearing the noise and tumult
within, had concluded, that a party of the king's army had entered privately to
strengthen the townsmen; and under the conviction of this, they fled with the
utmost precipitation.

The two lords perceiving that all hope was over, endeavored to conceal
themselves separately; but they were soon after taken, and lost their heads
upon the scaffold by the king's own order. Their deaths were soon after
followed by those of Sir Thomas Blount, and Sir Benedict Sely; and when the
quarters of these unhappy men were brought to London, no less than eighteen
bishops, and thirty-four mitred abbots, joined the populace, and met them with
the most indecent marks of joy and exultation. In this shocking procession, was
seen the earl of Rutland carrying the head of lord Spencer, his brother in-law,
in triumph, after having betrayed him. This miscreant had been long enured to
blood and treachery: he was instrumental in the murder of his uncle, the duke
of Gloucester, to please Richard; he soon after deserted the fallen fortunes of
that monarch, and joined with Henry; not long after, he entered into a
conspiracy against this monarch, after having sworn allegiance to him; and now,
at last, betrayed those very associates whom he had seduced into this
enterprise, carrying in triumph the marks of his execrable villainies.

But the suppression of a single rebellion was not sufficient to give quiet to
a kingdom, threatened with foreign invasions, and torn by intestine
discontents. The king of France had actually raised a vast armament to invade
England; but a truce was soon after concluded for eight and twenty years; and
it was agreed, that queen Isabel, who had been married to Richard, but whose
marriage had never been consummated, should return to France, her native
country. The Scotch, shortly after, began to renew their ancient disturbances;
and while the English army marched northward to oppose their incursions, the
Welsh, on the other side, under the conduct of Owen Glendour, attacked the
kingdom upon the defenseless quarter. Many were the petty victories gained, and
the ravages committed on either part in this contest. The name of Owen Glendour
is respected among his countrymen to this very day; but as all his conquests
procured no lasting advantage, and as all his victories only terminated in
fame, they are scarce worth a place in the page of history. It will be
sufficient to observe, that whatever honor the English lost on the side of
Wales, they gained an equivalent on that of Scotland; the Welsh maintained
their ground, although their chieftain, Glendour, was taken prisoner, while the
Scotch still fled before the English, and would neither submit, nor yet give
them battle.

he intended to detain them, in order to increase his demands, in making peace
with Scotland. This message was highly resented by the earl of Northumberland,
who, by the laws of war that prevailed in that age, had a right to the ransom
of all such as he had taken in battle. The command was still more irksome, as
he considered the king as his debtor, both for security and his crown. Indeed,
the obligations which Henry owed him, were of a nature the most likely to
produce ingratitude on the one side, and discontent on the other. The prince
naturally became jealous of that power which had advanced him to the throne;
and the subject thought himself entitled to every favor the crown had to
bestow. Not but that Henry had already conferred the highest honors upon him;
he had made him constable of the kingdom, and given him several other
employments; but nothing could satisfy this nobleman's ambition, while the king
had any thing left to give. Accordingly, stung with this supposed injury, he
resolved to overturn a throne which he had the chief hand in establishing. A
scheme was laid, in which the Scotch and Welsh were to unite their forces, and
to assist Northumberland in elevating Mortimer, as the true heir, to the crown
of England. When all things were prepared for the intended insurrection, the
earl had the mortification to find himself unable to lead on the troops, being
seized with a sudden illness at Berwick. But the want of his presence was well
supplied by his son Harry Percy, surnamed Hotspur, who took the command of the
troops, and marched them toward Shrewsbury, in order to join his forces with
those of Glendour, who, some time before, had been exchanged from prison, and
had now advanced with his forces as far as Shropshire. Upon the junction of
these two armies, they published a manifesto, which aggravated their real
grievances, and invented more. In the mean time, Henry, who had received no
intelligence of their designs, was at first greatly surprised at the news of
this rebellion. But fortune seemed to befriend him on this occasion; he had a
small army in readiness, which he had intended against the Scotch, and knowing
the importance of dispatch against such active enemies, he instantly hurried
down to Shrewsbury, that he might give the rebels battle.

Upon the approach of the two armies, both sides seemed willing to give a
color to their cause, by showing a desire of reconciliation; but when they
came to open their mutual demands, the treaty was turned into abuse and
recrimination. On one side was objected rebellion and ingratitude; on the
other, tyranny and usurpation. The two armies were pretty nearly equal, each
consisting of about twelve thousand men; the animosity on both sides was
inflamed to the highest pitch; and no prudence nor military skill could
determine on which side the victory might incline. Accordingly, a very bloody
engagement ensued, in which the generals on both sides exerted themselves with
great bravery. Henry was seen every where in the thickest of the fight; while
his valiant son, who was afterward the renowned conqueror of France, fought by
his side, and, though wounded in the face by an arrow, still kept the field,
and performed astonishing acts of valor. On the other side, the daring Hotspur
supported that renown, which he had acquired in so many bloody engagements, and
every where sought out the king as a noble object of his indignation. At last,
however, his death, from an unknown hand, decided the victory; and the fortune
of Henry once more prevailed. On that bloody day, it is said that no less than
two thousand three hundred gentlemen were slain, and about six thousand private
men, of whom two thirds were of Hotspur's army.

While this furious transaction was going forward, Northumberland, who was
lately recovered from his indisposition, was advancing with a body of troops to
reinforce the army of the malcontents, and take upon him the command. But
hearing by the way of his son's and his brother's misfortune, he dismissed his
troops, not daring to keep the field with so small a force, before an army
superior in number, and flushed with recent victory. The earl, therefore, for a
while attempted to find safety by flight, but at last being pressed by his
pursuers, and finding himself totally without resource, he chose rather to
throw himself upon the king's mercy, than lead a precarious and indigent life
in exile. Upon his appearing before Henry at York, he pretended that his sole
intention in arming was to mediate between the two parties; and this, though
but a very weak apology, seemed to satisfy the king. Northumberland, therefore,
received a pardon; Henry probably thinking that he was sufficiently punished by
the loss of his army, and the death of his favorite son.

But the extinction of one rebellion only seemed to give rise to another. The
archbishop of York, who had been promoted during the late reign, entered into a
confederacy with the earl of Nottingham, and the earl of Northumberland, who
had been so lately pardoned, to dethrone the king, and set young Mortimer in
his place. Had the forces of these insurgents co-operated with those that were
so lately overthrown, it is possible they might have overpowered any body of
men, which the king could bring into the field; but they began their operations
just when their confederates where defeated. This powerful combination,
however, took the field and published a manifesto; in which they reproached
Henry with usurpation, tyranny, and murder; they required that the right line
should be restored, and all grievances redressed. The earl of Westmoreland, who
had been sent against them with a very inferior force, demanded a conference,
to which they readily consented. The chiefs, on each side, met at Skipton, near
York, and, in the presence of both armies, entered upon the subject of their
grievances and complaints. The archbishop loudly deplored the nation's injuries
and his own; the earl of Shrewsbury, not only allowed the justice of his
remonstrances, but begged of him to propose the remedies. The archbishop
entered upon many stipulations, and the earl granted them all. He now,
therefore, entreated, that since they had nothing more to ask or to fear, that
they would dismiss their forces, and trust to his honor for the rest. His
specious promises, and plausible manners, led them to their ruin. The
insurgents immediately disbanded their troops,

Such advantages seemed to promise the country, long torn with factions, and
threatened with invasions, some degree of repose; but a new calamity now began
to appear, which, though small in the beginning, became in the course of ages,
attended with most dreadful effects. Since Wickliff had published his opinions,
in the last reign, his doctrines met with so many partisans, that the clergy
began to tremble for their influence over the minds of the people. They,
therefore, used all their interest to bring the king over to their party; who
had more than once, in former times, declared himself in favor of the new
doctrines. But at present, as he was conscious of the weakness of his title to
the crown, he was resolved to make use of every support to confirm his
pretensions; and, among others, that offered him by the clergy, was by no means
to be thought slightly of. He, therefore, seemed to listen with great
earnestness to their complaints; and took an occasion to direct his parliament
to attend to the conservation of the church, which he asserted was then in
danger. How reluctant soever the house of commons might be, to persecute a
sect, whose crime at any rate was but error, the credit of the court, and the
cabals of the clergy, at last obtained an act for the burning obstinate
heretics. This statute was no sooner past than the clergy resolved to show that
it was not hung out as an empty terror, but that it would be urged with all the
force of which it was capable. William Sawtre, a follower of Wickliff, and
rector of St. Osithe's, London, had been condemned by the convocation of
Canterbury; and was soon after burned alive, by virtue of the king's writ,
delivered to the mayor of London. This was the first man that suffered death in
England for the sake of religion; but the fires once kindled, were not likely
to be soon extinguished, as the clergy had the power of continuing the flame.
They easily perceived, that a power of burning their enemies would revive that
share of temporal power, which they had possessed some centuries before; and in
this they were not mistaken. They thus again renewed their pristine authority,
but upon very different grounds; for as in the Saxon times they fixed their
power upon the affections, so they now founded it upon the terrors of the
people.

By these means Henry seemed to surmount all his troubles; and the calm, which
was thus produced, was employed by him in endeavors to acquire popularity,
which he had lost by the severities exercised during the preceding part of his
reign. and required them to deliver in their accounts to the house. They
proposed thirty very important articles for the government of the king's
household; and, on the whole, preserved their privileges and freedoms, more
entire during his reign, than that of any of his predecessors. But while the
king thus labored, not without success, to retrieve the reputation he had
lost, his son Henry, prince of Wales, seemed equally bent on incurring the
public aversion. He became notorious for all kinds of debauchery; and ever
chose to be surrounded by a set of wretches, who took pride in committing the
most illegal acts, with the prince at their head. The king was not a little
mortified at this degeneracy in his eldest son, who seemed entirely forgetful
of his station, although he had already exhibited repeated proofs of his
valor, conduct, and generosity. Such were the excesses into which he ran, that
one of his dissolute companions having been brought to trial before Sir William
Gascoigne, chief justice of the king's bench, for some misdemeanor, the prince
was so exasperated at the issue of the trial, that he struck the judge in open
court. The venerable magistrate, who knew the reverence that was due to his
station, behaved with a dignity that became his office, and immediately ordered
the prince to be committed to prison. When this transaction was reported to the
king, who was an excellent judge of mankind, he could not help exclaiming in a
transport; "Happy is the king, that has a magistrate endowed with courage to
execute the laws upon such an offender; still more happy in having a son,
willing to submit to such a chastisement." This, in fact, is one of the first
great instances we read in the English history, of a magistrate doing justice
in opposition to power; since, upon many former occasions, we find the judges
only ministers of royal caprice.

Henry, whose health had for some time been declining, did not long outlive
this transaction. He was subject to fits, which bereaved him, for the time, of
his senses; and which, at last, brought on the near approach of death at
Westminster. As his constitution decayed, his fears of losing the crown
redoubled, even to a childish anxiety. He could not be persuaded to sleep,
unless the royal diadem were laid upon his pillow. He resolved to take the
cross, and fight the cause of the pilgrims to Jerusalem; and even imparted his
design to a great council, demanding their opinions relative to his intended
journey: but his disorder increasing to a violent degree, he was obliged to lay
aside his scheme, and to prepare for a journey of much greater importance. In
this situation, as he was one day in a violent paroxysm, the prince of Wales
took up the crown and carried it away; but the king soon after recovering his
senses, and missing the crown, demanded what was become of it? Being informed
that the prince of Wales had carried it off: "What! said the king, would he rob
me of my right before my death?" But the prince just then entering the room,
assured his father, that he had no such motives in what he had done, went and
replaced the crown where he had found it; and having received his father's
blessing, dutifully retired. The king was taken with his last fit, while he was
at his devotions before the shrine of St. Edward the Confessor, in Westminster
Abbey, and from thence he was carried to the Jerusalem Chamber. When he had
recovered from his swoon, perceiving himself in a strange place, he desired to
know where he was, and if the apartment had any particular name: being informed
that it was called the Jerusalem Chamber, he said, that he then perceived a
prophecy was fulfilled, which declared that he should die in Jerusalem. Thus
saying, and recommending his soul to his Maker; he soon after expired, in the
forty-sixth year of his age, and the fourteenth of his reign.

If we consider this monarch on one side of his character, he will appear an
object worthy the highest applause; if on the other, of our warmest
indignation. As a man, he was valiant, prudent, cool, and sagacious. These
virtues adorned him in his private character; nor did his vices appear, till
ambition brought him within sight of a throne: it was then that he was
discovered to be unjust, cruel, gloomy, and tyrannical; and though his reign
contributed much to the happiness of his subjects, yet it was entirely
destructive of his own. He was twice married; by his first wife, Mary de Bohun,
he had four sons, Henry his successor, Thomas duke of Clarence, John duke of
Bedford, Humphry duke of Gloucester, and two daughters. By his second wife he
had no issue.

HENRY V.
portrait of Henry V Hall sculp.

CHAP. XVII. HENRY V.
THE death of Henry IV. gave the people but very little concern, and, though he
did not practice the virtues of temperance, he always showed that he esteemed
them. But it was his courage which in that martial age chiefly won the people's
affection and applause. Courage, and superstition, then made up the whole
system of human duty; nor had the age any other idea of heroism, but what was
the result of this combination.

The first steps taken by the young king confirmed all those prepossessions
entertained in his favor. He called together his former companions, acquainted
them with his intended reformation; exhorted them to follow his example; and
thus dismissed them from his presence, allowing them a competency to subsist
upon, till he saw them worthy of further promotion. The faithful ministers of
his father, at first, indeed, began to tremble for their former justice, in the
administration of their duty; but he soon eased them of their fears, by taking
them into his friendship and confidence. Sir William Gascoigne, who thought
himself the most obnoxious, met with praises instead of reproaches, and was
exhorted to persevere in the same rigorous and impartial execution of justice.

But Henry did not stop here; he showed himself willing to correct, not only
his own private errors, but those of the former reign. He expressed the deepest
sorrow for the fate of the unhappy Richard, and ordered his funeral obsequies
to be performed with royal solemnity. He seemed ambitious to bury all
party-distinctions in oblivion, the good men of either party were only dear to
him; and the bad, vainly alleged their loyalty as an extenuation of their
vices. The exhortations, as well as the example of the prince, gave
encouragement to virtue; all parties were equally attached to so just a prince,
and the defects of his title were forgot, amidst the luster of his admirable
qualities.

In this manner, the people seemed happy in their new king; but it is not in
the power of man to raise himself entirely above the prejudices of the age in
which he lives, or to correct those abuses, which often employ the sagacity of
whole centuries to discover. The vices of the clergy had drawn upon them the
contempt and detestation of the people; but they were resolved to continue
their ancient power, not by reforming themselves, but by persecuting those who
opposed them. The heresy of Wickliff, or Lollardism, as it was called, began,
to spread every day more and more, while it received a new luster from the
protection and preaching of Sir John Old castle, baron of Cobham, who had been
one of the king's domestics, and stood high in his favor. His character, both
for civil and military excellence, pointed him out to Arundel, archbishop of
Canterbury, as the proper victim of ecclesiastical vengeance; and he applied to
the king for permission to indict lord Cobham, as a miscreant guilty of the
most atrocious heresy. But the generous nature of the prince was averse to such
sanguinary methods of conversion; and he begged leave first to be permitted to
try what effect the arts of reason and persuasion would produce upon this bold
leader of his sect. He accordingly desired a private conference with lord
Cobham; but he found that nobleman obstinate in his opinions, and determined
rather to part with life, than what he believed upon conviction. The king,
therefore, finding him immovable, gave him up to the fury of his enemies.
Persecution ever propagates those errors which it aims at abolishing. The
primate indicted lord Cobham; and with the assistance of his suffragans,
condemned him as an heretic to be burnt alive. Cobham, however, escaping from
the Tower, in which he was confined, the day before his execution, privately
went among his party; and stimulating their zeal, led them up to London, to
take a signal revenge of his enemies. But the king, apprised of his intentions,
ordered that the city-gates should be shut; and coming by night with his guards
into St. Giles's fields, seized such of the conspirators as appeared, and
afterward laid hold of several parties that were hastening to the appointed
place. Some of these were executed, but the greater number pardoned. Cobham
himself found means of escaping for that time; but he was taken about four
years after; and never did the cruelty of man invent, or crimes draw down, such
torments as he was made to endure. He was hung up with a chain by the middle;
and thus at a slow fire burned, or rather roasted, alive.

Such spectacles as these must naturally excite the disgust of the people, not
only against the clergy, but the government itself. Henry, to turn their minds
from such hideous scenes, resolved to take the advantage of the troubles in
which France was at that time engaged, and pursue the advice of his dying
father, who gave it as his last instructions, that he should employ his
subjects in foreign expeditions, and thus give all the restless spirits
occupation for their inquietude. Charles the fifth, who was then king of
France, was subject to frequent fits of lunacy, which totally disqualified him
from reigning. During the paroxysms of his disease, the ambition of his vassals
and courtiers had room for exertion; and they grew powerful from their
sovereign's weakness. The administration of affairs was disputed between his
brother Lewis, duke of Orleans, and his cousin-german, John, duke of Burgundy.
Isabella, his queen, also had her party; and the king vainly attempted to
secure one also in his favor. Each of these, as they happened to prevail,
branded their captives with the name of traitors; and the gibbets were at once
hung with the bodies of the accused and the accusers. This, therefore, was
thought by Henry a favorable opportunity to recover from France those grants,
that had been formerly given up by treaty. But previously, to give his intended
expedition the appearance of justice, he sent over ambassadors to Paris,
offering a perpetual peace and alliance, on condition of being put in
possession of all those provinces, which had been ravished from the English
during the former reign, and of espousing Catharine, the French king's
daughter, in marriage, with a suitable dowry. Though the French court was at that
time extremely averse to war, yet the exorbitance of these demands could not be
complied with; and Henry very probably made them in hopes of a denial. He
therefore assembled a great fleet and army at Southampton; and having allured
all the military men of the kingdom to attend him, from the hopes of conquest,
he put to sea, and landed at Harfleur, at the head of an army of six thousand
men at arms, and twenty-four thousand foot, mostly archers.

His first operations were upon Harfleur; which being pressed hard, promised at
a certain day to surrender, unless relieved before that time. The day arriving,
and the garrison, unmindful of their engagement, still resolving to defend the
place, Henry ordered an assault to be made, took the town by storm, and put all
the garrison to the sword. From thence, the victor advanced farther into the
country, which had been already rendered desolate by factions, and which he now
totally laid waste. But although the enemy made but a feeble resistance, yet
the climate seemed to fight against the English; a contagious dysentery
carrying off three parts of Henry's army. In such a situation he had recourse
to an expedient common enough in that barbarous age, to inspire his troops with
confidence in their general. He challenged the dauphin, who commanded in the
French army, to single combat, offering to stake his pretensions on the event.
This challenge, as might naturally be expected, was rejected; and the French,
though disagreeing internally, at last seemed to unite, at the appearance of
the common danger. A numerous army of fourteen thousand men at arms, and forty
thousand foot, was by this time assembled, under the command of count Albret;
and was now placed to intercept Henry's weakened forces on their return. The
English monarch, when it was too late, began to repent of his rash inroad into
a country, where disease, and a powerful army, every where threatened
destruction; he therefore began to think of retiring into Calais. In this
retreat, which was at once both painful and dangerous, Henry took every
precaution to inspire his troops with patience and perseverance; and showed
them in his own person the brightest example of fortitude and resignation. He
was continually harrassed on his march by flying parties of the enemy; and
whenever he attempted to pass the river Sum, over which his march lay, he saw
troops, on the other side, ready to oppose his passage. However, he was so
fortunate as to seize by surprise a passage near St. Quintin, which had not
been sufficiently guarded; and there he safely carried over his army.

But the enemy was still resolved to intercept his retreat; and after he had
passed the small river of Tertrois at Blangi, he was surprised to observe from
the heights, the whole French army drawn up in the plains of Azincourt; and so
posted, that it was impossible for him to proceed on his march, without coming
to an engagement. No situation could be more unfavourable than that in which he
then found himself. His army was wasted with disease; the soldiers spirits worn
down with fatigue, destitute of provisions, and discouraged by their retreat.
Their whole body amounted but to nine thousand men; and these were to sustain
the shock of an enemy near ten times their number, headed by expert generals,
and plentifully supplied with provisions. This disparity, as it depressed the
English, so it raised the courage of the French in proportion; and so confident
were they of success, that they began to treat for the ransom of their
prisoners. Henry, on the other hand, though sensible of his extreme danger, did
not omit any circumstance that could assist his situation. As the enemy were so
much superior, he drew up his army on a narrow ground between two woods, which
guarded each flank; and he patiently expected, in that position, the attack of
the enemy. The constable of France was at the head of one army; and Henry
himself, with Edward, duke of York, commanded the other. For a time both
armies, as if afraid to begin, kept silently gazing at each other, neither
being willing to break their ranks by making the onset; which Henry perceiving,
with a cheerful countenance cried out, "My friends, since they will not begin,
it is ours to set them the example; come on, and the Blessed Trinity be our
protection." Upon this, the whole army set forward with a shout, while the
French still continued to wait their approach with intrepidity. The English
archers, who had long been famous for their great skill, first let fly a shower
of arrows three feet long, which did great execution. The French cavalry
advancing to repel these, two hundred bow-men, who lay till then concealed,
rising on a sudden, let fly among them, and produced such a confusion, that the
archers threw by their arrows, and rushing in, fell upon them sword in hand.
The French at first repulsed the assailants, who were enfeebled by disease; but
they soon made up the defect by their valor; and resolving to conquer or die,
burst in upon the enemy with such impetuosity, that the French were soon
obliged to give way.

In the mean time a body of English horse, which had been concealed in a
neighboring wood, rushing out, flanked the French infantry, and a general
disorder began to ensue. The first line of the enemy being routed, the second
line began to march up to interrupt the progress of the victory. Henry,
therefore, alighting from his horse, presented himself to the enemy with an
undaunted countenance; and at the head of his men fought on foot, encouraging
some, and assisting others. Eighteen French cavaliers, who were resolved to
kill him, or die in the attempt, rushing from the ranks together, advanced; and
one of them stunned the king with a blow of his battle-ax. They then fell upon
him in a body; and he was upon the point of sinking under their blows, when
David Gam, a valiant Welshman, aided by two of his countrymen, came up to the
king's assistance, and soon turned the attention of the assailants from the
king to themselves, till at length being overpowered, they fell dead at his
feet. Henry had by this time recovered his senses; and fresh troops advancing
to his relief, the eighteen French cavaliers were slain; upon which he knighted
the Welshmen, who had so valiantly fallen in his defense. The heat of the
engagement still increasing, Henry's courage seemed also to increase, and the
most dangerous situation was where he fought in person: his brother, who was
stunned by a blow, fell at his feet; and while the king was piously
endeavoring to succor him, he received another blow himself, which threw him
upon his knees. But he soon recovered; and leading on his troops with fresh
ardour, they ran headlong upon the enemy; and put them into such disorder, that
their leaders could never after bring them to the charge. The duke of Alencon,
who commanded the second line, seeing it fly, resolved, by one desperate
stroke, to retrieve the fortune of the day, or fall in the attempt. Wherefore
running up to Henry, and at the same time crying aloud, that he was the duke of
Alencon, he discharged such a blow on his head, that it carried off a part of
the king's helmet; while, in the mean time, Henry not having been able to ward
off the blow, returned it, by striking the duke to the ground, and he was soon
killed by the surrounding crowd; all the king's efforts to save him proving
ineffectual. In this manner, the French were overthrown in every part of the
field; their number, being crowded into a very narrow space, were incapable of
either flying, or making any resistance; so that they covered the ground with
heaps of slain. After all appearance of opposition was over, the English had
leisure to make prisoners; and having advanced with uninterrupted success to
the open plain, they there saw the remains of the French rear-guard, which
still maintained a show of opposition. At the same time was heard an alarm from
behind, which proceeded from a number of peasants, who had fallen upon the
English baggage, and were putting those who guarded it to the sword. Henry, now
seeing the enemy on all sides of him, began to entertain apprehensions from his
prisoners, the number of whom exceeded even that of his army. He thought it
necessary, therefore, to issue general orders for putting them to death; but on
the discovery of the certainty of his victory, he stopped the slaughter, and
was still able to save a great number. This severity tarnished the glory which
his victory would otherwise have acquired; but all the heroism of that age is
tinctured with barbarity.

This battle was very fatal to France, from the number of princes and nobility
slain, or taken prisoners. Among the number of the slain, was the constable of
France, the two brothers to the duke of Burgundy, the duke of Alencon, the duke
of Bar, and the count de Morle. Among the prisoners, were the duke of
Orleans, the duke of Bourbon, with several others of inferior quality. An
archbishop of Sens also perished fighting in this battle. The killed are
computed on the whole to have amounted to ten thousand men; and as the loss
fell chiefly upon the cavalry, it is pretended, that of these eight thousand
were gentlemen. The number of prisoners are computed at fourteen thousand. All
the English who were slain did not exceed forty, a number amazingly
inconsiderable, if we compare the loss with the victory.

levies, upon him the protection of the French king, met Henry in order to
ratify that treaty, which was formerly begun, and by which the crown of France
was to be transferred to a stranger. The imbecility into which Charles had
fallen, made him passive in this remarkable treaty; and Henry dictated the
terms throughout the whole negotiation. The principal articles of this treaty
were, that Henry should espouse the princess Catharine; that king Charles
should enjoy the title and dignity of king for life; but that Henry should be
declared heir to the crown, and should be entrusted with the present
administration of the government; that France and England should for ever be
united under one king, but should still retain their respective laws and
privileges; that Henry should unite his arms with those of king Charles, and
the duke of Burgundy, to depress and subdue the dauphin and his partisans. Such
was the tenor of a treaty, too repugnant to the real interests of both kingdoms
to be of long duration; but the contending parties were too much blinded by
their resentments and jealousies, to see that it is not in the power of princes
to barter kingdoms, contrary to the real interests of the community.

It was not long after this treaty, that Henry married the princess Catharine;
after which he carried his father-in-law to Paris, and took a formal possession
of that capital. There he obtained, from the estates of the kingdom, a
ratification of the late compact; and then turned his arms, with success,
against the adherents of the Dauphin, who, in the mean time, wandered about a
stranger in his own patrimony, and to his enemies successes only opposed
fruitless expostulations.

Henry's supplies were not provided in such plenty, as to enable him to carry
on the war, without returning in person to prevail upon his parliament for
fresh succors; and, upon his arrival in England, though he found his subjects
highly pleased with the splendour of his conquests, yet they seemed somewhat
doubtful as to the advantage of them. A treaty, which in its consequences was
likely to transfer the seat of empire from England, was not much relished by
the parliament. They therefore, upon various pretenses, refused him a supply
equal to his exigencies or his demands, but he was resolved on pursuing his
schemes; and joining to the supplies granted at home, the contributions levied
on the conquered provinces, he was able once more to assemble an army of
twenty-eight thousand men, and with these he landed safely at Calais.

In the mean the Dauphin, a prince of great prudence and activity, omitted no
opportunity of repairing his ruined situation, and to take the advantage of
Henry's absence from France. He prevailed upon the regent of Scotland to send
him a body of eight thousand men from that kingdom; and with these, and some
few forces of his own, he attacked the duke of Clarence, who commanded the
troops in Henry's absence, and gained a complete victory.

This was the first action which turned the tide of success against the
English. But it was of short duration, for Henry soon after appearing with a
considerable army, the Dauphin fled at his approach; while many of the places,
which held out for the Dauphin in the neighborhood of Paris, surrendered to
the conqueror. In this manner, while Henry was every where victorious, he fixed
his residence at Paris; and while Charles had but a small court, he was
attended with a very magnificent one. apparent homage, but Henry commanding
with absolute authority.

In the mean time, the Dauphin was chaced beyond the Loire, and almost totally
dispossessed of all the northern provinces. He was even pursued into the south,
by the united arms of the English and Burgundians, and threatened with total
destruction. In this exigence, he found it necessary to spin out the war, and
to evade all hazardous actions with a rival who had been long accustomed to
victory. His prudence was every where remarkable; and, after a train of long
persecutions from fortune, he found her at length willing to declare in his
favor, by ridding him of an antagonist that was likely to become a master.

Henry, at a time when his glory had nearly reached its summit, and both crowns
were just devolved upon him, was seized with a fistula; a disorder, which from
the unskilfulness of the physicians of the times, soon became mortal.
Perceiving his distemper incurable; and that his end was approaching, he sent
for his brother the duke of Bedford, the earl of Warwick, and a few other
noblemen, whom he had honored with his confidence; and to them he delivered,
in great tranquillity, his last will with regard to the government of his
kingdom and family. He recommended his son to their protection; and though he
regretted the being unable to accomplish the great object of his ambition, in
totally subduing France, yet he expressed great indifference at the approach of
death; he devoutly waited its arrival, and expired with the same intrepidity
with which he had lived, in the thirty-fourth year of his age, and the tenth
year of his reign.

This prince possessed many virtues, but his military successes gave him credit
for more than he really possessed. It is certain, however, that he had the
talent of attaching his friends by affability, and of gaining his enemies by
address and clemency. Yet his reign was rather splendid than profitable; the
treasures of the nation were lavished on conquests, that even though they could
have been maintained, would have proved injurious to the nation. Nevertheless
he died fortunate, by falling in the midst of his triumphs, and leaving his
subjects in the very height of his reputation. Charles, who died two months
after him, finished a wretched reign, long past in frenzy and contempt,
despised by his friends, insulted by his allies, and leaving the most miserable
subjects upon earth.

Henry left by his queen, Catherine of France, only one son not full nine
months old, who succeeded him on the throne; and whose misfortunes, during the
course of a long reign, surpassed all the glories and successes of his father.

The English triumphs, at this time, in France, produced scarce any good
effects at home; as they grew warlike, they became savage, and, panting after
foreign possessions, forgot the arts of cultivating those that lay nearer home.
Our language, instead of improving, was more neglected than before; Langland
and Chaucer had begun to polish it, and enrich it with new and elegant
constructions; but it now was seen to relapse into its former rudeness, and no
poet or historian of note was born in this tempestuous period.

HENRY VI.
portrait of Henry VI Hall sculp.

CHAP. XVIII. HENRY VI.
HENRY VI. successor to Henry V. was not quite a year old when he came to the
throne; and his relations began, soon after, to dispute the administration of
government during his minority. The duke of Bedford, one of the most
accomplished princes of the age, and equally experienced, protector of England,
defender of the church, and first counselor to the king. His brother, the duke
of Gloucester, was fixed upon to govern in his absence, while he conducted the
war in France; and, in order to limit the power of both brothers, a council was
named, without whose advice and approbation no measure of importance could be
carried into execution.

Things being adjusted in this manner, as the conduct of military operations
was at that time considered in a much superior light to civil employments at
home, the duke of Bedford fixed his station in France, to prosecute the
successes of the English in that part of their dominions, and to repress the
attempts of Charles VII. who succeeded his father to a nominal throne. Nothing
could be more deplorable than the situation of that monarch on assuming his
title to the crown. The English were masters of almost all France; and Henry
VI. though yet but an infant, these unfavourable appearances, Charles (who
though yet but twenty, united the prudence of age with the affability of youth)
found means to break the leagues formed against him, and to bring back his
subjects to their natural interests and their duty.

However, his first attempts were totally destitute of success; wherever he
endeavored to face the enemy he was overthrown, and he could scarcely rely on
the friends next his person. His authority was insulted even by his own
servants; advantage after advantage was gained against him, and a battle fought
near Vernueil, in which he was totally defeated by the duke of Bedford, seemed
to render his affairs wholly desperate. However, from the impossibility of the
English keeping the field without new supplies, Bedford was obliged to retire
into England, and in the mean time his vigilant enemy began to recover from his
late consternation. Dumois, one of his generals, at the head of a thousand men,
compelled the earl of Warwick to raise the siege of Montargis; and this
advantage, slight as it was, began to make the French suppose that the English
were not invincible.

But they soon had still greater reason to triumph in their change of fortune,
and a new revolution was produced by means apparently the most unlikely to be
attended with success. The assistance of a female of the humblest birth, and
meanest education, served to turn the tide of victory in their favor; and
impress their enemies with those terrors, which had hitherto rendered them
unequal in the field. By this feeble aid, the vanquished became the victors;
and the English every where worsted, were at length totally expelled the
kingdom.

In the village of Domremi, near Vaucouleurs, on the borders of Lorrain, there
lived a country girl, about twenty-seven years of age, called Joan of Arc. This
girl had been a servant at a small inn; and in that humble station had
submitted to those hardy employments which fit the body for the fatigues of
war. She was of an irreproachable life, and had hitherto testified none of
those enterprizing qualities which displayed themselves soon after. She
contentedly fulfilled the duties of her situation, and was remarkable only for
her modesty, and love of religion. But the miseries of her country seemed to
have been one of the greatest objects of her compassion and regard. Her king
expelled his native throne, her country laid in blood, and strangers executing
unnumbered rapines before her eyes, were sufficient to excite her resentment,
and to warm her heart with a desire of redress. Her mind enflamed by these
objects, and brooding with melancholy stedfastness upon them, began to feel
several impulses, which she was willing to mistake for the inspirations of
heaven. Convinced of the reality of her own admonitions, she had recourse to
one Baudricourt, governor of Vaucouleurs, and informed him of her destination
by heaven, to free her native country from its fierce invaders. Baudricourt
treated her at first with some neglect; but her importunities at length
prevailed; and, willing to make a trial of her pretensions, he gave her some
attendants, who conducted her to the French court, which at that time resided
at Chinon.

The French court were probably sensible of the weakness of her pretensions;
but they were willing to make use of every artifice to support their declining
fortunes. It was therefore given out, that Joan was actually inspired; that she
was able to discover the king among the number of his courtiers, although he
had laid aside all the distinctions of his authority; that she had told him
some secrets, which were only known to himself; and that she had demanded, and
minutely described, a sword in the church of St. Catharine de Fierbois, which
she had never seen. In this manner, the minds of the vulgar being prepared for
her appearance, she was armed cap-a-pee, mounted on a charger, and shown in
that martial dress to the people. She was then brought before the doctors of
the university; and they, tinctured with the credulity of the times, or willing
to second the imposture, declared that she had actually received her commission
from above.

When the preparations for her mission were completely blazoned, their next aim
was to send her against the enemy. The English were at that time besieging the
city of Orleans, the last resource of Charles, and every thing promised them a
speedy surrender. Joan undertook to raise the siege; and to render herself
still more remarkable, girded herself with the miraculous sword, of which she
had before such extraordinary notices. Thus equipped, she ordered all the
soldiers to confess themselves before they set out, she displayed in her hand a
consecrated banner, and assured the troops of certain success. Such confidence
on her side soon raised the spirits of the French army; and even the English,
who pretended to despise her efforts, felt themselves secretly influenced with
the terrors of her mission. A supply of provisions was to be conveyed into the
town; Joan, at the head of some French troops, covered the embarkation, and
entered Orleans at the head of the convoy, which she had safely protected.
While she was leading her troops along, a dead silence and astonishment reigned
among the English; and they regarded with religious awe that temerity, which
they thought nothing but supernatural assistance could inspire. But they were
soon rouzed from their state of amazement by a sally from the town; Joan led on
the besieged, bearing the sacred standard in her hand, encouraging them with
her words and actions, bringing them up to the trenches, and overpowering the
besiegers in their own redoubts. In the attack of one of the forts, she was
wounded in the neck with an arrow; but instantly pulling out the weapon with
her own hands, and getting the wound quickly dressed, she hastened back to head
the troops, and to plant her victorious banner on the ramparts of the enemy.
These successes continuing, the English found that it was impossible to resist
troops animated by such superior energy; and Suffolk, who conducted the attack,
thinking that it might prove extremely dangerous to remain any longer in the
presence of such a courageous and victorious enemy, raised the siege, and
retreated with all imaginable precaution.

From being attacked, the French now in turn became the aggressors. Charles
formed a body of six thousand men, and sent them to besiege Jergeau, whither
the English, commanded by the earl of Suffolk, had retired, with a detachment
of his army. The city was taken; Suffolk yielded himself a prisoner; and Joan
marched into the place in triumph, at the head of the army. A battle was soon
after fought near Patay, where the English were worsted, as before; and the
generals, Scales and Talbot, were taken prisoners.

The raising of the siege of Orleans was one part of the maid's promise to the
king of France; the crowning him at Rheims was the other. She now declared,
that it was time to complete that ceremony; and Charles, in pursuance of her
advice, set out for Rheims, at the head of twelve thousand men. The towns
through which he passed opened their gates to receive him; and Rheims sent him
a deputation, with its keys, upon his approach. The ceremony of his coronation
was there performed with the utmost solemnity; and the maid of Orleans (for so
she was now called) seeing the completion of her mission, desired leave to
retire, alleging, that she had now accomplished the end of her calling. But
her services had been so great, that the king could not think of parting; her
pressed her to stay so earnestly, that she at length complied with his request.

A tide of successes followed the performance of this solemnity; Laon,
Soissons, Chateau-Thierri, Provins, and many other towns and fortresses in that
neighborhood, submitted to him on the first summons. On the other hand, the
English, discomfited and dispirited, fled on every quarter, unknowing whether
to ascribe their misfortunes to the power of sorcery, or to a celestial
influence; but equally terrified at either. They now found themselves deprived
of the conquests they had gained, in the same manner as the French had formerly
submitted to their power. Their own divisions, both abroad and at home unfitted
them entirely for carrying on the war; and the duke of Bedford, notwithstanding
all his prudence, saw himself divested of his strong holds in the country,
without being able to stop the enemies progress. In order, therefore, to revive
the declining state of his affairs, he resolved to have Henry crowned king at
Paris, knowing that the natives would be allured to obedience, by the splendor
of the ceremony.

An accident ensued soon after, which, though it promised to promote the
English cause in France, in the end served to render it odious, and conduced to
the total evacuation of that country. The duke of Burgundy, at the head of a
powerful army, had laid siege to Compeign; and the maid of Orleans had thrown
herself into the place, contrary to the wishes of the governor, who did not
desire the company of one whose authority would be greater than his own. The
garrison, however, were rejoiced at her appearance, and believed themselves
invincible under her protection. But their joy was of short duration; for Joan
having the day after her arrival headed a sally, and twice driven the enemy
from their intrenchments, she was at last obliged to retire, placing herself in
the rear, to protect the retreat of her forces. But in the end, attempting to
follow her troops into the city, she found the gates shut, and the bridge drawn
up by order of the governor, who is said to have long wished an opportunity of
delivering her up to the enemy.

Nothing could exceed the joy of the besiegers, in having taken a person who
had been so long a terror to their arms. The service of Te Deum was publicly
celebrated on this occasion; and it was hoped that the capture of this
extraordinary person would restore the English to their former victories and
successes. The duke of Bedford was no sooner informed of her being taken, than
he purchased her of the count Vendome, who had made her his prisoner, and
ordered her to be committed to close confinement. The credulity of both nations
was at that time so great, that nothing was too absurd to gain belief, that
coincided with their passions. As Joan but a little before, from her successes,
was regarded as a saint, she was now, upon her captivity, considered as a
sorceress, forsaken by the demon who had granted her a fallacious and
temporary assistance. Accordingly, it was resolved in council to send her to
Rouen to be tried for witchcraft; and the bishop of Beauvais, a man wholly
devoted to the English interest, presented a petition against her for that
purpose. The university of Paris was so mean as to join in the same request.
Several prelates, among whom the cardinal of Winchester was the only
Englishman, were appointed as her judges. They held their court in Rouen, where
Henry then resided; and the maid, clothed in her former military apparel, but
loaded with irons, was produced before this tribunal. Her behavior there no
way disgraced her former gallantry; she betrayed neither weakness, nor womanish
submission; but appealed to God and the pope for the truth of her former
revelations. In the issue, she was found guilty of heresy and witchcraft, and
sentenced to be burnt alive, the common punishment for such offenses.

But previous to the infliction of this dreadful sentence upon her, they were
resolved to make her abjure her former errors; and at length so far prevailed
upon her, by terror and rigorous treatment, that her spirits were entirely
broken, by the hardships she was obliged to suffer. Her former visionary dreams
began to vanish, and a gloomy distrust to take place of her late inspirations.
She publicly declared herself willing to recant, and promised never more to
give way to the vain delusions which had hitherto misled her, and imposed on
the people. This was what her oppressors desired; and willing to show some
appearance of mercy, they changed her sentence into perpetual imprisonment, and
to be fed during life on bread and water. But the rage of her enemies was not
yet satiated. Perfectly satisfied of her guilt, they were willing to know if
her reformation was equally certain. Suspecting that the female dress, which
she had consented to wear, was disagreeable to her, they purposely placed in
her apartment a suit of men's apparel, and watched for the effect of their
temptation upon her. Their cruel artifices prevailed. Joan, struck with the
sight of a dress in which she had gained so much glory, immediately threw off
her penitent's robes, and put on the forbidden garment. Her enemies caught her
equipped in this manner; and her imprudence was considered as a relapse into
her former transgressions. No recantation would suffice, and no pardon would be
granted to her. She was condemned to be burnt alive in the marketplace of
Rouen; and this infamous sentence was accordingly executed upon her.

Superstition adds virulence to the natural cruelty of mankind; and this cruel
sentence served only to inflame the hatred between the contending powers,
without mending the cause of the invaders. One of the first misfortunes which
the English felt after this punishment, was the defection of the duke of
Burgundy, who had for some time seen the error of his conduct, and wished to
break an unnatural connection, that only served to involve his country in ruin.
A treaty was therefore begun, and concluded, between him and Charles, in which
the latter made all the atonements possible for his offense; and the former
agreed to assist him in driving the English out of France. This was a mortal
blow to their cause; and such was its effects upon the populace in London, when
they were informed of it, that they killed several of the duke of Burgundy's
subjects, who happened to be among them at that time. It might perhaps also
have hastened the duke of Bedford's death, who died at Rouen a few days after
the treaty was concluded; and the earl of Cambridge was appointed his successor
to the regency of France.

From this period, the English affairs became totally irretrievable. The city
of Paris returned once more to a sense of its duty. Lord Willoughby, who
commanded it for the English, was contented to stipulate for the safe retreat
of his troops to Normandy. Thus ground was continually, though slowly, gained
by the French; and notwithstanding their fields were laid waste, and their
towns depopulated, yet they found protection from the weakness and divisions of
the English. At length, both parties began to grow weary of a war, which,
though carried on but feebly, was yet a burden greater than either could
support. But the terms of peace insisted upon by both were so wide of each
other, that no hopes of an accommodation could quickly be expected. A truce,
therefore, for twenty-two months was concluded, which left every thing on the
present footing between the parties. No sooner was this agreed upon, occasion
of breaking the truce;

It may easily be supposed, that the bad successes in France, which began
almost with young Henry's reign, produced dissensions and factions among the
rulers at home. The duke of Gloucester, who had been appointed regent of
England during his brother's absence, was not so secure in his place, but that
he had many who envied his situation. Among the number of these was Henry
Beaufort, bishop of Winchester, great uncle to the king, and the legitimate son
of John of Gaunt. This prelate, to whom the care of the king's person and
education had been entrusted, was a man of great capacity and experience, but
of an intriguing and dangerous disposition. As he aspired to the government of
affairs, he had continual disputes with the duke of Gloucester, and gained
frequent advantages over the open temper of that prince. It was in vain that
the duke of Bedford employed all his own authority, and that of parliament, to
reconcile them; their mutual animosities served for several years to embarrass
government, and to give its enemies every advantage. The sentiments of these
two leaders of their party were particularly divided with regard to France. The
cardinal encouraged every proposal of accommodation with that country; the duke
of Gloucester was for maintaining the honor of the English arms, and winning
back all that had been lost by defeats or delay. In this contest, the powers
seemed nearly divided; and it became incumbent on one side to call in new
auxiliaries, before either party could turn the political scale. For this
purpose, the cardinal was resolved to strengthen himself, by procuring a
suitable match for Henry, who was now twenty-three years old; and then, by
bringing the new made queen over to his interests, to turn the balance in his
favor. Accordingly, the earl of Suffolk, a nobleman whom he knew to be
steadfast in his attachments, was sent over to France, apparently to settle the
terms of the truce, which had been then begun; but, in reality, to procure a
suitable match for the king. The duke of Gloucester had before proposed a
daughter of the count Armagnac, but had not influence sufficient to prevail.
The cardinal and his friends had cast their eye on Margaret of Anjou, daughter
of Regnier, titular king of Sicily, Naples, and Jerusalem; but without either
real power or possessions. This princess was considered as the most
accomplished of the age, both in mind and person; and it was thought would, by
her own abilities, be able to supply the defects of her consort, who already
appeared weak, timid, and superstitious. The treaty was therefore hastened on
by Suffolk, and the marriage soon after ratified in England.

were pronounced guilty; neither the rank of the duchess, nor the innocence of
the accused, could protect them; she was condemned to do penance, and to suffer
perpetual imprisonment; Bolingbroke, the priest, was hanged, and the woman was
burnt in Smithfield.

But this was only the beginning of the duke's distresses. The cardinal of
Winchester was resolved to drive his resentment to the utmost extreme; and
accordingly procured a parliament to be summoned, not at London, which was too
well affected to the duke, but at St. Edmundsbury, where his adherents were
sufficiently numerous to overawe every opponent. As soon as he appeared, he
was accused of treason, and thrown into prison; and on the day on which he was
to make his defense, he was found dead in his bed, though without any signs of
violence upon his body.

The death of the duke of Gloucester was universally ascribed to the cardinal
of Winchester, who himself died six weeks after, testifying the utmost remorse
for the bloody scene he had acted. What share the queen had in the guilt of
this transaction is uncertain; her usual activity and spirit made the public
conclude, with some reason, that the duke's enemies durst not have ventured on
such a deed without her privity. Henry did not fail to share in the general
disgust that was thus produced; and as he wanted abilities, he never had the
art to remove any suspicion. From this time discontent began to prevail among
the people, and faction among the great. A weak prince seated on the throne of
England, however gentle and innocent, seldom fails of having his authority
despised, and his power insulted. The incapacity of Henry began every day to
appear in a fuller light; and the foreign war being now extinguished, the
people began to prepare for the horrors of intestine strife. In this period of
calamity, a new interest was revived, which had lain dormant in the times of
prosperity and triumph.

It was now that the English were to pay the severe, though late, penalty for
having unjustly deposed Richard the second; another Richard, who was duke of
York, beginning to think of prefering his claims to the crown. This nobleman
was descended, by the mother's side, from Lionel, one of the sons of Edward the
third, whereas the reigning king was descended from John of Gaunt, a son of the
same monarch, but younger than Lionel. Richard, therefore, stood plainly in
succession before Henry; and he began to think the weakness and unpopularity of
the present reign a favorable moment for ambition. The ensign of Richard was a
white rose, that of Henry a red; and this gave name to the two factions, whose
animosity was now about to drench the kingdom with slaughter.

The cardinal of Winchester being dead, the duke of Suffolk, who had a hand in
Gloucester's assassination, took the lead in public affairs; and being secretly
aided by the interest of the queen, managed all with uncontrollable authority.
As this nobleman had made his way to power by murder, so he was resolved to
maintain himself in it by the usual resources of bad men, by tyranny over his
inferiors, and flattery to the queen. His conduct soon excited the jealousy or
the hatred of the whole kingdom. The great nobility could ill brook the
exaltation of a subject above them, who was of a birth inferior to their own.
The people complained of his arbitary measures; or, that if proved, he could
readily evade punishment; he endeavored, therefore, to overawe his enemies by
boldly presenting himself to the charge; and he called upon them to show an
instance of his guilt. This was what the House of Commons had long wished for;
and they immediately opened their charge against him of corruption, tyranny,
and treason. He was accused of being the cause of the loss of France; of
persuading the French king, with an armed force, to invade England; and of
betraying in office the secrets of his department. This accusation might have
been false; but the real motive, which was Suffolk's power, and the cruel use
he made of it, was left unmentioned, although it was true. It was no easy
matter for any one man's strength, how great soever, to withstand the united
resentment of a nation: so that the court was obliged to give up its favorite;
and the king, to shield him as much as possible from popular resentment,
banished him the kingdom for five years. This was considered by some as an
escape from justice; the captain of a vessel was therefore employed by his
enemies to intercept him in his passage to France; he was seized near Dover,
his head was struck off on the side of a longboat; and his body thrown into
the sea. There is little in the transactions of these times to interest us on
the side of either party; we see scarce any think but crimes on both sides,
without one shining character, or one virtue to animate the narrative.

By the death of the duke of Suffolk, Richard of York saw himself rid of a
potent enemy, and was pleased to see the discontents of the nation daily
increase. Among the number of complaints which the unpopularity of the
government gave rise to, there were some which even excited insurrection;
particularly that headed by John Cade, which was of the most dangerous nature.
This man was a native of Ireland, who had been obliged to fly over into France
for his crimes; but seeing the people upon his return prepared for violent
measures, he assumed the name of Mortimer; and at the head of twenty thousand
Kentish men advanced toward the capital, and encamped at Blackheath. The king
being informed of this commotion, sent a message to demand the cause of their
assembling in arms; and Cade, in the name of the community, answered, that
their only aim was to punish evil ministers, and procure a redress of
grievances for the people. The king's council deeming these demands seditious,
a body of fifteen thousand men was levied to oppose the insurgents; while Henry
himself marched at their head toward Blackheath. At his approach, Cade
retired, as if he had been afraid of an engagement, and lay in ambush in a
wood, not doubting that he should be pursued by the king's whole army; but the
king was content with sending a detachment after the fugitives, and returning
himself to London. This was what Cade desired to see, and sallying out from his
ambuscade, he cut the detachment in pieces.

The citizens of London soon after opened their gates to the victor; and Cade
for some time maintained great order and discipline among his followers. He
always led them out into the field during the night time; and published severe
edicts against plunder, and violence of every kind.

Next day, being informed that the treasurer, lord Say, was in the city, he
caused him to be apprehended, and beheaded without any form of trial; and in
the evening returned to the Borough of Southwark. Thus for some days he
continued the practice of entering the city in the morning, and quitting it at
night; but at length being unable to keep his followers within bounds, the
citizens resolved to shut their gates against him. Cade endeavoring to force
his way, an engagement ensued between him and the citizens, which lasted all
day, and was not discontinued until night put an end to the engagement. The
archbishop of Canterbury, and the chancellor, who had taken refuge in the
Tower, being informed of the situation of affairs, found means to draw up the
same night an act of amnesty, which was privately dispersed among the rebels,
which had the desired effect. Cade saw himself in the morning abandoned by most
of his followers, and, retreating to Rochester, was obliged to fly alone into
the Wolds of Kent, where a price being set upon his head by proclamation, he
was discovered, and slain by one Alexander Eden, who, in recompense for this
service, was made governor of Dover castle.

In the mean time, the duke of York secretly fomented these disturbances; and,
pretending to espouse the cause of the people, wrote to the king, advising a
reformation in the ministry; and the house of commons was brought over to
second his request. An address was presented against the duke of Somerset, the
duchess of Suffolk, the bishop of Chester, Sir John Tufton, and lord Dudley,
praying the king to remove them for ever from his person and councils, and to
prohibit them from approaching within twelve miles of the court. Though the
king was willing enough to oppose so violent and arbitrary an attack upon his
favorites, yet he endeavored to soften the general animosity against them, by
promising to banish a part of the obnoxious ministry from court for the space
of a year.

But partial concessions in government are generally bad palliatives. The duke
of York, who found the people entirely attached to him, resolved to avail
himself of his power; and raising a body of ten thousand men, marched toward
London, demanding a reformation of the government, and the removal of the duke
of Somerset from all his power and authority. He had hopes from the beginning
that the citizens would have thrown open their gates to him; but was much
mortified, when he found that he was refused admission. Upon his retreat into
Kent, a parley ensued between the king and him, in which the duke still
insisted on the dismission of Somerset, with which the king seemed at length
willing to comply. The duke of York was therefore persuaded to pay his respects
to the king in his tent; but on repeating his charge against the duke of
Somerset, he was surprised to see that minister step from behind the curtain,
and offer to justify his innocence. York now perceived his danger, and
repressed the impetuosity of his accusation. As soon as he left the presence,
the king commanded him to be apprehended; but such was this nobleman's
authority, or such the timidity of the king's council, that they suffered him
to retire to his seat at Wigmore, upon promising strict obedience for the
future.

But a reconciliation thus extorted could be of no long duration; York still
secretly aspired at the crown, and though he wished nothing so ardently, yet he
was for some time prevented by his own scruples from seizing it. What his
intrigues failed to bring about, accident produced to his desire. The king
falling into a distemper, which so far increased his natural imbecility that it
even rendered him incapable of maintaining the appearance of royalty, York was
appointed lieutenant and protector of the kingdom, with powers to hold and open
parliaments at pleasure. This was a fatal blow to the house of Lancaster; all
the adherents of that party were dismissed from court, and the duke of Somerset
was sent to the Tower.

York being thus invested with a plenitude of power, continued in the enjoyment
of it for some time;

Henry was now but a prisoner, treated with the splendid forms of royalty; yet
indolent and sickly, he seemed pleased with his situation, and did not regret
that power which was not to be exercised without fatigue. But it was otherwise
with Margaret, his queen. She, naturally bold, active, and endued with
masculine courage, could not be content with the appearance of that authority,
which her enemies alone permitted her to exercise; she continued to excite the
wretched monarch to a vindication of his real dignity, and to spur him on to
independence. He was, therefore, once more induced to assert his prerogative;
and the duke of York was obliged to retire, to be in readiness to oppose any
designs against his liberty and life. At first a negotiation for peace was
entered upon by both parties; but their mutual distrusts soon brought them into
the field, and the fate of the kingdom was given up to be determined by the
sword. Their armies met at Bloreheath, on the borders of Staffordshire, York
fled to Ireland; the earl of Warwick, one of his boldest and ablest supporters,
escaped to Calais, with the government of which he had been entrusted during
the late protectorship; and all the party, thus suppressed, concealed their
intentions for a more favorable opportunity. Nor was this opportunity long
wanting; Warwick having met with some successes at sea, landed in Kent, and
being there joined by some other barons, he marched up to London, amidst the
acclamations of the people. The city immediately opened its gates to him; and
his troops increasing on every day's march, he soon found himself in a
condition to face the royal army, which hastened from Coventry to attack him.
Never was there a more formidable division of interests, or greater inveteracy
between the chiefs of either party than the present. Warwick was one of the
most celebrated generals of his age, formed for times of trouble, extremely
artful, and incontestably brave, equally skilful in council and the field, and
inspired with a degree of hatred against the queen that nothing could suppress.
On the other side, the queen seemed the only acting general: she ranged the
army in battalia, and gave the necessary orders, while the poor king was
brought forward, an involuntry spectator of those martial preparations. Both
armies met on a plain near Northampton; the queen's forces amounting to about
five and twenty thousand men, the earl of Warwick's to near double that number.
While the queen went about from rank to rank, the king remained in his tent,
awaiting the issue of the combat with female doubts and apprehensions. The
battle continued for five hours, with the utmost obstinacy; but at length the
good fortune and the numbers of Warwick were seen to prevail. The queen's army
was overthrown; and she had the misfortune to see the king once more made a
prisoner, and brought back to his capital in triumph.

The cause of the Yorkists being thus confirmed by the strongest arguments,
those of power, a parliament was called to give it their more formal sanction.
The duke of York, whose prospects began to widen as he rose, from being
contented with the protectorship, now began to claim the crown. It was now, for
the first time, that the house of lords seemed to enjoy an unbiassed
deliberative authority; the cause of Henry and the duke of York was solemnly
debated, each side producing their reasons without fear or control. This was
the first time that a spirit of true rational liberty ever appeared to exert
itself in England, and in which recent conquest did not supersede all
deliberation. The duke of York, though a conqueror, could not entirely gain his
cause: it was determined that Henry should possess the throne during his life;
and that the duke of York should be appointed his successor, to the utter
exclusion of the prince of Wales, who, yet but a child, was insensible of the
injury that was done him.

The queen, to all appearance, now seemed utterly destitute of every resource;
her armies were routed, her husband taken prisoner, and the parliament
disclaimed her cause; yet, though she had lost all, she still retained her
native intrepidity and perseverance. She was a woman of a great mind and some
faults, but ambition seemed to be the leading passion in all her conduct. Being
now a fugitive, distant from the capital, opposed by a victorious army, and a
consummate general, she still tried every resource to repair her disastrous
circumstances. She flew to Wales; there endeavored to animate her old friends,
and to acquire new. The nobility of the North, who regarded themselves as the
most warlike of the kingdom, were moved by indignation to find the southern
barons dispose of the crown, and settle the government. They began to consider
the royal cause as unjustly oppressed; and the queen soon found herself at the
head of an army of twenty thousand men, ready to second her pretensions. She
and her old enemy, the duke of York, once more met upon Wakefield Green,

Margaret, being victorious, marched toward London in order to give the king
liberty; but the earl of Warwick, who now put himself at the head of the
Yorkists, commanded an army, in which he led about the captive king to give a
sanction to his attempts. Upon the approach of the Lancastrians he conducted
his forces, strengthened by a body of Londoners, who were very affectionate to
his cause, and he gave battle to the queen at St. Alban's. While the armies
were warmly engaged, lord Lovelace, who commanded a considerable body of
Yorkists treacherously withdrew from the combat, and this decided the victory
in favor of the queen. Above two thousand of the Yorkists perished in the
battle, and the person of the king again fell into the hands of his own party,
to be treaty with apparent respect, but real contempt. Lord Bonville, to whose
care he had been entrusted, staid with him after the defeat, upon an assurance
of pardon; but Margaret, regardless of her husband's promise, immediately
ordered his head to be struck off.

It only now remained, that the city of London should declare in the queen's
favor, but Warwick had previously secured it in his interests; and the
citizens, who dreaded her tumultuous army, refused to open their gates to her
summons. In the mean time, young Edward, the eldest son of the late duke of
York, began to repair the losses his party had lately sustained, and to give
spirit to the Yorkists. This prince, in the bloom of youth, remarkable for the
beauty of his person, his bravery, and popular deportment, advanced toward
London with the remainder of Warwick's army; and obliging Margaret to retire,
entered the city amidst the acclamations of the people. Perceiving his own
popularity,

But the miseries of a civil war were not yet completed, and Margaret was
resolved to strike another blow. Upon her retiring to the North, great numbers
flocked to her standard, and she was able, in a few days, to assemble an army
of sixty thousand men in Yorkshire. On the other side, the earl of Warwick
conducted young Edward at the head of forty thousand men to oppose her. Both
sides at length met near Touton, in the county of York, to decide the fate of
empire, and never was England depopulated by so terrible an engagement. It was
a dreadful sight, to behold an hundred thousand men of the same country engaged
against each other; and all to satisfy the empty ambition of the weakest, or
the worst of mankind. While the army of Edward was advancing to the charge,
there happened a great fall of snow; which driving full in the faces of the
enemy blinded them, and this advantage, seconded by an impetuous onset, decided
the victory in their favor. Edward issued orders to give no quarter; and a
bloody slaughter ensued, in which near forty thousand of the Lancastrians were
slain. Edward entered York victorious; and taking down the heads of his father
and the earl of Salisbury, that were placed over the city gates, put up that of
the earl of Devonshire in their stead.

In the mean time, Margaret hearing the fate of her army, and being sensible
that no place in England could now afford her protection, she fled with Henry
and her son to Scotland. But no calamity was able to repress her perseverance;
though so often overcome, yet she was resolved once more to enter England with
five thousand men, granted her by the French king; and the unfortunate Henry
was led onward, by his presence to enforce her claims. But even here her former
ill fortune attended her; and her little fleet was dispersed by a tempest,
while she herself escaped, with some difficulty, by entering the mouth of the
Tweed. Soon after a defeat, which her few forces suffered at Hexham, seemed to
render her cause desperate; and the cruelty which was practiced upon all her
adherents, rendered it still more dangerous.

The loss of this battle appeared to deprive her of every resource; she and her
husband were obliged to seek for safety in a separate flight, without
attendants, and without even the necessaries of life. The weak unfortunate
king, always imprudent, and always unsuccessful, thought he could remain
concealed in England; but his error was soon attended with the obvious
consequences, being taken prisoner, carried to London with ignominy, and
confined in the Tower. Margaret was rather more fortunate. She flying with her
son into a forest, where she endeavored to conceal herself, was set upon
during the darkness of the night by robbers, who, either ignorant or regardless
of her quality, despoiled her of her rings and jewels, and treated her with the
utmost indignity. But she found more respectful treatment from one of those
lawless men, who, knowing her station, resolved to procure her safety at the
hazard of his own; and at last conducted her to the seacoast, whence she made
her escape to her father in Flanders, who, though very poor, strove as well as
he could to supply her with the necessaries of life. To the same court the
dukes of Somerset and Exeter retired; and they, literally speaking, felt all
the miseries of want. Philip de Comines, the French historian, says he saw the
duke of Exeter following the duke of Burgundy's equipage barefooted, and
serving for his livelihood as a footman. This was a strange situation for a
lord, who had conducted armies, and was allied to kings and princes; but those
enjoyments which served to distinguish the great from the little, were not so
apparent then as at present.

Edward being now, by means of the earl of Warwick, fixed upon the throne,
reigned in peace and security, while his title was recognized by parliament,
and universally submitted to by the people. mask or a pageant; and the king
would at once gallant a mistress, and inspect an execution. In order to turn
him from these pursuits, which were calculated to render him unpopular, the
earl of Warwick advised him to marry; and, with his consent, went over to
France to procure Bona of Savoy as queen, and the match was accordingly
concluded. But whilst the earl was hastening the negotiation in France, the
king himself rendered it abortive at home, by marrying Elizabeth Woodville,
with whom he had fallen in love, and whom he had vainly endeavored to debauch.
Having thus given Warwick real cause of offense, he was resolved to widen the
breach, by driving him from the council. Every incident tended to increase the
jealousy between the king, and this powerful subject; the favor shown the
queen's party, and the contempt which was thrown upon the earl, manifested an
open rapture. Warwick, whose prudence was equal to his bravery, soon made use
of both to assist his revenge; he seduced the duke of Clarence, brother to the
king; and to confirm that nobleman in his interests, he gave him his daughter
in marriage. Thus an extensive and dangerous combination was formed against
Edward and his ministry; and an accident that followed soon after, contributed
to fan the flame. The inhabitants about St. Leonard's Hospital, in Yorkshire,
complained that the duties levied for that institution, which were originally
allotted for pious uses, were now secreted by the managers; and they refused to
contribute their pair. They soon after rose in a body to oppose the
ecclesiastical severities that were levelled against them by the earl of
Pembroke. It is thought that the earl of Warwick had some hand in fomenting
these disorders; and although this rebellion was quieted by a pardon from
Edward, yet some others, that broke out shortly after, appeared favorable to
Warwick's designs. Vengeance seemed to be the only motive this nobleman had in
view; and that he pursued with unabating assiduity. Plots, treasons,
stratagems, and negotiations, followed each other in rapid succession; but at
last fortune seemed to favor Warwick's aims; and the king, as we are told,
fell into his power, by accepting an invitation, which the earl gave him, in
order to betray him. Be this as it may, Edward had soon the good fortune to see
himself at the head of a numerous army, and in a condition to take satisfaction
for the treachery of his powerful opponent. Resolving therefore to take
advantage of the enemies weakness, after having defeated a party commanded by
lord Wells, and cut off his head, he marched to give them battle. In this
exigence, Warwick, and the duke of Clarence, had no other resource but to quit
the kingdom; and embarking for Calais, they seized upon some Flemish vessels,
which they found lying along that coast, with which they entered one of the
ports of France. Here they entered into an union with Margaret, which was
dictated by necessity; both sides being willing to forget their mutual
animosity, in order to second their revenge. Lewis, the king of France,
prepared a fleet to escort them; and seizing the opportunity, they landed at
Dartmouth with a small body of troops, while Edward was in the North,
suppressing an insurrection, which had lately appeared there. Nothing can be
more extraordinary than the success of Warwick upon this occasion. The spirit
of discontent with which many were infected, and the general instability of the
English nation, conspired with his ambition; and in less than six days such
multitudes flocked to his standard, that he saw himself at the head of an army
of threescore thousand men.

It was now become Edward's turn to fly the kingdom. He had just time to escape
an attempt made upon his person in the night, by the marquis of Montague; and
to embark on board a small fleet, which lay off Lynn in Norfolk. Nor were his
dangers lessened at sea, where he was chased by some ships belonging to the
Hanse-towns, who were then at war with both France and England. But at length
he landed safely in Holland, where he received a cool reception from the duke
of Burgundy, with whom he had some time before entered into an alliance.



But Edward's party, though repressed, was not destroyed. Though an exile in
Holland, he had many partisans at home; and after an absence of nine months,
being seconded by a small body of forces, granted him by the duke of Burgundy,
he made a descent at Ravenspur in Yorkshire. Though at first he was cooly
received by the English, yet his army increased upon its march, while his
moderation and feigned humility still added to the number of his partisans.
London at that time ever ready to admit the most powerful, opened her gates to
him; and the wretched Henry was once more plucked from his throne, to be sent
back to his former mansion.

Thus Warwick began to experience the instability of fortune, and find his
party declining; but what gave the most dreadful blow to his hopes was the
defection of his son-in-law, the duke of Clarence, who went over to Edward, and
threw all his weight into the opposite scale. Nothing now therefore remained to
Warwick, but to cut short a state of anxious suspense by hazarding a battle;
and though he knew his forces to be inferior to those of Edward, yet he placed
his greatest dependence upon his own generalship. With this resolution,
therefore, he marched from St. Alban's, where he was stationed, and advancing
toward Barnet, within ten miles of London, there resolved to wait for Edward,
who was not flow in marching down to oppose him. Warwick and Edward were at
that time considered as the two most renowned generals of the age; and now was
to be struck the decisive blow that was either to six Edward on the throne, or
to overthrow his pretensions for ever. The unfortunate Henry also was dragged
along to be a spectator of the engagement; happy in his natural imbecility,
which seemed as a balm to sooth all his afflictions.

hopes gone, he was resolved to sell the conquerors a dear-bought victory. He
had, contrary to his usual practice, engaged that day on foot; and leading a
chosen body of troops into the thickest of the slaughter, he there fell in the
midst of his enemies, covered over with wounds. His brother underwent the same
fate; and ten thousand of his adherents were slain, Edward having ordered that
no quarter should be given.

Margaret, who had been ever fruitful in resources, was at that time returning
from France with her son, the prince of Wales, where she had been negotiating
for fresh supplies. She had scarce time to refresh herself from the fatigues of
her voyage, when she received the fatal news of the death of the brave Warwick,
and the total destruction of her party. Though she had hitherto boldly
withstood all the attacks of fortune, the present information was too violent a
blow for nature to support. Her grief, for the first time, found way in a
torrent of tears; and yielding to her unhappy fate, she took sanctuary in the
abbey of Beaulieu in Hampshire.

She had not been long in this melancholy abode before she found some few
friends still willing to assist her fallen fortunes. Tudor, earl of Pembroke,
Courtney, earl of Devonshire, the lords Wenlock and St. John, with other men of
rank, exhorted her still to hope for success, and offered to assist her to the
last. A dawn of hope was sufficient to revive the courage of this magnanimous
woman; and the recollection of her former misfortunes gave way to the
flattering prospect of another trial. She had now fought battles in almost
every province in England; Tewksbury-Park was the last scene that terminated
her attempts. The duke of Somerset headed her army; a man who had shared her
dangers, and had ever been steady in her cause. He was valiant, generous, and
polite; but rash, and headstrong. When Edward first attacked him in his
intrenchments, he repulsed him with such vigor, that the enemy retired with
precipitation; upon which the duke, supposing them routed, pursued, and ordered
lord Wenlock to support his charge. But unfortunately this lord disobeyed his
orders; and Somerset's forces were soon overpowered by numbers. In this
dreadful exigence, the duke, finding that all was over, became ungovernable in
his rage; and beholding Wenlock inactive, and remaining in the very place where
he had first drawn up his men, giving way to his fury, with his heavy battle-ax
in both hands, he ran upon the coward, and with one blow dashed out his brains.

The queen and the prince were taken prisoners after the battle, and brought
into the presence of Edward. The young prince appeared before the conqueror
with undaunted majesty; and being asked, in an insulting manner, how he dared
to invade England without leave, the young prince, more mindful of his high
birth than of his ruined fortune, replied, "I have entered the dominions of my
father, to revenge his injuries, and redress my own." The barbarous Edward,
enraged at his intrepidity, struck him on the mouth with his gauntlet; and this
served as a signal for further brutality: the dukes of Gloucester, Clarence,
and others, like wild beasts, rushing on the unarmed youth at once, stabbed him
to the heart with their daggers. To complete the tragedy, Henry himself, who
had long been the passive spectator of all these horrors, was now thought unfit
to live. The duke of Gloucester, afterward Richard the third, entering his
chamber alone, murdered him in cold blood. Of all those that were taken, none
were suffered to survive but Margaret herself. It was perhaps expected that she
would be ransomed by the king of France; and in this they were not deceived, as
that monarch paid the king of England fifty thousand crowns for her freedom.
This extraordinary woman, after having sustained the cause of her husband in
twelve battles, after having survived her friends, fortunes, and children, died
a few years after in privacy in France, very miserable indeed; but with few
other claims to our pity, except her courage and her distresses.

EDWARD IIII.
portrait of Edward IV Hall sculp.

CHAP. XIX. EDWARD IV.
OF all people the English are the most truly compassionate; and a throne
raised upon cruelty never wanted enemies among them. Nothing could have been
more ill-judged than any attempts to govern such a people by the hands of the
executioner; and the leaders of either faction seemed insensible of this truth.
Edward being now freed from great enemies, turned to the punishment of those of
lesser note; so that the gibbets were hung with his adversaries, and their
estates confiscated to his use. The bastard Falconbridge, among others, having
advanced to London at the head of a small body of forces, was repulsed; and
being taken prisoner was immediately executed.

But while Edward was thus rendering himself terrible on the one hand, he was
immersed in abandoned pleasures on the other. Nature, it seems, was not
unfavourable to him in that respect; as he was universally allowed to be the
most beautiful man of his time. His courtiers also seemed willing to encourage
those debaucheries in which they had a share; and the clergy, as they
themselves practiced every kind of lewdness with impunity, were ever ready to
lend absolution to all his failings. The truth is, enormous vices had been of
late so common, that adultery was held but as a very slight offense. Among the
number of his mistresses was the wife of one Shore, a merchant in the city, a
woman of exquisite beauty and good sense, but who had not virtue enough to
resist the temptations of a beautiful man, and a monarch.

England now enjoying a temporary calm, Edward thought that the best way to
ingratiate himself with his subjects, would be to assert his right to his
dominions in France, which the insurrections of his father had contributed to
alienate during the former reign. An attempt of this kind would serve to give
vent to the malignant disposition of his enemies, and would be sure to please
the vulgar, who are ever more fond of splendid, than of useful acquisitions. To
prosecute this scheme, the king sent off to his ally, the duke of Burgundy, a
reinforcement of three thousand men, and soon after passed over himself at the
head of a numerous army. Lewis the eleventh, who was then king of France, was,
not without reason, alarmed at this formidable invasion, which as he was unable
to resist, he strove to obviate by treaty. This succeeded more effectually than
arms; the two kings had an interview at the bridge of Perpignan; and, upon the
promise of a stipulated sum, Edward agreed to lead his forces back to England.
This monarch wanted to return home to his mistresses to spend upon them the
money he expected to receive from France; and the French monarch hoped soon to
put himself in a posture to refuse giving these sums which he had only made a
promise to pay.

Upon the conclusion of this expedition, which thus ended without effect,
Edward appeared no less actuated by private passions unworthy a sovereign and a
statesman, than jealous of all who seemed to despise his conduct. Among the
detail of private wrongs, which are too minute for history, an act of tyranny,
of which he was guilty in his own family, deserves the detestation of
posterity. The duke of Clarence, by all his services in deserting Warwick, had
never been able to recover the king's friendship, which he had forfeited by his
former confederacy with that nobleman. A pretext was therefore sought to ruin
him; and the openness of his hasty temper soon gave the wished-for occasion.
The king hunting one day in the park of Thomas Burdet, a creature of the
duke's, he killed a white buck, which was a great favorite of the owner.
Burdet vexed at the loss, broke into a passion, and wished the horns of the
deer in the belly of the person who had advised the king to that insult. For
this trifling exclamation, Burdet was tried for his life, and publicly executed
at Tyburn. The duke of Clarence, upon the death of his friend, vented his grief
in renewed reproaches against his brother, and exclaimed against the iniquity
of the sentence. The king, highly offended with this liberty, or using that as
a pretext against him, had him arraigned before the house of peers, and
appeared in person as his accuser. In those times of confusion, every crime
alleged by the prevailing party was fatal; the duke was found guilty; and
being granted a choice of the manner in which he would die, he was privately
drowned in a butt of malmsey in the Tower; a whimsical choice, and implying
that he had an extraordinary passion for that liquor.

The rest of this monarch's life was spent in riot and debauchery; in
gratifications that are pleasing only to the narrow mind, in useless treaties
with France, in which he was ever deceived, and in empty threats against the
monarch who had deceived him. His parliament, become merely the ministers of
his will, consented, at his request, to a war with France, at a time when his
alliances upon the continent were so broken, that it was impossible for it to
succeed. The people seemed equally pleassed with the prospect of an expedition,
which, without serving, could only tend to impoverish the nation; and great
hopes were revived of once more conquering France. While all were thus occupied
with hope, or private distrust, and while Edward was employed in making
preparations for that enterprise, he was seized with a distemper, of which he
expired in the forty-second year of his age, (and counting from his first
usurpation,) in the twenty-third of his reign. The character of this prince is
easily summed up. His best qualities were courage and beauty; his bad, a
combination of all the vices. Beside five daughters, this king left two sons,
Edward, prince of Wales, his successor, then in his thirteenth year; and
Richard, duke of York, in his seventh.

EDWARD V.
portrait of Edward V Hall sculp.

CHAP. XX. EDWARD V.
UPON the death of Edward, the kingdom was divided into two new factions. The
queen's family, who, during the last reign had grown into power, was became
obnoxious to the old nobility, who could not bear to act in subordination to
persons whom they considered as inferiors. The king himself, during his
lifetime, had been able to overawe these animosities; and on his deathbed
endeavored to guard against their future increase. He expressed a desire, that
his brother the duke of Gloucester should be entrusted with the regency, and
recommended peace and unanimity during the minority of his son. But the king
was no sooner dead, than the parties broke out with all their former
resentment; and the duke of Gloucester, a crafty, wicked, and ambitious prince,
resolved to profit by their mutual contentions.

His first aim was to foment the discontents of the old nobility, by
insinuating, that the queen wanted to hide the meanness of her original in a
multitude of new promotions; at the same time he redoubled his professions of
zeal and attachment to that princess, and thus entirely gained her confidence.
Having succeeded thus far, he gained over the duke of Buckingham, and some
other lords, to his interests, and prevailed upon them to second him in his
attempts to get the guardianship of the young king conferred upon him, together
with the custody of his person.

Being sure of the assistance of these noblemen, he resolved to take the king
out of the custody of the earl of Rivers, his uncle by the mother's side; and
having procured that nobleman to be arrested, he met young Edward in person,
and offered to conduct him up to London, with the most profound demonstrations
of respect. Having thus secured the person of the king, his next step was to
get the charge of the king's brother, a boy of about seven years old, who, with
the queen, his mother, had taken sanctuary in Westminster Abbey. The queen, who
had foreseen from the beginning the dangers that threatened her family, was
very hardly persuaded to deliver up her child; but at the intercession of the
primate, and the archbishop of York, she was at last induced to comply; and
clasping her child in her arms, with a last embrace, took leave of him with a
shower of tears. The young king finding that he was to have the pleasure of his
brother's company, was greatly rejoiced at the queen's compliance, not
considering the fatal intent of these preparations; for in a few days after the
duke of Gloucester, who had been made protector of the realm, upon a pretense
of guarding their persons from danger, conveyed them both to the Tower.

Having thus secured the persons of those he intended to destroy, his next step
was to spread a report of their illegitimacy; and, by pretended obstacles, to
put off the day appointed for the young king's coronation. Lord Stanly, a man
of deep penetration, was the first to disclose his fears of the protector's
having ill designs; and communicated his suspicions to lord Hastings, who long
had been firmly attached to the king's family. Hastings would at first give the
surmise no credit; and probably his wishes that such a project might not be
true, influenced his judgment, and confirmed his security. But he was soon
undeceived; for Catesby, a vile instrument of the protector, was sent to sound
him, and to try whether he could not be brought over to assist the projected
usurpation. Hastings treated the proposal with horror; he professed himself
immovable in his adherence to the king; and his death was therefore resolved
on by the protector.

In the mean time, orders had been dispatched to execute the lords Rivers,
Gray, and Vaughan, who had been confined in Pomfret castle, and whose only
crime was their attachment to the young king. On the very day on which they
were beheaded, the protector summoned a council in the Tower, whither lord
Hastings, amongst others, repaired, no way suspecting that his own life was in
danger. The duke of Gloucester was capable of committing the most bloody and
treacherous murders with the utmost coolness and indifference. He came thither
at nine o'clock in the morning with a most cheerful countenance, saluting the
members with the utmost affability, and demonstrations of unusual good humor.
He complimented the bishop of Ely on his early strawberries, and begged to have
a dish of them. He then left the council, as if called away by other business;
but desired that his absence might not interrupt the debates. In about an hour
he returned, quite altered in look, knitting his brows, biting his lips, and
showing, by a frequent change of countenance, the signs of some inward
perturbation. A silence ensued for some time; and the lords looked upon each
other, not without reason, expecting some horrid catastrophe. At length, he
broke the dreadful silence: "My lords, cried he, what punishment do they
deserve, who have conspired against my life?" This question redoubled the
astonishment of the assembly; and the silence continuing, lord Hastings at
length made answer, that whoever did so, deserved to be punished as a traitor.
"These traitors, cried the protector, are the sorceress, my brother's wife, and
Jane Shore, his mistress, with others, their associates. See to what a
condition they have reduced me by their incantations and witchcrafts." Upon
which he laid bare his arm, all shrivelled and decayed. The amazement of the
council seemed to increase at this terrible accusation; and lord Hastings again
said: "If they have committed such a crime, they deserve punishment." "If!
cried the protector, with a loud voice, do thou answer me with Ifs? I tell
thee that they have conspired my death; and that thou, traitor, art an
accomplice in their crime." He then struck the table twice with his hand; and
the room was instantly filled with armed men. "I arrest thee, continues he,
turning to Hastings, for high treason;" and at the same time gave him in charge
to the soldiers. In the mean while, the council-room was filled with tumult and
confusion; and though no rescue was offered, yet the soldiers caused a bustle,
as if they apprehended danger. One of them narrowly missed cleaving lord
Stanly's head with a battle-ax; but he fortunately escaped, by shrinking under
the table. In all probability the fellow had orders for that attempt, and
should Stanley be killed his death might be ascribed to the tumult caused by an
intended rescue. However, though he escaped the blow he was arrested by the
protector's order, who was well apprized of his attachment to the young king.
As for lord Hastings, he was obliged to make a short confession to the next
priest that was at hand; the protector crying out, By St. Paul, that he would
not dine till he had seen his head taken off. He was accordingly hurried out to
the Little Green before the Tower-chapel, and there beheaded on a log of wood,
that accidentally lay in the way. Two hours after, a proclamation, very well
drawn up, was read to the citizens of London, enumerating his offenses, and
palliating the suddenness of his punishment. It was remarked, however, by a
merchant among the auditors, that the proclamation was certainly drawn up by a
spirit of prophecy.

The protector, having thus got rid of those he most feared, was willing to
please the populace by punishing Jane Shore, the late king's mistress. This
unfortunate woman was an enemy too humble to excite his jealousy; yet as he had
accused her of witchcraft, of which all the world saw she was innocent, he
thought proper to make her an example, for those faults of which she was really
guilty. Jane Shore had been formerly deluded from her husband, who was a
goldsmith in Lombard Street, and continued to live with Edward, the most
guiltless mistress in his abandoned court. She was ever known to intercede for
the distressed, and was usually applied to as mediator for mercy. She was
charitable, generous, and of a most pleasing conversation; her wit being said
to be as irresistible as her beauty. As she was blameless in other respects,
the protector ordered her to be sued for incontinency, as having left her
husband to live in adultery with another. It is very probable, that the people
were not displeased at seeing one again reduced to former meanness, who had for
a while been raised above them, and enjoyed the smiles of a court. The charge
against her was too notorious to be denied; she pleaded guilty, and was
accordingly condemned to walk barefoot through the city, and to do penance in
St. Paul's church in a white sheet, with a wax-taper in her hand, before
thousands of spectators. She lived above forty years after this sentence,
reduced to the most extreme wretchedness; and Sir Thomas More, in the
succeeding reign, assures us, that he saw her gathering herbs in a field near
the city for her nightly repast; an extraordinary example of the ingratitude of
courts, and the reverses of fortune.

The protector now began to throw off the mask, and to deny his pretended
regard for the sons of the late king, thinking it high time to aspire at the
throne more openly. He had previously gained over the duke of Buckingham, a man
of talents and power, by bribes and promises of future favor. This nobleman,
therefore, used all his arts to infuse into the people an opinion of the
bastardy of the late king, and also that of his children. Doctor Shaw, a
popular preacher, was hired to harangue the people from St. Paul's Cross to the
same purpose; where, after having displayed the incontinence of the queen, and
insisting on the illegality of the young king's title, he then expatiated on
the virtues of the protector. "It is the protector, cried he, who carries in
his face the image of virtue, and the marks of a true descent. He alone can
restore the lost glory and honor of the nation." It was hoped, upon this
occasion, that some of the populace would have cried out, Long live king
Richard! but the audience remaining silent, the duke of Buckingham undertook to
persuade them, in his turn. His speech was copious upon the calamities of the
last reign, and the bastardy of the present race; he saw only one method of
shielding off the miseries that threatened the state, which was, to elect the
protector; but he seemed apprehensive that he would never be prevailed on to
accept of a crown, accompanied with such difficulty and danger. He next asked
his auditors, whether they would have the protector for their king; but was
mortified to find that a total silence ensued. The mayor, who was in the
secret, willing to relieve him in this embarrassing situation, observed, that
the citizens were not accustomed to be harrangued by a person of such quality,
and would only give an answer to their recorder. This officer, therefore,
repeated the duke's speech, but the people continuing still silent, "This is
strange obstinacy, cried the duke; we only require of you, in plain terms, to
declare whether, or not, you will have the duke of Gloucester for your king; as
the lords and commons have sufficient power without your concurrence?" After
all these efforts, some of the meanest apprentices, incited by the protector's
and Buckingham's servants, raising a feeble cry of, "God save king Richard!"
the mob at the door, a despicable class of people, ever pleased with novelty,
repeated the cry, and, throwing up their caps, repeated, A Richard! a Richard!

In this manner the duke took the advantage of this faint approbation; and the
next day, at the head of the mayor and aldermen, went to wait upon the
protector, at Baynard's Castle, with offers of the crown. When Richard was told
that a great multitude was waiting at the door, with his usual hypocrisy he
appeared to the crowd in a gallery between two bishops, and at first seemed
quite surprised at such a concourse of people. But when he was informed that
their business was to offer him the crown, he declared against accepting it;
alleging his love for the late king, his brother, his affliction for the
children under his care, and his own insufficiency. Buckingham seeming
displeased with this answer, muttered some words to himself, but at length
plainly told him, "That it was needless to refuse, for that the people were
bent on making him king; that they had now proceeded too far to recede; and
therefore, in case of his refusal, were determined to offer the crown where it
would meet a more ready acceptance." This was a resolution which the
protector's tenderness for his people would not suffer him to see effected. "I
perceive, cried he, in a modest tone, that the kingdom is resolved to load me
with preferments, unequal to my abilities or my choice; yet since it is my duty
to obey the dictates of a free people, I will, though reluctantly, accept their
petition. I therefore, from this moment, enter upon the government of England
and France, with a resolution to defend the one, and subdue the other." The
crowd being thus dismissed, each man returned home, pondering upon the
proceedings of the day; and making such remarks as passion, interest, or party
might suggest.

RICHARD III.
portrait of Richard III Hall sculp.

CHAP. XXI. RICHARD III.
ONE crime ever draws on another; and submissively answered, that he knew not
how to embrue his hands in innocent blood. A fit instrument, however, was not
long wanting; Sir James Tyrrel readily undertook the office, and Brackenbury
was ordered to resign to him the keys for one night. Tyrrel choosing three
associates, Slater, Deighton, and Forest, came in the nightime to the door of
the chamber, where the princes were lodged; and sending in the assassins, he
bid them execute their commission, while he himself staid without. They found
the young princes in bed, and fallen into a sound sleep: after suffocating them
with the bolster and pillows, they showed their naked bodies to Tyrrel; who
ordered them to be buried at the stair-foot, deep in the ground, under an heap
of stones. These facts appeared in the succeeding reign, being confessed by the
perpetrators; who, however, escaped punishment for the crime. The bodies of the
princes were afterward sought for by Henry VII. but could not be found;
however, in the reign of Charles II. the bones of two persons, answering their
age, were found in the very spot where it was said they were buried: they were
interred in a marble monument by order of the king in Westminster Abbey.

Richard had now waded through every obstacle to the throne; and began, after
the manner of all usurpers, to strengthen his ill-got power by foreign
connexions. Sensible, also, of the influence of pageantry and show upon the
minds of the people, he caused himself to be crowned first at London, and
afterward at York. The clergy he endeavored to secure by great indulgencies;
and his friends, by bestowing rewards on them, in proportion as they were
instrumental in placing him on the throne.

But while he thus endeavored to establish his power, he found it threatened
on a quarter where he least expected an attack. The duke of Buckingham, who had
been too instrumental in placing him on the throne, though he had received the
greatest rewards for his services, yet continued to wish for more. He had
already several posts and governments conferred upon him; but that nobleman,
whose avarice was insatiable, making a demand of the confiscated lands in
Hereford, to which his family had an ancient claim, Richard, either reluctantly
complied with his request, or but partially indulged it, so that a coolness
soon ensued; and no sooner had Buckingham supposed himself injured, than he
resolved to dethrone a monarch, whose title was founded in injustice. At first,
however, this aspiring subject remained in doubt, whether he should put up for
the crown himself, or set up another; but the latter resolution prevailing, he
determined to declare for Henry, earl of Richmond, who was at that time an
exile in Brittany, and was consiered as the only surviving branch of the house
of Lancaster.

Henry, earl of Richmond, was at that time detained in a kind of honorable
custody by the duke of Brittany. He was one of those, who had the good fortune
to escape the numerous massacres of the preceding reigns; but as he was a
descendant of John of Gaunt, by the female line, he was for that reason
obnoxious to those in power. He had long lived in exile; and was, at one time,
delivered up to the ambassadors of Edward, who were preparing to carry him over
to England, when the prince, who delivered him, repented of what he had done,
and took him from the ambassadors just as they were leading him on shipboard.
This was the youth on whom the duke of Buckingham cast his eye, to succeed to
the crown, and a negotiation was begun between them for that purpose. Henry's
hereditary right to the throne was doubtful, but the crimes of the usurper
served to strengthen his claims. However, still further to improve his title, a
marriage was projected between him and the princess Elizabeth, eldest daughter
of the late king, and the queen dowager was prevailed on heartily to accede to
the measure.

Richard, in the mean time, either informed by his creatures, or kept
distrustful by conscious guilt, began to suspect Buckingham's fidelity; and the
secret informations which he daily received, left him no room to doubt of the
truth of his suspicions. Impressed with this jealousy, therefore, he formed a
resolution of sending for him to court; and the duke's refusing to obey the
summons, confirmed him in his fears. But he soon had the plainest proofs of
Buckingham's enmity, intelligence arriving that this nobleman was at the head
of a large body of men in arms, and marching toward the western shore.
Richard, whose courage no dangers could allay, immediately put himself in a
posture of defense, by levying some troops in the North, and prepared to meet
the insurgents with his usual expedition. But fortune seemed his friend on the
present occasion, and rendered all his preparations unnecessary. As Buckingham
was advancing by hasty marches toward Gloucester, where he designed to cross
the Severn, just at that time the river was swollen to such a degree, that the
country on both sides was deluged, and even the tops of some hills were covered
with water. This inundation continued for ten days; during which Buckingham's
army, composed of Welshmen, could neither pass the river, nor find subsistence
on their own side; they were, therefore, obliged to disperse, and return home,
notwithstanding all the duke's efforts to prolong their stay. In this helpless
situation, the duke, after a short deliberation, took refuge at the house of
one Banister, who had been his servant, and who had received repeated
obligations from his family. But the wicked seldom find, as they seldom exert,
friendship. Banister, unable to resist the temptation of a large reward that
was set upon the duke's head, went and betrayed him to the sheriff of
Shropshire; who, surrounding the house with armed men, seized the duke, in the
habit of a peasant, and conducted him to Salisbury; where he was instantly
tried, condemned, and executed, according to the summary method practiced in
those ages.

In the mean time, the duke of Richmond landed in England; but finding his
hopes frustrated by the failure of Buckingham, he hastily set sail again, and
returned to Brittany. Thus every occurrence seemed to promise Richard a long
possession of the crown; however, the authority of parliament was still wanting
to give sanction to the injustice of his proceedings; but in those times of
ignorance and guilt that was easily procured. An act was passed, confirming the
illegitimacy of Edward's children; an act of attainder also was confirmed
against Henry, earl of Richmond; and all the usurper's wishes seemed to be the
aim of their deliberations. One thing, however, was wanting to complete
Richard's security, which was the death of his rival; to effect which, he sent
ambassadors to the duke of Brittany, seemingly upon business of a public
nature; but, in reality, to treat with Landais, that prince's minister, to
deliver up Richmond. The minister was base enough to enter into the
negotiation; but Richmond having had timely notice, fled away into France, and
just reached the confines of that kingdom when he found that he was pursued by
those who intended giving him up to his rival.

Richard thus finding his attempts to seize his enemy's person unsuccessful,
became every day more cruel, as his power grew more precarious. Among those who
chiefly excited his jealousy, was the lord Stanly, who was married to the widow
of Edward; and to keep him steadfast in obedience, he took his son as an hostage
for the father's behavior. He now also resolved to get rid of his present
queen, Anne, to make room for a match with his niece, the princess Elizabeth,
by whose alliance he hoped to cover the injustice of his claims. This lady,
whom he desired to get rid of, was the widow of the young prince of Wales, whom
he had murdered with his own hands at Tewksbury; and it is no slight indication
of the barbarity of the times, that the widow should accept for her second
lord, the murderer of her former husband. But she was now rewarded for her
former inhumanity, as Richard treated her with so much pride and indifference,
that she died with grief, according to his ardent expectation. However, his
wishes were not crowned with success in his applications to Elizabeth; the
mother, indeed, was not averse to the match; but the princess herself treated
his vile addresses with contempt and detestation.

Amidst the perplexity caused by this unexpected refusal, he received
information, that the earl of Richmond was once more making preparations to
land in England, and assert his claims to the crown. Richard, who knew not in
what quarter he might expect the invader, had taken post at Nottingham, in the
center of the kingdom; and had given commissions to several of his creatures,
to oppose the enemy wherever he should land. The account received of Richmond's
preparations were not ungrounded; he set out from Harfleur in Normandy, with a
retinue of about two thousand persons; and, after a voyage of six days, arrived
at Milford-Haven, in Wales, where he landed without opposition. Sir Rice ap
Thomas, and Sir Walter Herbert, who were in-trusted to oppose him in Wales,
were both in his interests; the one immediately deserted to him, and the other
made but a feeble opposition. Upon news of this descent, Richard, who was
possessed of courage and military conduct, his only virtues, instantly resolved
to meet his antagonist, and decide their mutual pretensions by a battle.
Richmond, on the other hand, being reinforced by Sir Thomas Bourchier, Sir
Walter Hungerford, and others, to the number of about six thousand, boldly
advanced with the same intention; and in a few days, both armies drew near
Bosworth-field, to determine a contest that had now for more than forty years
filled the kingdom with civil commotions and deluged its plains with blood.

The army of Richard was above double that of Henry; but the chief confidence
of the latter lay in the friendship and secret assurances of lord Stanly, who,
with a body of seven thousand men, hovered near the field of battle, and
declined engaging on either side.

Richard perceiving his enemy advance, drew up his army, consisting of about
thirteen thousand men, in order of battle; he gave the command of the vanguard
to the duke of Norfolk, while he led the main body himself, with the crown on
his head, designing by this either to inspire the enemy with awe, or to render
himself conspicuous to his own army. The van of Richmond's army, consisting of
archers, was commanded by John, earl of Oxford; Sir Gilbert Talbot led the
right wing, Sir John savage the left; while the earl himself, accompanied by
his uncle, the earl of Pembroke, placed himself in the main body. Lord Stanly,
in the mean time, posted himself on one flank, between the two armies, while
his brother took his station on the other, which was opposite. Richard seeing
him thus in a situation equally convenient for joining either army, immediately
sent him orders to unite himself to the main body, which the other refusing, he
gave instant orders for beheading lord Stanley's son, whom he still kept as an
hostage. He was persuaded, however, to postpone the execution till after the
fight; and attending to the more important transactions of the day, he directed
the trumpets to sound to battle. The two armies approaching each other, the
battle began with a shower of arrows, and soon the adverse fronts were seen
closing. This was what lord Stanley had for some time expected, who immediately
profiting by the occasion, joined the line of Richmond, and thus turned the
fortune of the day. This measure, which was so unexpected to the men, though
not to their leaders, had a proportioned effect on both armies, it inspired
unusual courage into Henry's soldiers, and threw Richard's into confusion. The
intrepid tyrant perceiving the danger of his situation, spurred up his horse
into the thickest of the fight, while Richmond quitted his station behind, to
encourage his troops by his presence in the front. Richard perceiving him, was
desirous of ending all by one blow; and with irresistible fury flew through
thousands to attack him. He slew sir William Brandon, the earl's standard
bearer, who attempted to stop his career. Sir John Cheney having taken
Brandon's place, was thrown by him to the ground. Richmond, in the mean time
stood firm to oppose him; but they were separated by the interposing crowd.
Richard, thus disappointed, went, by his presence, to inspire his troops at
another quarter; but at length perceiving his army every where yielding or
flying, and now finding that all was gone, he rushed with a loud shout into the
midst of the enemy, and there met a better death than his crimes and cruelties
deserved. After the battle, his body was found stripped among an heap of slain,
covered over with wounds, and the eyes frightfully staring. In this manner it
was thrown across an horse, the head hanging down on one side, and the legs on
the other, and thus carried to Leicester. It lay there two days exposed to
public view, and then was buried without farther ceremony.

Richard's crown being found by one of Henry's soldiers on the field of battle,
it was immediately placed upon the head of the conqueror, while the whole army,
as if inspired with one voice, cried out, "Long live king Henry!"

Thus ended the bloody reign of Richard; and by his death the race of the
Plantagenet kings, who had been in possession of the crown during the space of
three hundred and thirty years, became extinct. Thus ended also the contests
between the houses of York and Lancaster, by which most of the ancient families
of the kingdom were extinguished, and more than an hundred thousand men lost
their lives, either by the sword or the executioner.

These dissensions had, for some time, reduced the kingdom to a state of savage
barbarity. Laws, arts, and commerce, which had before emitted some feeble
gleams, were entirely neglected for the practice of arms; and to be a conqueror
was sufficient, in the eyes of the brutal people, to stand for every other
virtue. The English had, as yet, but little idea of legal subordination; nor
could they give any applause to those who attempted to cultivate the arts of
peace, the whole of their study and education being turned for war. The
ferocity of the people to each other was incredible. However, the women,
whatever part they took in the disturbances of the government, were exempted
from capital punishments; nor were they ever put to death, except when
convicted of witchcraft or poisoning. As for the clergy, they were entirely
distinct from the laity, both in customs, laws, and learning. They were
governed by the code of civil law, drawn up in the times of Justinian; while
the laity were held by the common law, which had been traditional from times
immemorial in the country. The clergy, however we may be told to the contrary,
understood and wrote Latin fluently; while the laity, on the other hand,
understood nothing of Latin, but applied themselves wholly to the French
language, when they aspired at the character of a polite education. The clergy,
as a body distinct from the state, little interested themselves in civil
polity; and perhaps they were not displeased to see the laity, whom they
considered less as fellow subjects than rivals for power, weakening themselves
by continual contests, and thus rendering themselves more easily manageable. In
short, as there was no knowledge of government among the individuals, but what
totally resulted from power, the state was like a feverish constitution, ever
subject to ferment and disorder. France, indeed, had served for some time as a
drain for the peccant humors; but when that was no longer open, the disorders
of the constitution seemed daily to increase, and vented themselves at last in
all the horrors of a long continued civil war.

HENRY VII.
portrait of Henry VII Hall sculp.

CHAP. XXII. HENRY VII.
AFTER having presented the reader with a frightful train of treasons,
stratagems, a nation of tumult reduced to civil subordination; an insolent and
factious aristocracy humbled, wise laws enacted, commerce restored, and the
peaceful arts made amiable to a people, for whom war alone heretofore had
charms. Hitherto we have on]y beheld the actions of a barbarous nation, obeying
with reluctance, and governed by caprice; but henceforward we may discover more
refined politics, and better concerted schemes; human wisdom, as if roused from
her lethargy of thirteen hundred years, exerting all her efforts to subdue the
natural ferocity of the people, and to introduce permanent felicity.

Henry's first care upon coming to the throne, was to marry the princess
Elizabeth, daughter of Edward the fourth; and thus he blended the interests of
the houses of York and Lancaster, so that ever after they were incapable of
distinction. Nevertheless, being apprehensive that the people might suppose he
claimed the crown in right of this union, he deferred the queen's coronation
till two years after, by which he made the priority of his own claim
incontestable. His reign also happily commenced with an obedience to the forms
of law, of which England had hitherto seen but few examples. An act had been
passed in the preceding reign for the attainder of his friends and followers,
which continued still in force; and the names of many members of that house, by
which it was to be repealed, were expressly mentioned in the attainder. To
suffer these to join in repealing that statute, would be admitting them as
judges in their own cause; but to this Henry prudently objected, obliging them
to leave the house, till an act was passed for reversing their attainder.

Before this reign, it had been usual with any person who was attainted, after
his execution, to give away his estates to any of the court favorites that
happened to be most in confidence. Henry wisely perceived that this severity
had two bad effects; the cruelty of the measure in the first place excited
indignation; and it also made the favorite too powerful for subjection. In
order to remedy these inconveniences, he made a law to deprive those who were
found in arms of their estates and effects, and sequester them for the benefit
of the crown.

A great part of the miseries of his predecessors proceeded from their poverty,
which was mostly occasioned by riot and dissipation. Henry saw that money alone
could turn the scale of power in his favor; and therefore hoarded up all the
confiscations of his enemies with the utmost frugality. From hence he has been
accused by historians of avarice; but that avarice which tends to strengthen
government, and repress sedition, is not only excuseable, but praiseworthy.
Liberality in a king is too often a misplaced virtue. What is thus given, is
generally extorted from the industrious and needy, to be lavished as rewards on
the rich, the insidious, and the fawning, upon the sycophants of a court, or
the improvers of luxurious refinement. Henry showed himself very different from
his predecessors in these respects, as he gave away very few rewards to the
courtiers about his person; and none except the needy shared his benefactions.
He released all prisoners for debt in his dominions, whose debts did not amount
to forty shillings, and paid their creditors from the royal coffers. Thus his
economy rendered him not only useful to the poor, but enabled him to be just
to his own creditors, either abroad or at home. Those sums which he borrowed
from the city of London, or any of his subjects, he repaid at the appointed day
with the utmost punctuality; and in proportion as he was esteemed in his own
dominions, he became respectable abroad.

With regard to the king's servants, he was himself the only acting minister;
and as for the rest, he did not choose his under-agents from among the nobility,
as had been most usual; but pitched upon John Morton, and Richard Fox, two
clergymen, persons of industry, vigilance, and capacity, to whom he chiefly
confided his affairs and secret councils. They had shared with him in all his
former dangers and distresses; and he now took care that they should
participate in his good fortune; the one being soon after created bishop of
Ely, the other bishop of Exeter. He perhaps supposed, that as clergymen were
naturally more dependent on him than the nobility, so they would be more
submissive to his commands, and more active in their services.

Immediately after his marriage with Elizabeth, he issued a general pardon to
all such as chose to accept it; but those lords who had been the favorites of
the last reign, and long accustomed to turbulence, refused his proffered
tenderness, and flew to arms. Lord Lovel, together with Humphrey and Thomas
Stafford, placed themselves at the head of this insurrection; but Henry sent
the duke of Bedford to oppose them, with orders to try what might be done by
offering a pardon, before he made any attempts to reduce them. The duke
punctually obeyed his instructions; and a general promise of pardon was made to
the rebels, which had a greater effect on the leaders than on their followers.
Lovel, who had undertaken an enterprise that exceeded his courage and capacity,
was so terrified with the fears of desertion among his troops, that he suddenly
withdrew himself; and, after lurking some time in Lancashire, made his escape
into Flanders, where he was protected by the duchess of Burgundy. The
Staffords took sanctuary in the church of Colnham, a village near Abingdon; but
it appearing that this church had not the privilege of giving protection, they
were taken thence; the eldest Stafford was executed at Tyburn; the younger,
pleading that he was misled by his brother, obtained his pardon. The rebel
army, now without a leader, submitted to the mercy of the king, and were
permitted to disperse without farther punishment.

But the people were become so turbulent and factious by a long course of civil
war, that no governor could rule them, nor any king please; so that one
rebellion seemed extinguished only to give rise to another. The king, in the
beginning of his reign, had given orders that the son of the duke of Clarence,
whom we have already mentioned as being drowned in a wine-butt, should be taken
from the prison where he had been confined by Richard, and brought to the
Tower. This unfortunate youth, who was styled the earl of Warwick, was, by long
confinement, so unacquainted with the world, that, as we are told, he could not
tell the difference between a duck and an hen. However, the unhappy youth,
harmless as he was, was made an instrument to deceive the people. There lived
in Oxford one Richard Simon, a priest, who possessing some subtlety, and more
rashness, trained up one Lambert Simnel, a baker's son, to counterfeit the
person of the earl of Warwick; and he was previously instructed by his tutor to
talk upon many facts and occurrences, as happening to him in the court of
Edward. But as the imposture was not calculated to bear a close inspection, it
was thought proper to show him first at a distance; and Ireland was judged the
fittest theater for him to support his assumed character. The plot unfolded to
their wishes; Simnel was received with the utmost joy, and proclaimed king of
Ireland; he was conducted by the magistrates and the populace of Dublin with
great pomp to the Castle, where he was treated conformably to his supposed
birth and distinction.

Henry could not help feeling more uneasiness at this barefaced imposture than
it seemed to deserve; but the penetrating monarch saw that his mother-in-law
was at the bottom of it; and he dreaded the fierce inquietude of her temper. He
was resolved, therefore, to take the advice of his council upon this occasion;
and they, after due deliberation, determined upon confining the old queen to a
monastery; but, to wipe off the imputation of treason from one so nearly allied
to the crown, it was given out, that she was thus punished for having formerly
delivered up the princess her daughter to Richard. The people as usual murmured
at the severity of her treatment; but the king, unmindful of their idle
clamours, persisted in his resolution; and she remained in confinement till her
death, which did not happen till several years after. The next measure was to
show Warwick to the people. In consequence of this, he was taken from the
Tower, and led through the principal streets of London, after which he was
conducted in solemn procession to St. Paul's, where great numbers were
assembled to see him. Still, however, they proceeded in Dublin to honor their
pretended monarch; and he was crowned with great solemnity, in presence of the
earl of Kildare, the chancellor, and the other officers of state. Such
impositions upon the people, were very frequent at that time, in several parts
of Europe. Lorrain, Naples, and Portugal, had their impostors, who continued to
deceive for a long time without detection. In fact, the inhabitants of every
country, were so much confined within their own limits, and knew so little of
what was passing in the rest of the world, that any distant story might be
propagated, how improbable soever. In this manner, king Simnel, being now
joined by lord Lovel, and one or two lords more of the discontented party,
resolved to pass over into England; and accordingly landed in Lancashire, from
whence he marched to York, expecting the country would rise and join him as he
marched along. But in this he was deceived; the people averse to join a body of
German and Irish troops, by whom he was supported, and kept in awe by the
king's reputation, remained in tranquillity, or gave all their assistance to the
royal cause. The earl of Lincoln, therefore, a disaffected lord, to whom the
command of the rebel army was given, finding no hopes but in speedy victory,
was determined to bring the contest to a short issue. The opposite armies met
at Stoke, in the county of Nottingham, and fought a battle, which was more
bloody, and more obstinately disputed, than could have been expected from the
inequality of their forces. But victory at length declared in favor of the
king, and it proved decisive. Lord Lincoln perished in the field of battle;
lord Lovel was never more heard of, and it was supposed he shared the same
fate. Simnel, with his tutor Simon, was taken prisoner; and four thousand of
the common men fell in battle. Simon being a priest could not be tried by the
civil power, and was only committed to close confinement. Simnel was too
contemptible to excite the king's fears or resentment; he was pardoned, and
made a scullion in the king's kitchen, whence he was afterward advanced to the
rank of falconer, in which mean employment he died.

Things being thus quietly settled at home; Henry began to turn his thoughts
toward his continental connexions, and to establish some degree of
understanding between him and the neighboring states around him. He was too
wise a prince, not to perceive the fatality of conquests upon the continent,
which could at best produce no other reputation than the empty one of military
glory. Yet, while he internally despised such pernicious triumphs, he was
obliged, in order to gain popularity, to countenance them. He, therefore,
frequently boasted that he was determined to ravish his kingdom of France from
the usurpers, who had long possessed it; and that he would lay the whole
country in blood. But these were the distant threats of a crafty politician;
there was nothing more distant from his heart. As far as negociations went, he
did all in his power; to keep the interests of that kingdom so nearly balanced,
as to prevent any from growing too powerful; but as for succors of men and
money, he too well knew the value of both to lavish them, as his predecessors
had done, upon such fruitless projects.

About this time the nobles of Brittany, being disgusted with their minister,
Peter Landais, rose in conspiracy against him, country. The aid of Henry was
implored by the distressed Bretons; but this monarch appeared more willing to
assist them by negociations than by arms; but though he determined to maintain
a pacific conduct, as far as the situation of his affairs would permit, he knew
too well the warlike disposition of his subjects, and their desires to engage
in any scheme that promised the humiliation of France, He resolved, therefore,
to take advantage of this propensity; and to draw some supplies of money from
the people, on pretense of giving assistance to the duke of Brittany. He
accordingly summoned a parliament to meet at Westminster, and easily persuaded
them to grant him a considerable supply. But money was, at that time, more
easily granted than levied in England. A new insurrection began in Yorkshire,
the people resisting the commissioners who were appointed to levy the tax. The
earl of Northumberland attempted to enforce the king's command; but the
populace, being by this taught to believe that he was the adviser of their
oppressions, flew to arms, attacked his house, and put him to death. The
mutineers did not stop there; but, by the advice of one John Achamber, a
seditious fellow of mean birth, they chose Sir John Egremont for their leader,
and prepared themselves for a vigorous resistance. The king, upon hearing this
rash proceeding, immediately levied a force, which he put under the earl of
Surry; and this nobleman, encountering the rebels, dissipated the tumult, and
took their leader, Achamber, prisoner. Achamber was shortly after executed; but
Sir John Egremont fled to the court of the duchess of Burgundy, the usual
retreat of all who were obnoxious to government in England.

As Henry had gone thus far in preparations for a war with France, he supposed
that it would be too flagrant an imposition upon the credulity of the nation,
not to put a part of his threats in execution. France was by this time
possessed of all Brittany; and a marriage had been lately concluded between the
French monarch, and the duchess of the last named territory. This accession of
power, in a rival state, was formidable not only to Henry, but to Europe. He,
therefore, prepared to make a descent upon France; and accordingly landed at
Calais, with an army of twenty-five thousand foot, and sixteen hundred horse,
which he put under the command of the duke of Bedford and the earl of Oxford.
But notwithstanding this appearance of an hostile disposition, there had been
secret advances made toward a peace three months before, and commissioners had
been appointed to treat on the terms. The demands of Henry were wholly
pecuniary; and the king of France, who deemed the peaceable possession of
Brittany an equivalent for any sum, readily agreed to the proposals made him.
He engaged to pay Henry near two hundred thousand pounds sterling, as a
reimbursement for the expenses of his expedition; and he stipulated to pay a
yearly pension to him, and his heirs, of twenty-five thousand crowns more.

produced a young man, who assumed his name and character. The person pitched
upon to sustain this part, was one Osbeck or Warbeck, the son of a converted
Jew, who had been over in England during the reign of Edward IV. where he had
this son named Peter, but corrupted, after the Flemish manner, into Peterkin or
Perkin. It was by some believed that Edward, among his other amorous
adventures, had a secret correspondence with Warbeck's wife, which might
account for a striking resemblance between young Perkin and that monarch.
Perkin, following the fortunes of his father, had traveled for many years from
place to place; so that his birth and circumstances became thereby unknown, and
difficult to be traced by the most diligent enquiry. The variety of his
adventures might have contributed to assist the natural sagacity, and
versatility of his disposition; as he seemed to be a youth capable of
sustaining any part or any assumed character. The duchess of Burgundy found
this youth entirely suited to her purposes; and her lessons, instructing him to
personate the duke of York, were easily learned, and strongly retained by a
youth of such quick apprehension. In short, his graceful air, his courtly
address, his easy manners, and elegant conversation, were capable of imposing
upon all but such as were conscious of the imposture.

The kingdom of Ireland, which still retained its attachments to the house of
York, was pitched upon as the proper place for Perkin's first appearance, as it
before had favored that of Simnel. He landed at Cork; and immediately
assuming the name of Richard Plantagenet, drew to him numerous partisans among
that credulous people. He wrote letters to the earls of Desmond and Kildare,
inviting them to join his party; he dispersed every where the strange
intelligence of his escape from his uncle Richard's cruelty; and men, fond of
every thing new and wonderful, began to make him the general subject of their
discourse, and even the object of their favor. From Ireland his fame soon
spread over into France; and Charles sent Perkin an invitation to his court,
where he received him with all the marks of consideration that were due to his
supposed dignity. The youth, no way dazzled by his elevation, supported the
prepossession which was spread abroad in his favor; so that England itself
soon began to give credit to his pretensions; while Sir George Neville, Sir
John Tailor, and above a hundred gentlemen more, went to Paris to pay him
homage, and offer their services. Upon the peace being shortly after concluded
between France and England, the impostor was obliged to make his residence at
the court of his old patroness, the duchess of Burgundy, and the interview
between these conscious deceivers was truly ridiculous. The duchess affected
the utmost ignorance of his pretensions, and even put on the appearance of
distrust; having, as she said, been already deceived by Simnel. She seemed to
examine all his assertions with the most scrupulous diffidence; put many
particular questions to him, affected astonishment at his answers, and at last,
after long and severe scrutiny, burst out into joy and admiration at his
delivery, acknowledging him as her nephew, as the true image of Edward, and
legitimate successor to the English throne. She immediately assigned him an
equipage suitable to his pretensions, appointed him a guard of thirty
halberdiers; and on all occasions honored him with the appellation of the
White Rose of England.

The English, ever ready to revolt, gave credit to all these absurdities; while
the young man's prudence, conversation, and deportment, served to confirm what
their disaffection and credulity had begun. All such as were disgusted with the
king, prepared to join him, but particularly those that were formerly Henry's
favorites, and had contributed to place him on the throne; thinking their
services could never be sufficiently repaid, now privately abetted the
imposture, and became heads of the conspiracy. These were joined by numbers of
the inferior class, some greedy of novelty, some blindly attached to their
leaders, and some induced by their desperate fortunes to wish for a change.

Among those who secretly abetted the cause of Perkin, were lord Fitzwater, Sir
Simon Mountfort, Sir Thomas Thwaits, and Sir Robert Clifford. But the person of
the greatest weight, and the most dangerous opposition, was Sir William Stanley
the lord chamberlain, and brother to the famous lord Stanley, who had
contributed to place Henry on the throne. This personage, either moved by a
blind credulity, or more probably by a restless ambition, entered into a
regular conspiracy against the king; and a corrsepondence was settled between
the malcontents in England and those in Flanders.

While the plot was thus carrying on in all quarters, Henry was not inattentive
to the designs of his enemies. He spared neither labor nor expense to detect
the falsehood of the pretender to his crown; and was equally assiduous in
finding out who were his secret abettors. For this purpose he dispersed his
spies through all Flanders, and brought over, by large bribes, some of those whom
he knew to be in the enemies interests. Among these, Sir Robert Clifford was
the most remarkable, both for his consequence, and the confidence with which he
was trusted. From this person Henry learned the whole of Perkin's birth and
adventures, together with the names of all those who had secretly combined to
assist him. The king was pleased with the discovery; but the more trust he gave
to his spies, the higher resentment did he feign against them.

At first he was struck with indignation at the ingratitude of many of those
about him; but concealing his resentment for a proper opportunity, he, almost
at the same instant, arrested Fitzwater, Mounfort, and Thwaits, together with
William Danbery, Robert Ratcliff, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas Astwood. All
these were arraigned, convicted, and condemned for high treason. Mountfort,
Ratcliff, and Danbery, were immediately executed; the rest received pardon. But
the principal delinquent yet remained to be punished, whose station, as lord
chamberlain, and whose connexions with many of the principal men in the
kingdom, seemed to exempt him from censure. To effect this, Clifford was
directed to come over privately to England, and to accuse Stanley in person,
which he did to the seeming astonishment of all present. Henry affected to
receive the intelligence as false and incredible; but Clifford persisting in
his accusation, Stanley was committed to custody, and soon after examined
before the council. Finding his guilt but too clearly proved, he did not
attempt to conceal it, supposing that an open confession might serve as an
atonement, or trusting to his former services for pardon and security. In this
he was mistaken; after a delay of six weeks, during which time the king
affected to deliberate upon his conduct, he was brought to trial, when he was
condemned, and shortly after beheaded. Through the whole of this reign, the
king seemed to make a distinction in the crimes of those who conspired against
him: whenever a conspirator took up arms against him, from a conscientious
adherence to principle, and a love of the house of York, he generally found
pardon; but when a love of change, or an impatience of subordination inspired
the attempt, the offender was sure to be treated with the utmost rigor of the
law.

While the adherents of Perkin were thus disappointed in England, he himself
attempted landing in Kent; the gentlemen of which county gathered in a body to
oppose him. Their aim was to allure him on shore by proffers of assistance, and
then seize his person; but the wary youth, observing that they had more order
and regularity in their movements than could be supposed in new levied forces,
refused to commit himself into their hands; wherefore they set upon his
attendants, who had come ashore, of whom they took an hundred and fifty
prisoners. These were tried and condemned, and all of them executed by order of
the king, who was resolved to use no lenity to men of such desperate fortunes.

The young adventurer finding his hopes frustrated in this attempt, went next
to try his fortune in Scotland. In that country his luck seemed greater than in
England. James the fourth, the king of that country, received him with great
cordiality; he was seduced to believe the story of his birth and adventures;
and he carried his confidence so far, as to give him in marriage lady Catharine
Gordon, daughter to the earl of Huntley, and a near kinswoman of his own; a
young lady eminent for virtue as well as beauty. But not content with these
instances of favor, he was resolved to attempt setting him on the throne of
England. It was naturally expected, that upon Perkin's first appearance in that
kingdom, all the friends of the house of York would rise in his favor. Upon
this ground, therefore, the king of Scotland entered England with a numerous
army, and proclaimed the young adventurer wherever he went. But Perkin's
pretensions, attended by repeated disappointments, were now become stale, even
in the eyes of the populace; so that, contrary to expectation, none were found
to second his pretensions. Being disappointed in this, he once more returned to
Edinburgh, where he continued to reside, till, upon the conclusion of a treaty
of peace between the two kingdoms, he was once more obliged to leave Scotland,
and to seek for a new protector.

In the mean time, Henry found little uneasiness at Perkin's irruption, as he
was sensible it would serve him as a pretext to a demand for further supplies
from parliament, with which he knew they would readily comply. The vote was in
fact easily enough obtained; but he found it not so easy to levy the money. The
inhabitants of Cornwall were the first to refuse contributing supplies for the
safety of the northern parts of the kingdom, which were so very remote from
them. Their discontents were further inflamed by one Michael Joseph, a farrier
of Bodmin, who had long been the spokesman of the multitude. To him was joined
one Thomas Flammock, a lawyer; and under the conduct of these two, the
insurgents passed through the county of Devon, and reached that of Somerset,
where they were joined by lord Audley, a nobleman of an ancient family, popular
in his deportment, but vain, ambitious, and restless in his temper. Thus
headed, and breathing destruction to the king's commissioners, they marched
with great speed toward London, without, however, committing any devastations
by the way. At length, without receiving countenance or reinforcement on their
march, they pitched their camp near Eltham, not far from London. Henry, whose
courage and intrepidity were never to be moved, had some time before levied an
army to oppose the Scotch; and this he ordered southward to suppress the
Cornish insurrection. On other occasions it was usual with him to hasten to a
decision; and it was a saying with him, that he only desired to see his rebels;
but as the present insurgents behaved in an inoffensive manner, he protracted
his attack for some time, till at length it was begun by lord Daubeny, who,
after some resistance, broke, and put them to flight. Lord Audley, Flammock,
and Joseph, their leaders, were taken and executed; but the rest, to the number
of sixteen thousand, were dismissed without further punishment.

they determined to send for Perkin to put himself at their head; and he no
sooner made his appearance among them at Bodmin in Cornwall, than the populace,
to the number of three thousand men, flocked to his standard. Elated with this
appearance of success, he took on him, for the first time, the title of Richard
the fourth, king of England; and, not to suffer the spirits of his adherents to
languish, he led them to the gates of Exeter. Finding the inhabitants obstinate
in refusing to admit him, and being unprovided with artillery to force an
entrance, he resolved to continue before it, until possessed of a sufficient
force to make a farther progress into the kingdom. In the mean time, Henry
being informed of his landing and his designs, expressed great joy upon the
occasion, declaring that he should now have the pleasure of an interview with a
person whom he long wished to see. All the courtiers sensible of Perkin's
desperate situation, and the general suspicion there was of their own fidelity,
prepared themselves to assist the king with great alacrity. The lords Daubeny
and Broke, the earl of Devonshire, and the duke of Buckingham, all appeared at
the head of their respective forces, and seemed eager for an opportunity of
displaying their courage and loyalty. Perkin being informed of these great
preparations broke up the siege of Exeter, and retired to Taunton. His
followers by this time amounted to seven thousand men, and appeared ready to
defend his cause; but his heart failed him; and instead of bringing them into
the field, he privately deserted them, and took sanctuary in the monastery of
Beaulieu, in the New Forest. His wretched adherents, left to the king's mercy,
found him still willing to pardon; and, except a few of the ringleaders, none
were treated with capital severity. The lady Catharine Gordon, wife to Perkin,
fell into the conqueror's hands, and was treated by him with all the lenity due
to her sex and quality. She was placed in a reputable station near the person
of the queen, and assigned a pension, which she enjoyed till her death. But the
manner in which Perkin himself was to be treated appeared more doubtful. At
first, it was suggested by some, that he should be taken forcibly from the
sanctuary to which he had fled, and made a public example; but Henry thought
that milder methods would answer as well. He therefore employed some persons to
treat with Perkin, and to persuade him, under promise of a pardon, to deliver
himself up to justice, and to confess and explain all the circumstances of his
imposture. His affairs being altogether desperate, he embraced the king's
offers, without hesitation, and quitted the sanctuary. Henry being desirous of
seeing him, he was brought to court, and conducted through the streets of
London in a kind of mock triumph, amidst the derision and insults of the
populace, which he bore with the most dignified resignation. He was then
compelled to sign a confession of his former life and conduct, which was
printed and dispersed throughout the nation; but it was so defective and
contradictory, that instead of explaining the pretended imposture, it left it
still more doubtful than before; and this youth's real pretensions are to this
very day an object of dispute among the learned. However, though his life was
granted him, he was still detained in custody, and keepers were appointed to
watch over his conduct. But his impatience of any confinement could not be
controuled; he broke loose from his keepers, and flying to the sanctuary of
Shine, put himself in the hands of the prior of that monastery. He was once
again prevailed on to trust himself to the king's mercy; but in order to reduce
him to the lowest state of contempt, he was set in the stocks at Westminster
and Cheapside, and obliged to read aloud, in both places, the confession which
had been formerly published in his name. From this place of scorn, he was
conveyed to the Tower, where it was thought the strength of his prison would be
sufficient to restrain his restless active disposition; but nothing could
repress his habits of inquietude. He had insinuated himself into the intimacy
of four servants of the lieutenant of the Tower; and by their means opened a
correspondence with the unfortunate Warwick,

That the danger might appear more imminent and pressing, so as to justify the
steps which Henry intended to take, another disturbance was raised at the same
time in Kent, where a young man called Ralph Wilford, the son of a cordwainer,
personated the earl of Warwick, under the conduct and direction of one Patrick,
an Augustine monk, who in his sermons exhorted the people to take arms in his
favor. This friar, who had been used as a tool by the king's emissaries, was
arrested, together with his pupil; and Wilford was hanged without ceremony, but
the tutor obtained his pardon. This was the prelude to the fate of Perkin, and
the earl of Warwick; the former of whom was tried at Westminster; and being
convicted on the evidence of the servants of the Tower, was hanged at Tyburn
with John Walter, mayor of Cork, who had constantly adhered to his cause in
all the vicissitudes of his fortune. Blewet and Astwood, two of the servants,
underwent the same fate; but six other persons, condemned as accomplices in the
same conspiracy, were pardoned. In a few days after Perkin's execution, the
wretched earl of Warwick was tried by his peers; and being convicted of
high treason, in consequence of pleading guilty to the arraignment, was
beheaded on Tower Hill, and in him ended the last male branch of the house of
Plantagenet. The deplorable end of this innocent nobleman, and the fate of
Perkin, who, notwithstanding all that appeared against him, was, by the
unprejudiced part of the nation, deemed the real son of king Edward, filled the
whole kingdom with such aversion to the government of king Henry, that to throw
the odium from himself, he was obliged to lay it to the account of his ally,
Ferdinand of Arragon, who he said scrupled his alliance, while any prince of
the house of York remained alive.

There had been hitherto nothing in this reign but plots, treasons,
insurrections, impostures, and executions; and it is probable that Henry's
severity proceeded from the continual alarms in which they held him. It is
certain, that no prince ever loved peace more than he; and much of the ill will
of his subjects arose from his attempts to repress their inclinations for war.
The usual preface to all his treaties was, "That when Christ came into the
world peace was sung; and when he went out of the world peace was bequeathed."
He had no ambition to extend his power, except only by treaties and by wisdom;
by these he rendered himself much more formidable to his neighbors, than his
predecessors had by their victories; they became terrible to their own
subjects; he was chiefly dreaded by rival kings.

He had all along two points principally in view; one to depress the nobility
and clergy, and the other to exalt and humanize the populace. From the ambition
and turbulence of the former, and from the wretchedness and credulity of the
latter, all the troubles in the former reigns had taken their original. In the
feudal times, every nobleman was possessed of a certain number of subjects,
over whom he had an absolute power; and therefore, upon every slight disgust,
he was able to influence them to join him in his revolt or disobedience. Henry,
therefore, wisely considered, that the giving these petty tyrants a power of
selling their estates, which before his time were unalienable, would greatly
weaken their interest. With this view he procured an act, by which the nobility
were granted a power of disposing of their estates; a law infinitely pleasing
to the commons, and not disagreeable even to the nobles, since they had thus an
immediate resource for supplying their taste for prodigality, and answering the
demands of their creditors. The blow reached them in their posterity alone; but
they were too ignorant to be affected by such distant distresses.

His next scheme was to prevent their giving liveries to many hundreds of their
dependants, who were thus retained to serve their lord, and kept like the
soldiers of a standing army, to be ready at the command of their leader. By an
act passed in this reign, none but menial servants, were permitted to wear a
livery under severe penalties; and this law was enforced with the most punctual
observance. The king one day paying a visit to the earl of Oxford, was
entertained by him with all possible splendor and hospitality. When he was
ready to depart, he saw ranged upon both sides a great number of men dressed up
in very rich liveries, apparently to do him honor. The king, surprised at such
a number of domestics, as he pretended to suppose them, asked lord Oxford
whether he entertained such a large number of domestics; to which the earl, not
perceiving the drift of the question, replied, that they were only men whom he
kept in pay to do him honor upon such occasions. At this the king started
back, and said, "By my faith, my lord, I thank you for your good cheer; but I
must not suffer to have the laws broken before my face; my attorney general
must talk with you." Oxford is said to have paid no less than fifteen thousand
marks as a composition for his offense.

We have already seen, in a thousand instances, what a perverted use was made
of monasteries, and other places appropriated to religious worship, by the
number of criminals who found sanctuary and protection there. This privilege
the clergy assumed as their undoubted right; and those places of pretended
sanctity were now become the abode of murderers, robbers, and conspirators.
Witches and magicians were the only persons that were forbid to avail
themselves of the security these sanctuaries afforded; and they whose crimes
were only fictitious, were the only people who had not the benefit of such a
retreat. Henry used all his interest with the pope to get these sanctuaries
abolished; but was not able to succeed. All that he could procure was, that if
thieves, murderers, or robbers, registered as sanctuary men, should sally out,
and commit fresh offenses, and retreat again, in such cases they might be taken
out of the sanctuary, and delivered up to justice.

Henry was not remiss in abridging the pope's power, while, at the same time,
he professed the utmost submission to his commands, and the greatest respect
for the clergy. The pope at one time was so far imposed upon by his seeming
attachment to the church, that he even invited him to renew the crusades for
recovering the Holy Land. Henry's answer deserves to be remembered. He assured
his holiness that no prince in Christendom would be more forward to undertake
so glorious and necessary an expedition; but as his dominions lay very distant
from Constantinople, it would be better to apply to the kings of France and
Spain for their assistance; and in the mean time he would go to their aid
himself, as soon as all the differences between the Christian princes should be
brought to an end. This was at once a polite refusal, and an oblique reproach.

But while he thus employed his power in lowering the influence of the nobles
and clergy, he was using every art to extend the privileges of the people. In
former reigns they were sure to suffer on whatever side they fought, when they
were unsuccessful. This rendered each party desperate in a declared civil war,
as no hopes of pardon remained, and consequently terrible slaughters were seen
to ensue. He therefore procured an act, by which it was established, that no
person should be impeached or attainted for assisting the king for the time
being, or, in other words, the sovereign who should be then actually in
possession of the throne. This excellent statute served to repress the desire
of civil war, as several would naturally take arms in defense of that side, on
which they were certain of losing nothing by a defeat; and numbers would thus
serve to intimidate rebellion. Thus the common people, no longer maintained in
vicious idleness by their superiors, were obliged to become industrious for
their support. The nobility, instead of vying with each other in the number and
boldness of their retainers, acquired by degrees a more civilized species of
emulation; and endeavored to excel in the splendor and elegance of their
equipages, houses, and tables. In fact, the king's greatest efforts were
directed to promote trade and commerce, because this naturally introduced a
spirit of liberty among the people, and disengaged them from all dependence,
except upon the laws and the king. Before this great era, all our towns owed
their original to some strong castle in the neighborhood, where some powerful
lord generally resided. These were at once fortresses for protection, and
prisons for all sorts of criminals. In this castle there was usually a garrison
armed and provided, depending entirely on the nobleman's support and
assistance. To these seats of protection, artificers, victuallers, and
shopkeepers, naturally resorted, and settled on some adjacent spot to furnish
the lord and his attendants with all the necessaries they might require. The
farmers also, and the husbandmen in the neighborhood, built their houses there
to be protected against the numerous gangs of robbers called Robertsmen, that
hid themselves in the woods by day, and infested the open country by night.
Henry endeavored to bring the towns from such a neighborhood, by inviting the
inhabitants to a more commercial situation. He attempted to teach them
frugality, and a just payment of debts, by his own example; and never once
omitted the rights of the merchant, in all his treaties with foreign princes.

But it must not be concealed, that from a long contemplation upon the relative
advantages of money, he at last grew into an habit of considering it as
valuable for itself alone. As he grew old his avarice seemed to predominate
over his ambition; and the methods he took to increase his treasures, cannot be
justified by his most ardent admirers. He had found two ministers, Empson and
Dudley, perfectly qualified to second his avaricious intentions. They were both
lawyers; the first of mean birth, brutal manners, and an unrelenting temper;
the second, better born, and better bred, but equally severe and inflexible. It
was their usual practice to commit, by indictment, such persons to prison as
they intended to oppress; from whence they seldom got free, but by paying heavy
fines, which were called mitigations and compositions. By degrees, as they were
grown more hardened in oppression, the very forms of law were omitted; they
determined in a summary way upon the properties of the subject, and confiscated
their effects to the royal treasury. But the chief instruments of oppression
employed by these ministers were the penal statutes, which, without
consideration of rank, quality, or services, were rigidly put in execution
against all men.

In this manner, was the latter part of this active monarch's reign employed in
schemes to strengthen the power of the crown, by amassing money, and extending
that of the people. He had the satisfaction about that time of completing a
marriage between Arthur, whole nation; and the princess was obliged shortly
after to marry his second son Henry, who was created Prince of Wales in the
room of his brother. The prince himself made all the opposition which a youth
of twelve years of age was capable of; but as the king persisted in his
resolution, the marriage was, by the pope's dispensation, shortly after
solemnized.

The magnificence of these nuptials was soon after eclipsed by the accidental
arrival of Philip, the archduke of Castile, with Joan his consort. These
personages had embarked for Spain during the winter season, in order to take
the advantage of an invitation, which the people of that country had offered to
place them upon the Spanish throne. Meeting, however, with a violent tempest in
their voyage, they were obliged to take shelter in Weymouth harbor, where they
were honorably received by Sir John Trenchard, a gentleman of authority in the
county of Dorset. to have an interview with him at Windsor. Henry received him
with all the magnificence possible, and with all seeming cordiality; but was
resolved to reimburse himself for the expense of his pageants, by advantages
that would be more substantially conducive to his own interests, and those of
the nation. There had been some years before a plot carried on against him by
the earl of Suffolk; for which Sir James Tyrrel, and Sir James Windham, had
been condemned and executed, while Suffolk, the original contriver, had made
his escape into the Low Countries, where he found protection from Philip. But
he was now given up at Henry's request, and being brought over to England, he
was imprisoned in the Tower. A treaty of commerce was also agreed upon between
the two sovereigns; which was at that time of the greatest benefit to England,
and continues to remain as the ground work of all other commercial treaties to
this day.

Henry having thus seen England in a great measure civilized by his endeavors,
his people pay their taxes without constraint, the nobles confessing a just
subordination, the laws alone inflicting punishment, the towns beginning to
live independent of the powerful, commerce every day increasing, the spirit of
faction extinguished, and foreigners either fearing England or seeking its
alliance, he began to perceive the approaches of his end. He then resolved to
reconcile himself to heaven; and by distributing alms, founding religious
houses, and granting a general pardon to all his subjects, to make an atonement
for the errors of his reign. It was in this disposition that he died of the
gout in his stomach,

About this time all Europe, as well as England, seemed to rouse from the long
lethargy, during which it continued for above twelve hundred years. France,
Spain, Portugal, and Sweden enjoyed excellent monarchs; who encouraged and
protected the rising arts, and spread the means of happiness. The Portuguese
sailed round the Cape of Good Hope, under the command of Vasquez de Gama; and
the Spaniards, under the conduct of Columbus, had made the discovery of the new
world of America. It was by accident only, that Henry had not a considerable
share in these great naval discoveries; for Columbus, after meeting with many
repulses, from the courts of Portugal and Spain, sent his brother Bartholomew
into England in order to explain his projects to the king, and to crave his
protection for the execution of them. Henry invited Columbus to England; but
his brother in returning being taken by pirates, was detained in his voyage,
and Columbus in the mean time, succeeding with Isabella, happily effected his
enterprise. Henry was not discouraged by this disappointment; he fitted out
Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian dwelling at Bristol, and sent him westward in
search of new countries. other countries; but returned without making any
settlement. The king, soon after, expended fourteen thousand pounds in building
one ship, called the GREAT HARRY. This was, properly speaking, the first ship
in the English navy. Before this period, when the king wanted a fleet, he had
no other expedient but to hire ships from the merchants.

HENRY VIII.
portrait of Henry VIIICHAP. XXIII. HENRY VIII.
NO prince ever came to the throne with a conjuncture of circumstances more in
his favor than Henry VIII. who now, by his mother's, from that of York. He was
in friendship with all the powers of Europe, and his subjects were every day
growing more powerful and more wealthy; commerce and arts had for some time
been introduced into the kingdom, and the English seemed willing to give them a
favorable reception. The young king himself was beautiful in person, expert in
polite exercises, open and liberal in his air, and loved by all his subjects.
The old king, who was himself a scholar, had him instructed in all the learning
of the times; so that he was an adept in school divinity before the age of
eighteen.

But favorable as these circumstances were, Henry soon showed that they went
but a short way in forming a good character, they were merely the gifts of
nature, or accomplishments, implanted by the assiduity of his father; but he
wanted the more solid advantages, which were to be of his own formation, a good
heart, and a sound understanding. The learning he had, if it may deserve that
appellation, served only to inflame his pride, but not control his vicious
affections; the love of his subjects broke out in their flattery, and this was
another meteor to lead him astray. His vast wealth, instead of relieving the
public, or increasing his power, only contributed to supply his debaucheries,
or gratify the rapacity of the ministers of his pleasures. But it had been
happy for his people if his faults had rested here; he was a tyrant, humanity
takes the alarm at his cruelties; and however fortunate some of his measures
might prove in the event, no good man but must revolt at his motives, and the
means he took for their accomplishment.

The first action which showed that the present reign was to be very different
from the former, was the punishment of Empson and Dudley, who were obnoxious to
the populace for having been the ready instruments of the late king's rapacity.
They were immediately cited before the council, in order to answer for their
conduct; but Empson, in his defense, alleged that so far from deserving
censure for his past conduct, he was confident his actions rather merited
reward and approbation. Though a strict execution of the law was the crime of
which he and Dudley were accused; although these laws had been established by
the voluntary consent of the people; notwithstanding all their expostulations,
Empson and Dudley were sent to the Tower, and soon after brought to their
trial. As the strict discharge of their duty, in executing the laws, could not
be alleged against them as a crime, to gratify the people with their
punishment, they were accused of having entered into a conspiracy against the
present king; and of intentions to seize, by force, the administration of
government. Nothing could be more improbable and unsupported than such a
charge; nevertheless the jury were so far infected with popular prejudice, that
they gave a verdict against them, and they were both executed, some time after,
by a warrant from the king.

This measure, which betrayed an unjust compliance with popular clamor, was
followed by another still more detrimental to the nation, although still more
pleasing to the people. Julius the second was at that time pope, and had filled
all Europe with his intrigues and ambition; but his chief resentment was
levelled against Lewis, king of France, who was in possession of some valuable
provinces of Italy, from which he hoped, by his intrigues, to remove him. For
this purpose he entered into a treaty with Ferdinand, king of Spain, and Henry
of England; to each of whom he offered such advantages as were most likely to
inflame their ambition, in case they fell upon Lewis on their respective
quarters; while he undertook himself to find him employment in Italy. Henry,
who had no other motives but the glory of the expedition, and the hopes of
receiving the title of the Most Christian King, which the pope assured him
would soon be wrested from Lewis, to be conferred upon him, readily undertook
to defend his cause; and his parliament being summoned, as readily granted
supplies for a purpose so much favored by the people. The spirit of chivalry
and foreign conquest was not yet quite extinguished in England; the kingdom of
France was still an object they desired to possess, and Henry, in compliance
with their wishes, gave out that he intended striking for the crown. It was in
vain that one of his old prudent counselors objected, that conquests on the
continent would only drain the kingdom, without enriching it; and that England,
from its situation, was not fitted to enjoy extensive empire: the young king,
deaf to all remonstrances, and burning with military ardour, resolved to
undertake the war. The marquis of Dorset was first sent over, with a large body
of forces, to Fontarabia, to assist the operations of Ferdinand; but that
faithless and crafty monarch had no intentions of effectually seconding their
attempts, wherefore they were obliged to return home without effect.

A considerable fleet was equipped, some time after, fleet retired from before
Breast, and the French navy, for a while, kept possession of the sea.

This slight repulse, only served to inflame the king's ardour to take revenge
upon the enemy; and he soon after sent a body of eight thousand men to Calais,
under the command of the earl of Shrewsbury; and another body of six thousand
followed shortly after, under the conduct of lord Herbert. He prepared to
follow himself with the main body and rear, and arrived at Calais, attended by
numbers of the English nobility. But he soon had an attendant, who did him
still more honor. This was no less a personage than Maximilian, emperor of
Germany, who had stipulated to assist him with eight thousand men; but being
unable to perform his engagements, joined the English army with some German and
Flemish soldiers, who were useful in giving an example of discipline to Henry's
new levied soldiers. He even enlisted himself in the English service, wore the
cross of St. George, and received pay, an hundred crowns a day, as one of
Henry's subjects and captains.

Henry being now at the head of a formidable army, fifty thousand strong, it
was supposed that France must fall a victim to his ambition. But that kingdom
was not threatened by him alone; the Swiss, on another quarter, with
twenty-five thousand men, were preparing to invade it; while Ferdinand of
Arragon, whom no treaties could bind, was only waiting for a convenient
opportunity of attack on his side to advantage. Never was the French monarchy
in so distressed a situation; but the errors of its assailants procured its
safety. The Swiss entered into a treaty with Tremouille, the French general,
who gave them their own terms, satisfied that his master would rescind them
all, as not having given him any powers to treat; Ferdinand continued to remain
a quiet spectator, vainly waiting for some effectual blow to be struck by his
allies; and Henry spent his time in the siege of towns, which could neither
secure his conquests, or advance his reputation.

The first of these were Terouanne, a little town situated on the frontiers of
Picardy, which kept him employed for more than a month, although the garrison
scarce amounted to a thousand men. The besieged, after some time, falling short
of provisions, a very bold and desperate attempt was made to supply them, which
was attended with success. A French captain, whose name was Fontrailles, led up
a body of eighteen hundred men, each of whom carried a bag of gunpowder, and
two quarters of bacon behind him. With this small force he made a fierce and
unexpected irruption into the English camp; and, surmounting all resistance,
advanced to the ditch of the town, where each horseman threw down his burden.
Then immediately returning upon the gallop, they were again so fortunate as to
break through the English, without any great loss in the undertaking. But the
party of horse that was sent to cover the retreat, was not so successful.
Though this body of troops was commanded by the boldest and bravest captains of
the French army, yet, on sight of the English, they were seized with such an
accountable panic, that they immediately fled, and had many of their best
officers taken prisoners. This action was called by the French the battle of
Guinegate, from the place where it was fought; but by the English the battle of
the Spurs, as the French, upon that day, made more use of their spurs than
their swords, to procure safety.

After this victory, which might have been followed with very important
consequences, had the victors marched forward to Paris, Henry sat down to make
sure of the little town, which had made such an obstinate resistance; and found
himself, when it was obliged to surrender, master of a place, which neither
recompensed the blood, nor the delay that were expended in the siege.

From one error Henry went on to another. He was persuaded to lay siege to
Tournay, a great and rich city of Flanders, which at that time was in
possession of the French. This siege, though it took up little time, yet served
to retard the great object, which was the conquest of France; and Henry hearing
that the Swiss were returned home, and being elated with his trifling
successes, resolved to transport his army back to England, where flattery was
put to the torture, to make him happy in the glory of his ridiculous
expedition. A truce was concluded soon after between the two kingdoms; and
Henry continued to dissipate, in more peaceful follies, those immense sums,
which had been amassed by his predecessor for very different purposes.

The success which, during his foreign expedition, attended his arms in the
North of England, was much more important and decisive. A war having been
declared between the English and Scots, who ever took the opportunity to fall
on, when their neighbors were embroiled with France, the king of that country
summoned out the whole force of his kingdom; and having passed the Tweed with a
body of fifty thousand men, ravaged those parts of Northumberland which lay
along the banks of that river. But as his forces were numerous, and the country
barren, he soon began to want provisions; so that many of his men deserting,
returned to their native country. In the mean time, the earl of Surry, at the
head of twenty-six thousand men, approached the Scotch, who were encamped on a
rising ground, near the hills of Cheviot. The river Till ran between both
armies, and prevented an engagement; wherefore the earl of Surry sent an herald
to the Scotch camp, challenging the enemy to descend into the plain, which lay
to the south, and there to try their valor on equal ground. This offer not
being accepted, he made a feint, as if he intended marching away toward
Berwick, which putting the Scotch in motion to annoy his rear, he took
advantage of a great smoke, caused by the firing their huts, and passed the
little river, which had hitherto prevented the engagement. Both armies now
perceiving that a combat was inevitable, they prepared for the onset with great
composure and regularity. The English divided their army into two lines; lord
Howard led the main body of the first line; Sir Edmond Howard the right wing,
and Sir Marmaduke Constable the left; the earl of Surry himself commanded the
main body of the second line, assisted by lord Dacres, and Sir Edward Stanley,
to the right and the left. The Scots, on the other hand, presented three
divisions to the enemy; the middle commanded by the king himself, the right by
the earl of Huntley, and the left by the earls of Lenox and Argyle; a fourth
division, under the earl of Bothwell, made a body of reserve. Lord Huntley
began the onset, charging the division of lord Howard with such fury, that it
was immediately put to confusion, and routed. But this division was so
seasonably supported by lord Dacres, that the men rallied, and the battle
became general. Both sides fought a long time with incredible impetuosity,
until the Highlanders, being galled by the English artillery, broke in sword in
hand upon the main body, commanded by the earl of Surry; and at the head of
these, James fought with the most forward of the nobility. They attacked with
such velocity, that the hinder line could not advance in time to sustain them,
so that a body of English intercepted their retreat. James being thus almost
surrounded by the enemy, refused to quit the field, while it was yet in his
power; but, alighting from his horse, formed his little body into an orb, and
in this posture fought with such desperate courage, as restored the battle. The
English, therefore, were again obliged to have recourse to their artillery and
arrows, which made a terrible havoc; but night separating the combatants, it
was not till the day following that lord Howard perceived that he had gained a
great and glorious victory. The English had lost no persons of note, but the
whole flower of the Scotch nobility were fallen in battle. Ten thousand of the
common men were cut off, and a body, supposed to be that of the king, was sent
to London, where it remained unburied, as a sentence of excommunication still
remained against James, for having leagued with France against the Holy See.
But upon Henry's application, who pretended that that prince in the instant
before his death had discovered some signs of repentance, absolution was given
him, and the body was interred. However, the populace of Scotland still
continued to think their king alive; and it was given out among them that he
had secretly gone on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

These successes only served to intoxicate Henry still the more; and while his
pleasures, on the one hand, engrossed his time, the preparations for repeated
expeditions exhausted his treasures. As it was natural to suppose the old
ministers, who were appointed to direct him by his father, would not willingly
concur in these idle projects, Henry had, for some time, discontinued asking
their advice, and chiefly confided in the counsels of Thomas, afterward
cardinal Wolsey, who seemed to second him in his favorite pursuits. Wolsey was
a minister who complied with all his master's inclinations, and flattered him
in every scheme to which his sanguine and impetuous temper was inclined. He was
the son of a private gentleman, and not of a butcher, as is commonly reported,
of Ipswich. He was sent to Oxford so early, that he was a bachelor at fourteen,
and at that time was called the boy bachelor. He rose by degrees, upon quitting
college, from one preferment to another, till he was made rector of Lymington
by the marquis of Dorset, whose children he had instructed. He had not long
resided at this living, when one of the justices of the peace put him in the
stocks for being drunk, and raising disturbances at a neighboring fair. This
disgrace, however, did not retard his promotion; for he was recommended as
chaplain to Henry the seventh; and being employed by that monarch in a secret
negotiation respecting his intended marriage with Margaret of Savoy, he
acquitted himself to that king's satisfaction, and obtained the praise both of
diligence and dexterity. That prince having given him a commission to
Maximilian, who at that time resided at Brussels, was surprised in less than
three days after to see Wolsey present himself before him; and, supposing that
he had been delinquent, began to reprove his delay. Wolsey, however, surprised
him with assurances that he was just returned from Brussels, and had
successfully fulfilled all his majesty's commands. His dispatch on that
occasion procured him the deanery of Lincoln, and in this situation it was that
he was introduced by Fox, bishop of Winchester, to the young king's notice, in
hopes that he would have talents to supplant the earl of Surry, who was
favorite at that time, and in this Fox was not out in his conjectures.
Presently after, being introduced at court, he was made a privy-counsellor; and
as such, had frequent opportunities of ingratiating himself with the young
king, as he appeared at once complying, submissive, and enterprizing. Wolsey
used every art to suit himself to the royal temper; he sung, laughed, and
danced with every libertine of the court; neither his own years, which were
near forty, nor his character of a clergyman, were any restraint upon him, or
tended to check, by ill-timed severities, the gaiety of his companions. To such
a weak and vicious monarch as Henry, qualities of this nature were highly
pleasing; and Wolsey was soon acknowledged as his chief favorite, and to him
was entrusted the chief administration of affairs. The people began to see with
indignation the new favourite's mean condescensions to the king, and his
arrogance to themselves. They had long regarded the vicious haughtiness, and
the unbecoming splendor of the clergy, with envy and detestation; and Wolsey's
greatness served to bring a new odium upon that body, already too much the
object of the people's dislike. His character being now placed in a more
conspicuous point of light, daily began to manifest itself the more. Insatiable
in his acquisitions, but still more magnificent in his expense; of extensive
capacity, but still more unbounded in enterprise; ambitious of power, but still
more desirous of glory; insinuating, engaging, persuasive, and at other times
lofty, elevated, and commanding: haughty to his equals, but affable to his
dependents; oppressive to the people, but liberal to his friends; more generous
than grateful; formed to take the ascendant in every intercourse, but vain
enough not to cover his real superiority.

He had been advanced soon to the bishopric of Lincoln; but this he afterward
resigned, put their children into his family as a place of education; and
whoever was distinguished by any art or science, paid court to the cardinal,
and were often liberally rewarded. He was the first clergyman in England who
wore silk and gold, not only on his habit, but also on his saddles and the
trappings of his horses.

Beside these various distinctions the pope soon after conferred upon him that
of legate, designing thus to make him instrumental in draining the kingdom of
money, upon pretense of employing it in a war against the Turks, but in reality
with a view to fill his own coffers. In this he so well served the court of
Rome, that some time after the post of legate was conferred upon him for life;
and he now united in his person the promotions of legate, cardinal, archbishop,
and prime minister.

Soon after, Warham, chancellor, and archbishop of Canterbury, a man of a very
moderate temper, chose rather to retire from public employment, than maintain
an unequal contest with the haughty cardinal. Wolsey instantly seized on the
chancellorship, and exercised the duties of that employment with great
abilities and impartiality. The duke of Norfolk finding the king's treasures
exhausted, and his taste for expense still continuing, was glad to resign his
office of treasurer, and retire from court. Fox, bishop of Winchester, who had
first been instrumental in Wolsey's rise, withdrew himself in disgust; the duke
of Suffolk also went home with a resolution to remain private, whilst Wolsey
availed himself of their discontents, and filled up their places by his
creatures, or his personal assiduity. These were vast stretches of power; and
yet the churchman was still insatiable. He procured a bull from the pope,
empowering him to make knights and counts, to legitimate bastards, to give
degrees in arts, law, physic, and divinity; and to grant all sorts of
dispensations. So much pride and power could not avoid giving high offense to
the nobility, yet none dared vent their indignation, so greatly were they in
terror of his vindictive temper.

In order to divert their envy from his inordinate exaltation, he soon entered
into a correspondence with Francis the first, of France, who had taken many
methods to work upon his vanity, and at last succeeded. In consequence of that
monarch's wishes, Henry was persuaded by the cardinal to deliver up Tournay
once more to the French; and he also agreed to an interview with that monarch.
This expensive congress was held between Guisnes and Ardres, near Calais;
within the English pale, in compliment to Henry for crossing the sea. The two
monarchs, after saluting each other in the most cordial manner, retired into a
tent erected for the purpose, where Henry proceeded to read the articles of
their intended alliance. As he began to read the first words of it, "I, Henry,
king," he stopped a moment; and then subjoined only "of England," without adding
France, the usual style of English monarchs. Francis remarked this delicacy,
and expressed his approbation by a smile. Nothing could exceed the magnificence
of the nobility of both courts on this occasson. Many of them involved
themselves in large debts; and the penury of a life was scarce sufficient to
reimburse the extravagance of a few days. Beside, there at first appeared
something low and illiberal in the mutual distrusts that were conspicuous on
this occasion; the two kings never met without having the number of their
guards counted on both sides; every step was carefully adjusted; they passed
each other in the middle-point between both places, when they went to visit
their queens; and at the same instant that Henry entered Ardres, Francis put
himself into the hands of the English at Guisnes. But Francis, who is
considered as the first restorer of true politeness into Europe, put an end to
this low and illiberal method of conversing. Taking one day with him two
gentlemen and a page, he rode directly into Guisnes, crying out to the English
guards that they were their prisoners, and desiring to be carried to their
master. Henry was not a little astonished at the appearance of Francis; and
taking him in his arms, "My brother, said he, you have here given me the most
agreeable surprise; you have shown me the full confidence I may place in you; I
surrender myself your prisoner from this moment." He then took from his neck a
collar of pearls of great value, and putting it on Francis, begged him to wear
it for the sake of his prisoner. Francis agreed; and giving him a bracelet of
double the value of the former, insisted on his wearing it in turn. Henry went
the next day to Ardres, without guards or attendants; and confidence being now
sufficiently established between these monarchs, they employed the rest of the
time in feasts and tournaments.

Some months before a defiance had been sent by the two kings to each other's
court, aids, would be ready in the plains of Picardy to answer all comers that
were gentlemen, at tilt and tourney. Accordingly, the monarchs, now all
gorgeously apparelled, entered the lists on horseback, Francis surrounded with
Henry's guards, and Henry with those of Francis. They were both at that time
the most comely personages of their age, and prided themselves on their
expertness in the military execises. The ladies were the judges in these feats
of chivalry; and they put an end to the encounter whenever they thought proper.
It is supposed that the crafty French monarch was willing to gratify Henry's
vanity by allowing him to enjoy a petty pre-eminence in these pastimes. He ran
a tilt against Monsieur Grandeval, whom he disabled at the second encounter. He
engaged Monsieur de Montmorency, whom, however, he could not throw from the
saddle. He fought at faulchion with a French nobleman, who presented him with
his courser, in token of submission.

But these empty splendours were not sufficient to appease the jealousy of the
nobles at home, or quiet the murmurs of the people. Among these, the duke of
Buckingham, the son of him who lost his life in the reign of Richard the third,
was the foremost to complain. He had often been heard to treat the cardinal's
pride and profusion with just contempt; and carrying his resentment perhaps to
an improper length, some low informers took care that Wolsey should be apprized
of all. The substance of his impeachment was, that he had consulted a
fortune tellers concerning his succession to the crown, and had affected to make
himself popular. This was but a weak pretext to take away the life of a
nobleman, whose father had died in defense of the late king; but he was brought
to a trial, and the duke of Norfolk, whose son had married his daughter, was
created lord steward, to preside at this solemn procedure. He was condemned to
die, as a traitor, by a jury, consisting of a duke, a marquis, seven earls, and
twelve barons. When the sentence was pronouncing against him, and the high
steward came to mention the word traitor, the unhappy prisoner could not
contain his indignation. "My lords, cried he to the judges, I am no traitor;
and for what you have now done against me, take my sincere forgiveness; as for
my life, I think it not worth petitioning for; may God forgive you, and pity
me." He was soon after executed on Tower Hill.

By this time, all the immense treasures of the late king were quite exhausted
on empty pageants, guilty pleasures, or vain treaties and expeditions. But the
king relied on Wolsey alone for replenishing his coffers; and no person could
be fitter for the purpose. His first care was to get a large sum of money from
the people, under the title of a benevolence, which added to its being extorted
the mortification of being considered as a free gift. Henry little minded the
manner of its being raised, provided he had the enjoyment of it; however, his
minister met with some opposition in his attempts to levy these extorted
contributions. In the first place, having exacted a considerable subsidy from
the clergy, he next adressed himself to the house of commons; but they only
granted him half the supplies he demanded. Wolsey was at first highly offended
at their parsimony, and desired to be heard in the house; but as this would
have destroyed the very form and constitution of that august body, they
replied, that none could be permitted to sit and argue there, but such as had
been elected members. This was the first attempt made in this reign, to render
the king master of the debates in parliament. Wolsey first paved the way; and,
unfortunately for the kingdom, Henry too well improved upon his plans soon
after.

A treaty with France, which threatened to make a breach with the emperor,
induced Henry to wish for new supplies, or at least he made this the pretext of
his demands. But as the parliament had testified their reluctance to indulge
his wishes, he followed the advice of Wolsey, and resolved to make use of his
prerogative alone for that purpose. He issued out commissions to all the
counties of England for levying four shillings in the pound upon the clergy,
and three shillings and four-pence from the laity; nor did he attempt to cover
the violence of the measure, by giving it the name either of benevolence or
loan. This unwarrantable stretch of royal power was quickly opposed by the
people; they were unwilling to submit to impositions unknown till now, and a
general insurrection threatened to ensue. Henry had the prudence to stop short
in that dangerous path into which he had entered; and declared, by circular
letters to all the counties, that what was demanded was only by way of
benevolence. But the spirit of opposition, once roused, was not so easily
quieted; the citizens of London hesitated on the demand; and in some parts of
the country insurrections were actually begun, which were suppressed by the
duke of Suffolk. These imposts, which were first advised by Wolsey, not happily
succeeding, he began to lose a little of his favor with the king; and this
displeasure was still more increased by the complaints of the clergy, who
accused him of extortion. Henry reproved Wolsey, in severe terms, which
rendered him more cautious and artful for the future. As an instance of his
cunning, having built a noble palace, called York Place, at Westminster, for
his own use, fearing now the general censure against him, he made a present of
it to the king, assuring him, that from the first he intended it as an offer to
his majesty. Thus Wolsey's impunity only served to pave the way to greater
extortions. The pride of this prelate was great; but his riches were still
greater. In order to have a pretext for amassing such sums, he undertook to
found two new colleges in Oxford, for which he received every day fresh grants
from the pope and the king. To execute this favorite scheme, he obtained a
liberty of suppressing several monasteries, and converting their revenues to
the benefit of his new foundation. Whatever might have been the pope's
inducement to grant him these privileges, nothing could be more fatal to the
pontiff's interests; for Henry was thus himself taught shortly afterward to
imitate, what he had seen a subject perform with impunity.

Hitherto the administration of all affairs was carried on by Wolsey; for the
king was contented to lose, in the embraces of his mistresses, all the
complaints of his subjects; and the cardinal undertook to keep him ignorant, in
order to continue his own uncontrolled authority. But now a period was
approaching, that was to put an end to this minister's exorbitant power. One of
the most extraordinary and important revolutions that ever employed the
attention of man, was now ripe for execution. This was no less a change than
the Reformation; to have an idea of the rise of which, it will be proper to
take a cursory view of the state of the church at that time, and to observe by
what seemingly contradictory means Providence produces the most happy events.

The church of Rome had now, for more than a thousand years, been corrupting
the ancient simplicity of the Gospel, and converting into a temporality the
kingdom of another world. The popes had been frequently seen at the head of
their own armies, fighting for their dominions with the arm of flesh, and
forgetting in cruelty and detestable maxims of state, all the pretended
sanctity of their characters. The cardinals, prelates, and dignitaries of the
church, lived in envied splendor, were served like voluptuous princes; and
some of them were found to possess eight or nine bishoprics at once. Wherever
the church governed, it exerted that power with cruelty; so that to their
luxuries were usually added the crime of tyranny too. As for the inferior
clergy, both popish and protestant writers exclaim against their abandoned and
dissolute morals. They publicly kept mistresses, and bequeathed to their
illegitimate children whatever they were able to save from their pleasures, or
extort from the poor. There is still to be seen a will made by a bishop of
Cambray, in which he sets aside a certain sum for the bastards he has had
already, and those which, by the blessing of God, he may yet happen to have. In
many parts of England and Germany, the people obliged their priests to have
concubines; so that the laity might preserve their wives with greater security;
while, at the same time, the poor laborious peasant and artizan saw all the
fruits of their toil go, not to cloathe and maintain their own little families,
but to pamper men, who insulted them with lectures, to which their example
appeared a flat contradiction. But the vices of the clergy were not greater
than their ignorance; few of them knew the meaning of their Latin mass. Their
sagacity was chiefly employed in finding out witches, and exorcising the
possessed; but what most increased the hatred of the people against them was
the selling pardons and absolutions for sin, at certain stated prices. A
deacon, or subdeacon, who committed murder, was absolved from his crime, and
allowed to possess three benefices upon paying twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot
might commit murder for about ten pounds of our money. Every crime had its
stated value; and absolutions were given for sins not only already committed,
but such as should be committed hereafter. The wisest of the people looked with
silent detestation on these impositions; and the ignorant themselves, whom
fortune seemed to have formed for slavery, began to open their eyes to such
glaring absurdities.

These vices and impositions were now almost come to a head; and the increase
of arts and learning among the laity, propagated by means of printing, which
had been lately invented, began to make them resist that power, which was
originally founded in deceit. Leo the tenth was at that time pope, provoked by
opposition, he inveighed against the authority of the pope himself. Being
driven hard by his adversaries still as he enlarged his reading, in order to
support his tenets, he discovered some new abuse or error in the church of
Rome. The people, who had long groaned under the papal tyranny, heard his
discourses with pleasure, and defended him against the authority and
machinations of his enemies. Frederic, elector of Saxony, surnamed the Wise,
openly protected him; the republic of Zurich even reformed their church
according to the new model; and Luther, a man naturally inflexible and
vehement, was become incapable, either from promises of advancement, or terrors
of severity, to relinquish a sect, of which he was himself the founder. It was
in vain, therefore, that the pope issued out his bulls against Luther; it was
in vain that the Dominican friars procured his books to be burned; he boldly
abused the Dominicans, and burned the pope's bull in the streets of Wirtemberg.
In the mean time, the dispute was carried on by writing on either side. Luther,
though opposed by the pope, the conclave, and all the clergy, supported his
cause singly, and with success. As the controversy was new, his ignorance of
many parts of the subject was not greater than theirs; and ill as he wrote,
they answered still worse. Opinions are inculcated upon the minds of mankind,
rather by confidence and perseverance, than by strength of reasoning, or beauty
of diction; and no man had more confidence or more perseverance than he. In
this dispute, it was the fate of Henry to be a champion on both sides. His
father, who had given him the education of a scholar, permitted him to be
instructed in school divinity, which then was the principal object of learned
enquiry. Henry, therefore, willing to convince the world of his abilities in
that science, obtained the pope's permission to read the works of Luther, which
had been forbidden, under pain of excommunication. In consequence of this, the
king defended the seven sacraments, out of St. Thomas Aquinas; and showed some
dexterity in this science, though it is thought that Wolsey had the chief hand
in directing him. A book being thus finished in haste, it was sent to Rome for
the pope's approbation, which it is natural to suppose would not be withheld.
The pontiff, ravished with its eloquence and depth, compared it to the labors
of St. Jerome or St. Augustine; and rewarded the author with the title of
Defender of the Faith, little imagining that Henry was soon to be one of the
most terrible enemies that ever the church of Rome had to contend with.

Besides these causes, which contributed to render the Romish church odious and
contemptible, there were still others, proceeding from political measures.
Clement the seventh had succeeded Leo, and the hereditary animosity between the
emperor and the pope breaking out into a war, Clement was imprisoned in the
castle of St. Angelo; and with thirteen cardinals, his adherents, kept in
custody for his ransom. As the demands of the emperor were exorbitant, Henry
undertook to negotiate for the pope, and was procuring him a very favorable
treaty; but his holiness, in the mean time, corrupting his guards, had the good
fortune to procure his escape from confinement; and leaving the treaty
unfinished, sent Henry a letter of thanks for his mediation. The violence of
the emperor, taught Henry that popes might be injured with impunity; and the
behavior of the pope manifested but little of that sanctity or infallibility
to which the pontiffs pretended. Besides, as Henry had laid the pope thus under
obligations, he supposed that he might, upon any emergency, expect a grateful
return.

It was in this situation of the church and the pope, that a new scene was
going to be opened, which was to produce endless disturbances, and to change
the whole system of Europe. though he felt a secret dislike to her person, yet
for a long time he broke out into no flagrant act of contempt; contented to
range from beauty to beauty among the ladies of his court, and his rank always
procuring him a ready compliance. But Henry was carried forward, though perhaps
not at first excited, by a motive much more powerful than the tacit suggestions
of his conscience. It happened that among the maids of honor, then attending
the queen, there was one Anna Bullen, the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen, a
gentleman of distinction, and related to most of the nobility. He had been
employed by the king in several embassies, and was married to a daughter of the
duke of Norfolk. The beauty of Anne surpassed whatever had hitherto appeared at
this voluptuous court; and her education, which had been at Paris, tended to
set off her personal charms. Her features were regular, mild, and attractive,
her stature elegant, though below the middle size, while her wit and vivacity
exceeded even her other allurements. Henry, who had never learned the art of
restraining any passion that he desired to gratify, saw and loved her; but
after several efforts to induce her to comply with his criminal desires, he
found that without marriage, he could have no chance of succeeding. This
obstacle, therefore, he hardily undertook to remove; and as his own queen was
now become hateful to him, in order to procure a divorce, he alleged that his
conscience rebuked him for having so long lived in incest with the wife of his
brother. In this pretended perplexity, therefore, he applied to Clement the
seventh, who owed him many obligations, desiring to dissolve the bull of the
former pope, which had given him permission to marry Catharine; and to declare
that it was not in the power, even of the holy see, to dispense with a law so
strictly enjoined in scripture. The unfortunate pope was now in the utmost
perplexity; queen Catharine was aunt to the emperor, who had lately made him a
prisoner, and whose resentment he dreaded to rekindle by thus injuring so near
a relation: beside, he could not in prudence declare the bull of the former
pope illicit, for this would be giving a blow to the doctrine of papal
infallibility. On the other hand, Henry was his protector and friend, the
dominions of England were the chief resource from whence his finances were
supplied, and the king of France, some time before, had got a bull of divorce
in somewhat similar circumstances. In this exigence, he thought the wisest
method would be to spin out the affair by a negotiation; and, in the mean time,
sent over a commission to Wolsey, in conjunction with the archbishop of
Canterbury, or any other English prelate, to examine the validity of the king's
marriage, and the former dispensation; granting them also a provisional
dispensation for the king's marriage with any other person. When this message
was laid before the council in England, they prudently considered that an
advice given by the pope in this secret manner, might very easily be disavowed
in public; and that a clandestine marriage would totally invalidate the
legitimacy of any issue the king should have by such a match. In consequence of
this, fresh messengers were dispatched to Rome, and evasive answers returned,
the pope still continuing to promise, recant, dispute, and temporize; hoping
that the king's passion would never hold out during the tedious course of an
ecclesiastical controversy. In this he was entirely mistaken. Henry had been
long taught to dispute as well as he, and quickly found, or wrested, many texts
of scripture to favor his opinions or his passions. To his arguments he added
threats, assuring the pope, that the English were already but too well disposed
to withdraw from the holy see; and that if he continued uncomplying, the whole
country would readily follow the example of a monarch, who, stung by
ingratitude, should deny all obedience to a pontiff by whom he had always been
treated with falsehood and duplicity. The king even proposed to his holiness,
whether in case he were not permitted to put away his present queen, he might
not have a dispensation for having two wives at a time.

The pope, perceiving the eagerness of the king, at one time had thoughts of
complying with his solicitations, and sent cardinal Campegio, his legate, to
London, who, with Wolsey, opened a court for trying the legitimacy of the
king's present marriage, and cited the king and the queen to appear before
them. They both presented themselves; and the king answered to his name when
called; but the queen, instead of answering to here is, rose from her seat, and
throwing herself at the king's feet, in the most pathetic manner, prevailed,
and would wrest the laws against her; she, therefore, refused the present
trial, where she could expect neither justice nor impartiality. Yet
notwithstanding the queen's objections, her trial went forward; and Henry
shortly hoped to be gratified in his most sanguine expectations. The principal
point which came before the legates, was the proof of prince Arthur's
consummation of his marriage with Catharine, which some of his own expressions
to that purpose, tended to confirm. Other topics were preparing, tending to
prove the inability of the pope himself to grant such a dispensation; and the
business seemed now to be drawing near a period, when, to the great surprise of
all, Campegio all of a sudden, without any warning, and upon very frivolous
pretenses, prorogued the court; and shortly after transferred the cause before
the court of Rome.

During the course of these perplexing negociations, on the issue of which
Henry's happiness seemed to depend, he had at first expected to find in his
favorite Wolsey, a warm defender, and a steady adherent; but in this he found
himself mistaken. Wolsey seemed to be in pretty much the same dilemma with the
pope. On the one hand, he was to please his master the king, from whom he had
received a thousand marks of favor; and on the other hand, he feared to
disoblige the pope, whose servant he more immediately was, and who besides had
power to punish his disobedience. He, therefore, resolved to continue neuter in
this controversy; and though of all men the most haughty, he gave way on this
occasion to his colleague Campegio in all things, pretending a deference to his
skill in canon law. Wolsey's scheme of temporizing was highly displeasing to
the king, but for a while he endeavored to stifle his resentment, until it
could act with more fatal certainty. He for some time looked out for a man of
equal abilities and less art; and it was not long before accident threw into
his way one Thomas Cranmer, of greater talents, and probably of more integrity.
Cranmer was a doctor of divinity, and a professor at Cambridge, but had lost
his office upon marrying contrary to the institutes of the canon law, which
enjoined celibacy to all the clergy. He had traveled in his youth into
Germany; and it was there he became acquainted with Luther's works, and
embraced his doctrines. This man happening to fall one evening into company
with Gardener secretary of state, and Fox the king's almoner, the business of
the divorce became the subject of conversation. He gave it as his opinion, that
the readiest way to quiet the king's conscience, or to extort the pope's
consent, would be to consult all the universities of Europe upon the affair; an
advice which being brought to the king, pleased him so much, that Cranmer was
desired to follow the court.

The king finding himself provided with a person who could supply Wolsey's
place, appeared less reserved in his resentments against that prelate. The
attorney general was ordered to prepare a bill of indictment against him; and
he was soon after commanded to resign the great seal. Crimes are easily found
against a favorite in disgrace, and the courtiers did not fail to increase the
catalogue of his errors. He was ordered to depart from York-place palace; and
all his furniture and plate were converted to the king's use. The inventory of
his goods being taken, they were found to exceed even the most extravagant
surmises. Of fine holland alone there were found a thousand pieces; the walls
of his palace were covered with cloth of gold and silver; he had a cup-board of
plate of massy gold; all the rest of his riches and furniture were in
proportion, and probably their greatness invited the hand of power. The
parliament soon after confirmed the sentence of the court of Star Chamber
against him, and he was ordered to retire to Esher, a country seat which he
possessed near Hampton; there to await the king's further pleasure, with all
the fluctuations of hope and apprehension. Still, however, he was in possession
of the archbishopric of York and bishopric of Winchester; and the king gave him
distant gleams of hope, by sending him a ring accompanied with a gracious
message. Wolsey, who, like every bad character, was proud to his equals and
mean to those above him, happening to meet the king's messenger on horseback,
immediately alighted, and throwing himself on his knees in the mire, received,
in that abject manner, those marks of his majesty's condescension. But his
hopes were soon overturned, for after he had mained some time at Esher, he was
ordered to remove to his see of York; where he took up his residence at Cawood,
and rendered himself very popular in the neighborhood by his affability. He
was not allowed to remain long unmolested in this retreat. He was arrested by
the earl of Northumberland, at the king's command, for high treason, and
preparations were made for conducting him to London, in order to his trial. He
at first refused to comply with the requisition, as being a cardinal; but
finding the earl bent on performing his commission, he complied, and set out,
by easy journies, for London to appear as a criminal, where he had acted as a
king. In his way he stayed a fortnight at the earl of Shrewsbury's; where, one
day at dinner, he was taken ill, not without violent suspicions of having
poisoned himself. Being brought forward from thence, he with much difficulty
reached Leicester Abbey; where the monks coming out to meet him, he said,
"Father abbot, I am come to lay my bones among you;" and immediately ordered
his bed to be prepared. As his disorder increased, an officer being placed
near, at once to guard and attend him, he spoke to him, a little before he
expired, to this effect; "I pray you have me heartily recommended unto his
royal majesty; he is a prince of a most royal carriage, and has a princely
heart, and rather than he will miss, or want any part of his will, he will
endanger one half of his kingdom. I do assure you, I have kneeled before him,
for three hours together, to persuade him from his will and appetite, but could
not prevail. Had I but served God as diligently as I have served the king, he
would not have given me over in my gray hairs. But this is the just reward,
that I must receive for my indulgent pains and study; not regarding my service
to God, but only to my prince." He died soon after, in all the pangs of
remorse, and left a life which he had all along rendered turbid by ambition,
and wretched by mean assiduities. He left two natural children behind him, one
of whom, being a priest, was loaded with church preferments.

Henry being now freed from the control of a person, who had for some time
been an obstacle to his intentions, by Cranmer's advice, he had the legality of
his present marriage convassed in all the most noted universities of Europe. It
was very extraordinary to see the king on one side soliciting the universities
to be favorable to his passion; and, on the other the emperor pressing them
with equal ardour to be favorable to his aunt. Henry liberally rewarded those
doctors who declared on his side; and the emperor granted benefices to such as
voted in conformity to his wishes. Time has discovered these intrigues. In one
of Henry's account books, we find the disbursements he made on these occasions.
To a subdeacon he gave a crown, to a deacon two crowns; and so of the rest, in
proportion to the consequence of the station or opinion. The person, however,
who bribed on these occasions, excused himself, by declaring, that he never
paid the money till after the vote was given. In this contest, the
liberalities, and consequently the votes of Henry prevailed; his intrigues for
a favorable decision being better carried on, as he was most interested in the
debate. All the colleges of Italy and France unanimously declared his present
marriage against all law divine and human; and therefore alleged, that it was
not in the power of the pope himself to grant a dispensation. The only places
where this decision was most warmly opposed, were at Oxford and Cambridge; but
they also concurred in the same opinion at last, having furnished out the
formality of a debate. But the agents of Henry were not content with the
suffrage of the universities alone; the opinions of the Jewish Rabbis were also
demanded; however, their suffrages were easily bought up.

Henry being thus fortified by the suffrages of the universities, was now
resolved to oppose even the pope himself, and began in parliament by reviving
an old law against the clergy, by which it was decreed, that all those who had
submitted to the legantine authority had incurred severe penalties. The clergy,
to conciliate the king's favor, were compelled to pay a fine of an hundred and
eighteen thousand pounds. A confession was likewise extorted from them, that
the king was protector and supreme head of the church and the clergy of
England. By these concessions a great part of the profits, and still more of
the power, of the church of Rome, was cut off. An act soon after was passed
against levying the first fruits, or a year's rent, of all the bishoprics that
fell vacant. The tie that held Henry to the church being thus broken, he
resolved to keep no further measures with the pontiff. He therefore privately
married Anne Bullen, whom he had created marchioness of Pembroke, the duke of
Norfolk, uncle to the new queen, her father, mother, and doctor Cranmer being
present at the ceremony. Soon after finding the queen pregnant, he publicly
owned his marriage, and, to color over his disobedience to the pope with an
appearance of triumph, he passed with his beautiful bride through London, with
a magnificence greater than had been ever known before. The streets were
strewed, the walls of the houses were hung with tapestries, the conduits ran
with wine, and an universal joy was diffused among the people, who were
contented rather with the present festivity, than sollicitous to examine the
motives of it. Catharine, who had all along supported her claims with
resolution, and yet with modesty, was cited to a trial; but refusing to appear,
she was pronounced contumacious, and judgment given against the validity of her
marriage with the king. At length, therefore, finding the inutility of further
resistance, she retired to Ampthill, near Dunstable, where she continued the
rest of her life in privacy and peace.

In the mean time, when this intelligence was conveyed to Rome, the conclave
was in a rage; and the pope, incited by their ardour, and frighted also by the
menaces of the emperor, published a sentence, declaring queen Catharine alone
to be Henry's lawful wife, and requiring him to take her again, with a
denunciation of censures in case of refusal. On the other hand, Henry finding
that his subjects of all ranks had taken part with him, and had willingly
complied with his attempts to break a foreign dependence, resolved no longer to
renew these submissions which no power could extort. The people had been
prepared by degrees for this great innovation: care had been taken for some
years to inculcate the doctrine, that the pope was entitled to no authority
beyond the limits of his own diocese. The king, therefore, no longer delayed
his meditated scheme of separating entirely from the church of Rome. The
parliament was at his devotion; the majority of the clergy was for him, as they
had already declared against the pope, by decreeing in favor of the divorce;
and the people, above all, wished to see the church humbled, which had so long
controlled them at pleasure, and grown opulent by their labors and distresses.
Thus all things conspiring to cooperate with his designs, he at once ordered
himself to be declared by his clergy the supreme head of the church; the
parliament confirmed the title, abolished all authority of the pope in England,
voted all tributes, for ages, was now at once overthrown, and none seemed to
repine at the revolution, except those who were immediately interested by their
dependence on the court of Rome.

But though Henry had thus separated from the church, yet he had not addicted
himself to the system of any other reformer. The idea of heresy still appeared
detestable, as well as formidable, to him; and whilst his resentment against
the sea of Rome had removed one part of his early prejudices, he made it a
point never to relinquish the rest. Separate as he stood from the catholic
church, and from the Roman pontiff, the head of it, he still valued himself on
maintaining the catholic doctrines, and on guarding by fire and sword the
imagined purity of its establishments. His ministers and courtiers were of as
motley a character as his conduct, and seemed to waver, during the whole reign,
between the ancient and the new religion. The young queen, engaged by interest,
as well as inclination, favored the cause of the reformers; Thomas Cromwell,
who, from being a creature of Wolsey, and who, by an admirable defense of the
conduct of his old master, had been taken into the favor and confidence of the
king, embraced the same views. Being a man of prudence and ability, he was very
successful in promoting the reformation, though in a concealed manner. Cranmer,
who was now become archbishop of Canterbury, had all along adopted the
protestant tenets, and had gained Henry's friendship by his candor and
sincerity. On the other hand, the duke of Norfolk adhered to the old mode of
worship; and by the greatness of his rank, as well as by his talents for peace
and war, he had great weight in the king's council. Gardener, lately created
bishop of Winchester, had enlisted himself in the same party; and the
suppleness of his character, and the dexterity of his conduct, had rendered him
extremely useful to it. The king, mean while, who held the balance between
these contending factions, was enabled, by the courtship paid him by both
protestants and catholics, to assume an immeasurable authority.

As the mode of religion was not as yet known, and as the minds of those who
were of opposite sentiments were extremely exasperated, it naturally followed
that several must fall a sacrifice in the contest between ancient
establishments, and modern reformation. The reformers were the first who were
exhibited as unhappy examples of the vindictive fury of those who were for the
continuance of ancient superstitions. One James Bainham, a gentleman of the
Temple, being accused of favoring the doctrines of Luther, had been brought
before Sir Thomas More during his chancellorship; and, after being put to the
torture, was condemned as a relapsed heretic, and was burned in Smithfield. One
Thomas Bilney, a priest, had embraced the new doctrine; but being terrified
into an abjuration, he was so stung with remorse, that he went into Norfolk,
publicly recanting his former conduct, and exposing the errors of popery. He
was soon seized, tried in the bishop's court, condemned as a relapsed heretic,
and burnt accordingly. On the other hand, Henry was not remiss in punishing
such as disowned the propriety of his late defection from Rome; and the monks,
as they suffered most by the reformation, so they were most obnoxious, from
their free manner of speaking, to the royal resentment.

To assist him in bringing these to punishment, the parliament had made it
capital to deny his supremacy over the church; and many priors and
ecclesiastics lost their lives for this new species of crime. But of those who
fell as a sacrifice to this stern and unjust law, none are so much to be
regretted as John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, and the celebrated Sir Thomas
More. Fisher was a prelate eminent for his learning and morals; but so firmly
attached to ancient opinions, that he was thrown into prison, and deprived of
his ecclesiastical revenues; so that he had scarce even rags to cover him in
his severe confinement. He was soon after indicted for denying the king's
supremacy, condemned, and beheaded.

Sir Thomas More is entitled to still greater pity, as his merits were greater.
This extraordinary man, who was one of the revivers of ancient literature, and
incontestably the foremost writer of his age, had, for some time, refused to
act in subserviency to the capricious passions of the king. He had been created
chancellor; but gave up that high office, rather than concur in the breach with
the church of Rome. The austerity of this man's virtue, and the sanctity of his
manners, had in no wise encroached on the gentleness of his temper; but even in
the midst of poverty and disgrace he could preserve that natural gaiety, which
was probably inspired by conscious innocence. But on the present occasion,
being put into confinement, no entreaties nor arguments could prevail with him
to speak an entire acknowlegement of the justice of the king's claims. One
Rich, who was then sollicitor-general, was sent to confer with him; and in his
presence he was inveigled to say, that any question with regard to the law,
which established that prerogative, was like a two-edged sword. If a person
answered one way it would confound his soul; if another, it would destroy his
body. These words were sufficient for the base informer to hang an accusation
upon; and as trials at that time were but mere formalities, the jury gave
sentence against More, who long expected his fate. His natural cheerfulness
attended him to the last. When he was mounting the scaffold, he said to one,
"Friend, help me up; and when I go down again, let me shift for myself." The
executioner asking him forgiveness, he granted the request, but told him, "You
will never get credit by beheading me, my neck is so short." Then laying his
head on the block, he bid the executioner stay till he had put aside his beard,
for said he, that has never committed treason.

The concurrence which the people seemed to lend to these fierce severities,
added to the great authority which Henry from his severe and fierce deportment
possessed, induced him to proceed still farther in his scheme of innovation. As
the monks had all along shown him the greatest resistance, he resolved at once
to deprive them of future power to injure him. He accordingly empowered
Cromwell, secretary of state, to send commissioners into the several counties
of England to inspect the monasteries; and to report, with rigorous exactness,
the conduct and deportment of such as were resident there. This employment was
readily undertaken by some creatures of the court, namely, ^ayton, London,
Price, Gage, Petre, and Belasis, who are said to have discovered monstrous
disorders in many of the religious houses. Whole convents of women abandoned to
all manner of lewdness, friars accomplices in their crimes, pious frauds every
where practiced to increase the devotion and liberality of the people, and
cruel and inveterate factions maintained between the members of many of these
institutions. These accusations, whether true or false, were urged with great
clamor against these communities; and a general horror was excited in the
nation against them.

The king now, therefore, thought he might with safety, and even some degree of
popularity, abolish these institutions; but willing to proceed gently at first,
he gave directions to parliament to go no farther at present than to suppress
the lesser monasteries, thousand pounds, which was about a twentieth part of
the national income. The loss therefore which was sustained by the clergy upon
this occasion, was by no means so great or mortifying as the cruel insults and
reproaches to which they were exposed for their former frauds and avarice. The
numberless relics which they had amassed, to delude and draw money from the
people, were now brought forward, and exposed before the populace with the most
poignant contempt. An angel with one wing, that brought over the head of the
spear that pierced the side of Christ; coals that had roasted St. Lawrence, the
parings of St. Edmond's toes, certain relics to prevent rain, others to stop
the generation of weeds among corn. There was a crucifix at Boxley in Kent,
distinguished by the appellation of the Rood of Grace, which had been long in
reputation for bending, raising, rolling the eyes, and shaking the head. It was
brought to London, and broke to pieces at Paul's Cross; and the wheels and
springs by which it was actuated shown to the people. At Hales in
Gloucestershire, the monks had carried on a profitable traffic with the
pretended blood of Christ in a crystal phial. This relic was no other than the
blood of a duck killed weekly, and exhibited to the pilgrim; if his prayers
were accepted, the blood was shown him; if supposed to be rejected, the phial
was turned; and being on one side opake, the blood was no longer to be seen.
But the spoils of St. Thomas a Becket's shrine at Canterbury exceed what even
imagination might conceive. The shrine was broken down; and the gold that
adorned it filled two large chests, that eight strong men could hardly carry
out of the church. The king even cited the saint himself to appear, and to be
tried and condemned as a traitor. He ordered his name to be struck out of the
Calendar, his bones to be burned, and the office for his festival to be struck
out of the Breviary. Such were the violent measures with which the king
proceeded against these seats of indolence and imposture; but as great murmurs
were excited by some upon this occasion, he took care that all those who could
be useful to him, or even dangerous in cases of opposition, should be sharers
in the spoil. He either made a gift of the revenues of the convents to his
principal courtiers, or sold them at low prices, or exchanged them for other
lands on very disadvantageous terms. He also erected six new bishoprics,
Westminster, Oxford, Peterborow, Bristol, Chester, and Gloucester, of which the
last five still continue. He also settled salaries on the abbots and priors,
proportioned to their former revenues or their merits; and each monk was
allowed a yearly pension of eight marks for his subsistence.

But though the king had entirely separated himself from Rome, yet he was
unwilling to follow any guide in conducting a new system. He would not
therefore wholly abolish those practices, by which priestcraft had been carried
to such a pitch of absurdity. The invocation of saints was not yet abolished by
him, but only restrained. He procured an act, or, more properly speaking, gave
orders, to have the Bible translated into the vulgar tongue; but it was not
permitted to be put into the hands of the laity. It was a capital crime to
believe in the pope's supremacy; and yet equally heinous to be of the reformed
religion, as established in Germany. His opinions were at length delivered in a
law, which, from its horrid consequences, was afterward termed the Bloody
Statute, by which it was ordained, that whoever, by word or writing, denied
transubstantiation, whoever maintained that the communion in both kinds was
necessary, whoever asserted that it was lawful for priests to marry, whoever
alleged that vows of chastity might be broken, whoever maintained that private
masses were unprofitable, or that auricular confession was unnecessary, should
be found guilty of heresy, and burned or hanged as the court should determine.
As the people were at that time chiefly composed of those who followed the
opinions of Luther, and such as still adhered to the pope, this statute, with
Henry's former decrees, in some measure excluded both, and opened a field for
persecution, which soon after produced its dreadful harvests.

These severities, however, were preceded by one of a different nature, arising
neither from religious nor political causes, but merely from tyrannical
caprice. Anne Bullen, his queen, had been always a favourer of the reformation,
and consequently had many enemies on that account, who only waited some fit
occasion to destroy her credit with the king; and that occasion presented
itself but too soon. The king's passion was by this time quite palled by
satiety; as the only desire he ever had for her arose from that brutal
appetite, which enjoyment soon destroys, he was now, fallen in love, if we may
so prostitute the expression, with another, and languished for the possession
of Jane Seymour, who had for some time been maid of honor to the queen.

As soon as the queen's enemies perceived the king's disgust, they soon
resolved on taking the first opportunity of gratifying his inclination to get
rid of her, by producing crimes against her, which his passions would quickly
make real. serious affair, she received the sacrament in her closet, sensible
of what little mercy she had to expect from so furious a tyrant.

In the mean time, her enemies were not remiss in enflaming the accusation
against her. The duke of Norfolk, from his attachment to the old religion, took
care to produce several witnesses accusing her of incontinency with some of the
meaner servants of the court. Four persons were particularly pointed out as her
paramours; Henry Norris, groom of the stole, Weston, and Brereton, gentlemen of
the king's bedchamber, together with Mark Smeton, a musician. As these had
served her with much assiduity, their respect might have been construed by
suspicion into more tender attachments. The next day the queen was sent to the
Tower, earnestly protesting her innocence, and sending up prayers to heaven for
assistance in this extremity. She in vain begged to be admitted into the
presence of the king; the Lady Bullen, her uncle's wife, who had always hated
her, was ordered to continue in the same chamber; and she made a report of all
the incoherent ravings of the afflicted prisoner. She owned that she had once
rallied Norris on his delaying his marriage, and had told him that he probably
expected her, when she should be a widow. She had reproved Weston, she said,
for his affection to a kinswoman of hers, and his indifference toward his
wife; but he told her that she had mistaken the object of his affection, for it
was herself. She affirmed, that Smeton had never been in her chamber but twice,
when he played on the harpsichord; but she acknowledged that he once had the
boldness to tell her, that a look sufficed him.

Every person at court now abandoned the unhappy queen in her distress, except
Cranmer, who, though forbid to come into the king's presence, wrote a letter to
him in behalf of the queen; but his intercession had no effect. On the twelfth
day of May, Norris, Weston, Brereton, and Smeton, where tried in
Westminster Hall, when Smeton was prevailed upon, by the promise of a pardon,
to confess a criminal correspondence with the queen; but he was never
confronted by her he accused; and his execution with the rest, shortly after,
served to acquit her of the charge. Norris, who had been much in the king's
favor, had an offer of his life, if he would confess his crime, and accuse his
mistress; but he rejected the proposal with contempt, and died professing her
innocence, and his own.

In the mean time, the queen, who saw the terrible appearance of her fortunes,
endeavored to soften the king by every endeavor to spare the lives of the
unfortunate men, whose deaths were decreed. But his was a stern jealousy
fostered by pride; and nothing but her removal could appease him. Her letter to
him upon this occasion, written from the Tower, is full of the tenderest
expostulations, and too remarkable to be omitted here; as its manner serves at
once to mark the situation of her mind, and shows to what a pitch of refinement
she had carried the language even then. It is as follows.

"Sir,
"Your grace's displeasure, and my imprisonment, are things so strange unto me,
as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send
unto me, (willing me to confess a truth, and so obtain your favor,) by such an
one, whom you know to be mine ancient professed enemy, I no sooner received
this message by him, then I rightly conceived your meaning; and if, as you say,
confessing a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness
and duty perform your command.

But let not your grace ever imagine that your poor wife will ever be brought
to acknowledge a fault, where not so much as a thought thereof preceded. And to
speak a truth, never prince had wife more loyal in all duty, and in all true
affection, than you have ever found in Anne Boleyne. With which name and place
I could willingly have contented myself, if God and your grace's pleasure had
been so pleased. Neither did I at any time so far forget myself in my
exaltation, or received queenship, but that I always looked for such an
alteration as I now find; for the ground of my preferment being on no surer
foundation than your grace's fancy, the least alteration I knew was fit and
sufficient to draw that fancy to some other object. You have chosen me from a
low estate to be your queen and companion, far beyond my desert or desire. If
then you have found me worthy of such honor, good your grace let not any light
fancy, or bad counsel of mine enemies, withdraw your princely favor from me;
neither let that stain, that unworthy stain of a disloyal heart toward your
good grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most dutiful wife, and the infant
princess your daughter. Try me, good king; but let me have a lawful trial, and
let not my sworn enemies sit as my accusers and judges; yea let me receive an
open trial, for my truth shall fear no open shame; then shall you see either
mine innocence cleared, your suspicion and conscience satisfied, the ignominy
and slander of the world stopped, or my guilt openly declared. So that
whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your grace may be freed from an open
censure; and mine offense being so lawfully proved, your grace is at liberty
both before God and man, not only to execute worthy punishment on me, as an
unlawful wife, but to follow your affection already settled on that party, for
whose sake I am now as I am, whose name I could some good while since have
pointed unto your grace, not being ignorant of my suspicion therein.

"But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my death, but an
infamous slander must bring you the enjoying your desired happiness, then I
desire of God that he will pardon your great sin therein, and likewise mine
enemies, the instruments thereof; and that he will not call you to a strict
account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his general judgment
seat, where both you and myself must shortly appear, and in whose judgment I
doubt not (whatsoever the world may think of me) mine innocence shall be openly
known and sufficiently cleared.

"My last and only request shall be, that myself may only bear the burden of
your grace's displeasure; and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those
poor gentlemen, who (as I understand) are likewise in strait imprisonment for
my sake. If ever I have found favor in your sight, if ever the name of Anna
Boleyn has been pleasing in your ears, then let me obtain this request; and I
will so leave to trouble your grace any further, with mine earnest prayers to
the Trinity, to have your grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all
your actions.

From my doleful prison in the Tower, this sixth of May. Your most loyal and
ever faithful wife, Anne Boleyn."


It was not to be expected that eloquence could prevail on a tyrant, whose
passions were to be influenced by none of the nobler motives; the queen and her
brother were tried by a jury of peers; but upon what proof or pretense the
crime of incest was urged against them is unknown; the chief evidence, it is
said, amounted to no more, than that Rochford had been seen to lean on her bed
before some company. Part of the charge against her was, that she had declared
to her attendants, that the king never had her heart; which was considered as a
slander upon the throne, and strained into a breach of a late statute, by which
it was declared criminal to throw any slander upon the king, queen, or their
issue. The unhappy queen, though unassisted by counsel, defended herself with
great judgment, and presence of mind; and the spectators could not forbear
declaring her entirely innocent. She answered distinctly to all the charges
brought against her: but the king's authority was not to be controuled; she was
declared guilty; and her sentence ran, that she should be burned or beheaded at
the king's pleasure. When this terrible sentence was pronounced against her,
she could not help offering up a prayer to Heaven, vindicating her innocence;
and in a most pathetic speech to her judges, averred the injustice of her
condemnation. But the tyrant, not satisfied with this vengeance, was desirous
also of having her daughter declared illegitimate; and remembering the report
of a contract between her and Percy, earl of Northumberland, prevailed upon the
queen, either by promise of life, or of executing the sentence in all its
rigor, to confess such a contract. The afflicted primate, who sat as judge,
thought himself obliged, by this confession, to pronounce the marriage null and
invalid; and Henry, in the transports of his malignant prosecution did not see,
that if her marriage had been invalid from the beginning, the sentence for
adultery must have been invalid also.

She, who had been once the envied object of royal favor, was now going to
give a melancholy instance of the capriciousness of fortune: upon her returning
to prison, she once more sent protestations of her innocence to the king. "You
have raised me, said she, from privacy to make me a lady; from a lady you made
me a countess; from a countess, a queen; and from a queen I shall shortly
become a saint in heaven." On the morning of her execution, she sent for
Kingstone, the keeper of the Tower, to whom, upon entering the prison, she
said, "Mr. Kingstone, I hear I am not to die till noon, and I am sorry for it;
for I thought to be dead before this time, and free from a life of pain." The
keeper attempting to comfort her, by assuring her the pain would be very
little, she replied, "I have heard the executioner is very expert; and
(clasping her neck with her hands, laughing,) I have but a little neck." When
brought to the scaffold, from a consideration of her child Elizabeth's welfare,
she would not inflame the minds of the spectators against her prosecutors, but
contented herself with saying, "that she was come to die as she was sentenced
by the law." She would accuse none, nor say any thing of the ground upon which
she was judged; she prayed heartily for the king, and called him "a most
merciful, and gentle prince; that he had always been to her a good and gracious
sovereign; and that if any one should think proper to canvass her cause, she
desired him to judge the best." She was beheaded by the executioner of Calais,
who was brought over as much more expert than any in England. Her body was
negligently thrown into a common chest of elm tree, made to hold arrows, and
was buried in the Tower. Anne Bullen seemed to be guilty of no other crime,
than that of having survived the king's affections; and although many crowned
heads were already put to death in England, she was the first that underwent
all the forms of law, and was beheaded on a scaffold.

The people, in general, beheld her fate with pity; but still more, when they
discovered the cause of the tyrant's impatience to destroy her; for the very
next day after her execution, he married the lady Jane Seymour, his cruel heart
being no way softened by the wretched fate of one that had been so lately the
object of his warmest affections. He also ordered his parliament to give him a
divorce between her sentence and execution; and thus he endeavored to
bastardize Elizabeth, the only child he had by her, as he had in the same
manner formerly bastardized Mary, his only child by queen Catharine.

It is easy to imagine, that such various innovations, and capricious
cruelties, were not felt by the people without indignation; but their murmurs
were fruitless, and their complaints disregarded. Henry now made himself umpire
between those of the ancient superstition, and the modern reformation; both
looked up to him for assistance, and at mutual enmity with each other, he took
the advantage of all. Beside, he had all the powerful men of the nations on his
side, by the many grants he had made them of the lands and goods of which he
had despoiled the monasteries. It was easy for him, therefore, to quell the
various insurrections which his present arbitrary conduct produced, as they
were neither headed by any powerful man, nor conducted with any kind of
foresight, but merely the tumultuary efforts of anguish and despair. The first
rising was in Lincolnshire, headed by doctor Mackrel, prior of Barlings; and
though this tumultuary army, amounted to twenty thousand men, upon a
proclamation being made, with assurances of pardon, the populace dispersed; and
Mackrel, with some more of the leaders, falling into the king's hands, were put
to death. Another rising followed soon after, in the North, amounting to above
forty thousand men, who were preceded by priests, carrying the ensigns of their
function before the army; and all seeming chiefly inspired with an enmity
against Cromwell, whom they considered as the instigator of the king's
severities. But these also were soon dispersed upon finding their provisions
grown short; after having in vain endeavored to attack the duke of Norfolk's
army, which was sent against them, and from which they were separated by a
rivulet that was swollen by heavy rains. A new insurrection broke out out shortly
after, headed by Musgrave and Tilby; but the insurgents were dispersed and put
to flight by the duke of Norfolk. Besides, one Ask, a gentleman of that part
of the country, who led the first insurrection, lord Darcy, Sir Robert
Constable, Sir John Bulmer, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Stephen Hamilton, Nicholas
Tempest, and William Lumley, were thrown into prison, condemned, and executed.
Henry, enraged by multiplied revolts, was resolved to put no bounds to his
severities; and the birth of a prince, afterward Edward the sixth, and the
death of the queen, who survived this joyful occasion but two days, made but a
small pause in the fierce severity with which those were treated who were found
to oppose his will.

a royal favorite, for tyrants ever raise their favorites from the lowest of
the people, together with Cranmer, now become archbishop of Canterbury, were
both seen to favor the reformation with all their endeavors. On the other
hand, Gardener bishop of Winchester, together with the duke of Norfolk, were
for leading the king back to his original superstition. In fact, Henry
submitted to neither; his pride had long been so enflamed by flattery, that he
thought himself entitled to regulate, by his own single opinion, the religious
faith of the whole nation.

In this universal terror and degeneracy of mankind, during which the
severities of one man alone was sufficient to keep millions in awe, there
seemed to be a poor schoolmaster in London, who boldly stood up for the rights
of humanity, and ventured to think for himself. This man's name was John
Lambert, who hearing doctor Tailor preach upon the real presence in the
sacrament, presented him with his reasons for contradicting that doctrine. The
paper was carried to Cranmer and Latimer, who were then of the opinion of
Luther on that head, and endeavored to bring him over to their opinions. But
Lambert remained steady in his belief; and they were mortified when, instead of
recanting, he appealed to the king himself. This was a challenge that pleased
Henry's vanity, and willing at once to exert his supremacy, and display his
learning, he accepted the appeal; and public notice was given of his intended
disputation. For this purpose, scaffolds were erected in Westminster Hall for
the accommodation of the audience; and Henry appeared on his throne,
accompanied with all the ensigns of majesty. The prelates were placed on his
right hand, the temporal peers on his left. The judges, and most eminent
lawyers, had a place assigned them behind the bishops; the courtiers of the
greatest distinction, behind the peers. Poor Lambert was produced in the midst
of this splendid assembly, with not one creature to defend or support him. The
bishop of Chester opened the conference by declaring, that the king,
notwithstanding any slight alterations he had made in the rites of the church,
was yet determined to maintain the purity of the catholic faith; and to punish,
with the utmost severity, all departure from it. After this preamble,
sufficient to terrify the boldest disputant, the king asked Lambert, with a
stern countenance, what his opinion was of transubstantiation. When Lambert
began his oration with a compliment to his majesty, Henry rejected his praise
with disdain and indignation. He afterward entered upon the discussion of that
abstruse question; and endeavored to press Lambert with some arguments, drawn
from the scriptures and the schoolmen. At every word the audience were ready to
second him with their applause and admiration. Lambert, however, no way
discouraged, was not slow to reply; but here Cranmer stepped in and seconded the
king's proofs by some new topics. Gardener entered the lists in support of
Cranmer; Tonstal took up the argument after Gardener; Stokesley brought fresh
aid to Tonstal. Six bishops more appeared successively in the field against the
poor solitary disputator, who, for five hours, long attempted to vindicate his
doctrines, till at last fatigued, confounded, brow-beaten, and abashed, he was
reduced to silence. The king then returning to the charge, demanded if he was
convinced; and whether he chose to gain life by recantation, or to die for his
obstinacy? Lambert, no way intimidated, replied, that he cast himself wholly on
his majesty's clemency; to which Henry replied, "that he would never protect an
heretic; and, therefore, if that was his final answer, he must expect to be
committed to the flames." Lambert, no way terrified, heard Cromwell read the
sentence, by which he was condemned to be burnt alive, with the utmost
composure; and as if his persecutors were resolved to try his fortitude, the
executioners were ordered to make his punishment as painful as they could. He
was, therefore, burned at a slow fire, his legs and thighs being first
consumed; and when there appeared no end of his tortures, some of the guards,
more merciful than the rest, lifted him on their halberts; and while he yet
continued to cry out, "None but Christ! None but Christ!" he was wholly
consumed by the surrounding fire.

This poor man's death seemed to be only a signal for that of many more.
Adulation had whispered the king with such an opinion of his own ability, that
he now resolved to punish rigorously all those who should presume to differ
from him in point of opinion, without making any distinction between Catholic
or Lutheran. Soon after, no less than five hundred persons were imprisoned for
contradicting the opinions delivered in the bloody statute; and received
protection only from the lenity of Cromwell. For some time, also, doctor
Barnes, who had been instrumental in Lambert's execution, felt, in his turn,
the severity of the persecuting spirit; and by a bill in parliament, without
any trial, was condemned to the flames, discussing theological questions at the
very stake. With Barnes were executed one Gerrard, and Jerome, for the same
opinions. Three Catholics, also, whose names were Abel, Fetherstone, and Powel,
were dragged upon the same hurdles to execution; and declared, that the most
grievous part of their punishment, was the being coupled with such heretical
miscreants as were united in the same calamity.

During these horrid transactions, Henry was resolved to take another queen,
and, after some negotiation upon the continent, he contracted a marriage with
Anne of Cleves, his aim being by her means to fortify his alliances with the
princes of Germany. Nor was he led into this match without a most scrupulous
examination on his side, of the lady's personal accomplishments. He was assured
by his envoy that she was of a very large person, which was the more pleasing
to him, as he was at that time himself become very corpulent, and consequently
required a similar figure in a wife. He was still further allured by her
picture, in which Holbein, who drew it, was, it seems, more a friend to his art
than to truth; for he greatly flattered her. The king, therefore, upon her
landing went privately to meet her at Rochester, where he was very much damped
in his amorous ardour. He found her big indeed, and tall as he could wish; but
utterly devoid of grace and beauty; she could also speak but one language, her
native German; so that her conversation could never recompense the defects of
her person. He swore she was a great Flanders mare; and added that he could
never settle his affections upon her. However, sensible that he would greatly
disoblige her brother the duke, and consequently all the German princes in his
alliance, he resolved to marry her; and he told Cromwell, who was chiefly
instrumental in this affair, that since he had gone so far, he would put his
neck into the yoke, whatever it cost him. The marriage was accordingly
celebrated; but the king's disgust was only increased by it; he told Cromwell
the next morning, that he hated her more than ever; and even suspected her not
to be a true maid, a circumstance in which he thought himself extremely
skilful. Cromwell saw the danger he incurred by having been instrumental in
forming this union; but he endeavored by his assiduity, and humble adulation,
to keep the king from coming to extremities with him.

But he should have known that a tyrant once offended is implacable. Henry's
aversion to the queen secretly increased every day; and he at length resolved
to get rid of her, and his prime minister together. The fall of this favorite
was long and ardently wished for by a great part of the nation. The nobility
hated a man, who from such mean beginnings, was placed before the first persons
in the kingdom; for besides being made vicar general, which gave him almost
absolute authority over the clergy, he was lord privy seal, lord chamberlain,
and master of the wards. He had also obtained the order of the garter, a
dignity which had hitherto been only conferred on the most illustrious
families; and to carry his exaltation still higher, he had been made earl of
Essex. The protestants disliked him for his concurrence with the king's will in
their persecution; and the papists detested him, as the inveterate enemy of
their religion. It only remained, therefore, with the king to hasten or retard
the punishment of a man, who had scarce a partizan in the nation, except
himself. But he had a strong cause of dislike to him for his late unpropitious
alliance; and a new motive was soon added for increasing his displeasure. He
had fixed his affection on Catharine Howard, niece to the duke of Norfolk; and
the only method of gratifying this new passion was, as in former cases,
discarding the present queen to make a room for a new one. The duke of Norfolk
had long been Cromwell's mortal enemy, and eagerly embraced this opportunity to
destroy a man he considered as his rival. He therefore made use of all his
niece's arts to ruin the favorite; and when his project was ripe for
execution, he obtained a commission from the king to arrest Cromwell for high
treason. His disgrace was no sooner known, then all his friends forsook him,
except Cranmer, who wrote such a letter to Henry in his behalf, as no other man
in the kingdom would have presumed to offer. However, he was accused in
parliament of heresy and treason; and without being ever heard in his own
defense, condemned to suffer the pains of death, as the king should think
proper to direct. Cromwell's fortitude seemed to forsake him in this dreadful
exigency. He wrote to the king for pardon; said, that the frail flesh incited
him continually to apply to his grace for mercy, and subscribed his epistle
with a heavy heart, and a trembling hand, "from the king's most miserable
prisoner and poor slave at the Tower, Thomas Cromwell. Mercy, mercy, mercy."

Cromwell's letter touched the hard heart of the monarch; he ordered it to be
read to him three times; and then, as if willing to gain a victory over all his
softer feelings, he signed the warrant for beheading him upon Tower Hill. When
he was brought to the scaffold, his regard for his son hindered him from
expatiating upon his own innocence; he thanked God for bringing him to that
death for his transgressions, confessed he had often been seduced, but that he
now died in the catholic faith. It was thus that Henry, not satisfied with the
death of those whom he chose to punish, repressed their complaints also; and
terrified the unhappy sufferers from the last consolation of the wretched, the
satisfaction of upbraiding their persecutors. In this manner, the unhappy
sufferer having spent some time in his private devotions, submitted his neck to
the executioner, who mangled him in a most terrible manner. A few days after
his death, a number of people were executed together upon very different
accusations. Some for having denied the king's supremacy, and others for having
maintained the doctrines of Luther.

About a month after the death of Cromwell, the king declared his marriage with
Catharine Howard, whom he had some time before privately espoused. This was
regarded as a very favorable incident by the catholic party; and the
subsequent events for a while turned out to their wish. The king's councils
being now entirely directed by Norfolk and Gardener, a furious persecution
commenced against the protestants; and the law of the six articles was executed
with rigor; so that a foreigner, who was then residing in England, had reason
to say, that those who were against the pope were burned, and those who were
for him were hanged. The king, with an ostentatious impartiality, reduced both
parties to an equal share of subordination, and infused terror into every
breast.

But the measure of his severities was not yet filled up. He had thought
himself very happy in his new marriage. He was so captivated with the queen's
accomplishments, that he gave public thanks for his felicity, and desired his
confessor to join with him in the same thanksgiving. This joy, however, was of
very short duration. While the king was at York, upon an intended conference
with the king of Scotland, a man of the name of Lassels had waited upon Cranmer
at London; and from the information of this man's sister, who had been servant
to the dutchess-dowager of Norfolk, he gave a very surprising account of the
queen's incontinence. He averred that she led a very lewd life before her
marriage, and had carried on a scandalous correspondence with two men, called
Derham and Mannock; and that she continued to indulge herself in the same
criminal pleasures since she had been raised to her present greatness. Cranmer
was equally surprised and embarrassed at this intelligence, which he
communicated to the chancellor, and some other members of the privy council,
who advised him to make the king acquainted with the whole affair on his return
to London. The archbishop knew the hazards he ran by intermedling in such
delicate points; but he also knew the dangers he incurred by suppressing his
information. He therefore resolved to communicate what he had heard to writing,
in the form of a memorial; and this he shortly after delivered into the king's
own hand, desiring his majesty to read it in private. Henry at first
disbelieved, or pretended to disbelieve, the report; he ordered the keeper of
the privy seal to examine Lascelles, who persisted in his former narrative; and
even produced his sister to confirm his account. Upon this, Derham and Mannock
were arrested, and they quickly confessed their own guilt, and the queen's
incontinency. They went still farther, by impeaching the old lady Rochford, who
had formerly been so instrumental in procuring the death of Anne Bullen. They
alleged that this lady had introduced one Culpepper into the queen's
bedchamber, who stayed with her from eleven at night till four in the morning.
When the queen was first examined relative to her crime, she denied the charge;
but afterward finding that her accomplices were her accusers, she confessed
her incontinence before marriage, but denied her having dishonored the king's
bed since their union. But three maids of honor, who were admitted to her
secrets, still further alleged her guilt; and some of them confessed having
past the night in the same bed with her and her lovers. The king was so
affected at this discovery that he burst into a flood of tears, and bitterly
lamented his misfortune. Derham, Mannock, and Culpepper, were convicted and
executed; but he was resolved to throw the odium of the queen's death upon the
parliament, who had always shown themselves the ready ministers of all his
severities. These servile creatures, upon being informed of the queen's crime
and confession, found her quickly guilty, and petitioned the king that she
might be punished with death; that the same penalty might be inflicted on the
lady Rochford, the accomplice of her debaucheries; and that her grandmother,
the duchess dowager of Norfolk, together with her father, mother, and nine
others, men and women, as having been privy to the queen's irregularities,
should participate in her punishment. With this petition the king was most
graciously pleased to agree; they were condemned to death by an act of
attainder, which, at the same time, made it capital for all persons to conceal
their knowledge of the debaucheries of any future queen. It was also enacted,
that if the king married any woman who had been incontinent, taking her for a
true maid, she should be guilty of treason, in case she did not previously
reveal her guilt. The people made merry with this absurd and brutal statute;
and it was said, that the king must henceforth look out for a widow. After all
these laws were passed, in which the most wonderful circumstance is, that a
body of men could ever be induced to give their consent, the queen was beheaded
on Tower Hill, together with the lady Rochford, who found no great degree of
compassion, as she had herself before tampered in blood. The queen was more
pitied, as she owned that she had led a dissolute life before marriage; but
denied in her last moments, and with the utmost solemnity, that she had ever
been untrue since her marriage with the king. The public exclaimed so loudly
against the severity of the act, which brought in so many accomplices of her
guilt, that the king did not think proper to execute sentence upon them, though
some of them were long detained in confinement.

Henry having thus, by various acts of tyranny, shown that he was abandoned to
all ideas of justice, morals, or humanity, at last took it into his head to
compose a book of religion, which was to be the code by which his subjects
should for the future regulate all their belief and actions. Having procured an
act of parliament for this purpose, in which all spiritual supremacy was
declared to be vested in him, faith, free will, good works, and grace, are
there defined with a leaning toward the opinion of the reformers; while the
sacraments, which a few years before were only allowed to be three, are there
increased to their original number of seven, conformable to the sentiments of
the catholics. But the king was not long satisfied with this code of belief;
for he soon after procured a new book to be composed, called The Erudition of a
Christian Man, which he published upon his own authority; and though this new
creed differed a good deal from the former, yet he was no less positive in
requiring assent to this, than he had been to the former. In both these books
he was very explicit in enforcing the doctrine of passive obedience; so that
his institutions were not likely to weaken what he so powerfully enforced by
his severities.

But his authority in religion was not more uncontrolled than in temporal
concerns. An alderman, one Read, who had refused to assist him with a
benevolence, was pressed as a private sentinel, and sent to serve in an army
which was levied against an incursion of the Scotch. In this manner, all who
opposed his will were either pressed or imprisoned, happy if they escaped with
such slight punishments. His parliament made a law, by which the king's
proclamations were to have the same force as statutes; and to facilitate the
execution of this act, by which all shadow of liberty was totally removed, they
appointed that any nine of the privy council should form a legal court for
punishing all disobedience to all proclamations. Thus the king was empowered to
issue a proclamation to destroy the lives, or take away the properties, of any
of his subjects; and the only redress was to himself in council.

In about a year after the death of the last queen, his absence in France,
whither he passed over at the head of thirty thousand men, to prosecute a war
which had been declared between him and the French king. He there behaved, as
in all his former undertakings, with ineffectual ostentation. Instead of
marching into the heart of the country, he sat down before Boulogne, which was
obliged to capitulate; and his ally, the emperor, making a separate peace,
Henry was obliged to return with his army into England, where he found his
subjects ready to offer him their accustomed adulation, and to praise him for
an enterprise in which, at an infinite charge, he had made an acquisition that
was of no manner of benefit.

But of all his subjects none seemed more abandoned and basely servile than the
parliament, which it might have been reasonably supposed would rather be the
protectors of the people, than the slaves of the crown. Upon his return from
his expensive French expedition, after professions of the greatest submission
and profound acknowledgement, they granted him a subsidy equal to his demands,
and added to it a gift, which will make their memory odious to the most distant
posterity. By one vote they bestowed upon him all the revenues of the two
universities, as well as of some other places of education and public worship.
But rapacious as this monarch was, he refrained from despoiling these venerable
seminaries of their ancient endowments; however they owed their safety to his
lenity, and not to the protection of this base and degenerate parliament.

Nor was he less just upon another occasion with regard to the suggestions of
his council, who had long conceived an hatred against Cranmer, and labored to
destroy him. This just and moderate man had all along owed his safety to his
integrity; and scorning intrigue himself, was therefore the less liable to be
circumvented by the intrigues of others. The catholic party had long
represented to the king that Cranmer was the secret cause of most of the
divisions which tore the nation, as his example and support were the chief
props of heresy. Henry seeing the point to which they tended, and desirous of
knowing how far they would carry their intrigues, feigned a compliance with
their wishes, and ordered the council to make enquiry into the primate's
conduct and crimes. All the world therefore concluded that his disgrace was
certain, and his death inevitable. His old friends who, from mercenary motives,
had been attached to him, now began to treat him with mortifying neglect; he
was obliged to stand several hours among the servants at the door of the
council chamger before they deigned to admit him; and he made his appearance
among them only to be informed that they had determined to send him to the
Tower. But Cranmer was not to be intimidated by their menaces; he appealed to
the king; and when that was denied him, he produced a ring, which Henry had
given him to make use of upon that emergency. The council was confounded; and
still more so, when, in the presence of the king, they found themselves
severely reproved, and Cranmer taken into more than former favor. Henry
obliged them all to embrace as a sign of their reconciliation; and Cranmer,
from his gentle nature, rendered this reconciliation more sincere on his part
than is usual in such forced compliances.

Still, however, the king's severity to the rest of his subjects continued as
fierce as ever. For some time he had been imcommoded by an ulcer in his leg;
the pain of which, added to his corpulence, and other infirmities, increased
his natural irascibility to such a degree, that scarce any, of even his
domestics, approached him without terror. It was not to be expected, therefore,
that any who differed from him in opinion, should, at this time particularly,
hope for pardon. Among the many whose unmerited sufferings excite our pity and
indignation, the fate of Anne Askew deserves to be particularly remembered.
This lady was a woman of merit as well as beauty, and connected with many of
the principal ladies at court. It is said that she kept up a secret
correspondence with the queen herself, who secretly favored the reformation;
and this correspondence only served to hasten this poor woman's ruin, the
chancellor being known to be her enemy. However this be, she happened to differ
from the established code of belief, particularly in the article of the real
presence; and, notwithstanding the weakness of her sex and age, she was thrown
into prison, and accused of heresy. In this situation, with courage far beyond
what might be expected, she employed her time in composing prayers and
discourses, and vindicating the truth of her opinions. The chancellor, who was
much attached to the catholic party, was sent to examine her with regard to her
abettors at court; but she maintained the utmost secrecy, and would accuse
none. In consequence of this contumacy, as it was called, the poor young lady
was put to the torture; but she still continued resolute, and her silence
testified her contempt of their petty cruelties. The chancellor, therefore,
became outrageous, and ordered the lieutenant of the Tower, who executed this
punishment, to stretch the rack still harder; which he refusing to do, and,
though menaced, still persisting in a refusal, the chancellor himself,
intoxicated with religious zeal, grasped the cords himself, and drew it so
violently, that the woman's body was almost torn asunder. But her constancy was
greater than the barbarity of her persecutors; so that, finding no other method
to subdue her, she was condemned to be burned alive. She received this sentence
with a transport of joy, and as a release from a state of the greatest pain to
the greatest felicity. As all her joints had been dislocated by the rack, so
that she could not stand, she was carried to the place of execution in a chair.
Together with her, were brought Nicholas Belenian a priest, John Lassals of the
king's household, and John Adams a tailor, who had all been condemned for the
same crime. They were tied to the stake; and in that dreadful situation
informed, that upon recanting, they should be granted their lives. But they
refused a life that was to be gained by such prostitution; and they saw, with
tranquillity, the executioner kindle the flames which consumed them.

From this indiscriminate severity the queen was not herself entirely secure.
She had for some time attended the king in his indisposition, and endeavored
to sooth him by her arts and assiduity. His favorite topic of conversation was
theology, and Catharine, who was tinctured with the spirit of the times, would
now and then enter into a debate with him, upon many speculative tenets, that
were then in agitation between the Catholics and Lutherans. Henry, highly
provoked that she should presume to differ from him, made complaints of her
obstinacy to Gardener, who gladly laid hold of the opportunity to inflame the
quarrel. Even articles of impeachment were drawn up against her, which were
brought to the king by the chancellor to be signed; but in returning home, he
happened to drop the paper. It was very lucky for the queen, that the person
who found it was in her interests; it was immediately carried to her, and the
contents soon made her sensible of the danger to which she was exposed. In this
exigence, she was resolved to work upon the king; and paying him her customary
visit, he led her, as usual, to the subject of theology, which at first she
seemed to decline, but in which she afterward engaged, as if merely to gratify
his inclinations. In the course of her conversation, however, she gave him to
know, that her whole aim in talking, was to receive his instructions, and not
to controvert them; that it was not for her to set her opinions in opposition
to those that served to direct the nation; but she alleged, she could not help
trying every art that could induce the king to exert that eloquence which
served, for the time, to mitigate his bodily pain. Henry seemed charmed at this
discovery; "And is it so, sweet heart, cried he, then we are perfect friends
again." Just after this reconciliation, the chancellor made his appearance,
with a party of forty pursuivants at his heels, prepared to take the queen into
custody. But the king advanced to meet him; and seemed to expostulate with him
in the severest terms. The queen could overhear the terms, knave, fool, and
beast, which he very liberally bestowed upon that magistrate; and his being
ordered to depart. When he was gone, she interposed in his defense; but the
king could not help saying, "Poor soul, you know not how little entitled this
man is to your good offices." From thenceforth the queen was careful not to
offend Henry's humor by contradiction; she was contented to suffer the divines
to dispute, and the executioner to destroy. The fires accordingly were kindled
against the heretics of both sides as usual, during which dreadful exhibitions,
the king would frequently assemble the houses of parliament, and harangue them
with florid orations, in which he would aver, that never prince had a greater
affection for his people; nor ever people had a greater affection for their
king. In every pause of these extraordinary orations, some of his creatures,
near his person, would begin to applaud; and this was followed by loud
acclamations, from all the rest of the audience.

But though his health was declining apace, yet his implacable cruelties were
not the less frequent. His resentments were diffused indiscriminately to all;
at one time a protestant, and at another a catholic, were the objects of his
severity. The duke of Norfolk and his son, the earl of Surry, were the last
that felt the injustice of the tyrant's groundless suspicions. The duke was a
nobleman who had served the king with talents and fidelity; his son was a young
man of the most promising hopes, who excelled in every accomplishment that
became a scholar, a courtier, and a soldier. He excelled in all the military
exercises, which were then in request; he encouraged the fine arts by his
practice and example; and it is remarkable, that he was the first who brought
our language, in his poetical pieces, to any degree of refinement. He
celebrated the fair Geraldina in all his sonnets, and maintained her superior
beauty in all places of public contention. These qualifications, however, were
no safeguard to him against Henry's suspicions; he had dropped some expressions
of resentment against the king's ministers, upon being displaced from the
government of Boulogne; and the whole family was become obnoxious from the late
incontinency of Catharine Howard, the queen who was executed. From these
motives, therefore, private orders were given to arrest the father and son; and
accordingly they were arrested both on the same day, and confined to the Tower.
Surry being a commoner, his trial was the more expeditious; and as to proofs,
there were many informers base enough to betray the intimacies of private
confidence, and all the connections of blood. The duchess dowager of Richmond,
Surry's own sister, enlisted herself among the number of his accusers; and Sir
Richard Southwell also, his most intimate friend, charged him with infidelity
to the king. It would seem, that at this dreary period, there was neither
faith, nor honor to be found in all the nation; Surry denied the charge, and
challenged his accuser to single combat. This favor was refused him; and it
was alleged, that he had quartered the arms of Edward the Confessor on his
escutcheon, which alone was sufficient to convict him of aspiring to the crown.
To this he could make no reply; and indeed any answer would have been needless,
for neither parliaments nor juries, during this reign, seem to be guided by any
other proofs, but the will of the crown. This young nobleman was, therefore,
condemned for high treason, notwithstanding his eloquent and spirited defense;
and the sentence was soon after executed upon him on Tower Hill. In the mean
time the duke endeavored to mollify the king by letters and submissions; but
the monster's hard heart was rarely subject to tender impressions. The
parliament, that the king was sickly, and could not hold out long; and the
kingdom was likely to be torn between the contending parties of different
persuasions. Cranmer, though engaged for many years in an opposite party to
Norfolk, and though he had received many and great injuries from him, would
have no hand in so unjust a prosecution; but retired to his seat at Croydon.
However, the death warrant was made out, and immediately sent to the lieutenant
of the Tower. The duke prepared for death, the following morning was to be his
last; but an event of greater consequence to the kingdom intervened, and
prevented his execution.

The king had been for some time approaching fast toward his end; and for
several days all those about his person plainly saw that his speedy death was
inevitable, The disorder in his leg was now grown extremely painful; and this,
added to his monstrous corpulency, which rendered him unable to stir, made him
more furious than a chained lion. He had been ever stern and severe; he was now
outrageous. In this state he hid continued for near four years before his
death, the terror of all, and the tormentor of himself; his courtiers having no
inclination to make an enemy of him, as they were more ardently employed in
conspiring the death of each other. In this manner, therefore, he was suffered
to struggle, without any of his domestics having the courage to warn him of his
approaching end, as more than once during this reign, persons had been put to
death for foretelling the death of the king. At last, Sir Anthony Denny had the
courage to disclose to him this dreadful secret; and, contrary to his usual
custom, he received the tidings with an expression of resignation. His anguish
and remorse was at this time greater than can be expressed; he desired that
Cranmer might be sent for; but before that prelate could arrive, he was
speechless. Cranmer desired him to give some sign of his dying in the faith of
Christ, he squeezed his hand, and immediately expired, after a reign of
thirty-seven years, and nine months, in the fifty-sixth year of his age. had
any connection with each other. There is nothing so absurd as to defend the one
by the other; the most noble designs are brought about by the most vicious
instruments; for we see even that cruelty and injustice were thought necessary
to be employed in our holy redemption.

With regard to foreign states, Henry made some expeditions into France, which
were attended with vast expense to the nation, and brought them no kind of
advantage. However, he all along maintained an intercourse of friendship with
Francis, which appeared disinterested and sincere. Against the Scotch he was
rather more successful; his generals having worsted their incursive armies on
several occasions. They particularly gained a signal advantage, beside that
already related of Floden field, at a place near Pinkey-House, in which near
ten thousand Scots were slain. But that which gave England the greatest
ascendency over that nation, was the spirit of concord which soon after seemed
to prevail between the two kingdoms; and that seemed to pave the way for their
being in time united under the same sovereign. There were ten parliaments
summoned in this reign, and twenty-three sessions held; but the whole time in
which these parliaments sat, during this long reign, did not exceed three years
and an half. The foreign commerce of England, during this age, was mostly
confined to the Netherlands. The merchants of the Low Countries bought the
English commodities, and distributed them into the other parts of Europe. These
commodities, however, were generally little more than the natural productions
of the country, without any manufactures; for it must be observed at this time
that foreign artificers much surpassed the English in dexterity, industry, and
frugality; and it is said that at one time not less than fifteen thousand
artizans of the Flemish nation alone were settled in London.

INDEX.
A
ACHAMBER, John, heads a rebellion, 288 -- taken prisoner, and put to death,
289 Acon, in Palestine, the siege of, raised, 2 Albans, St. first battle of,
224 -- second battle of, 229 Alencon, count de, slain in the battle of Cressy,
100 Ardevelt, James, account of, 89 Arras, treaty of, 189 Arthur, prince of
Wales, married to Catharine of Spain, 313 -- his death, ib. Artillery, used by
Edward III. at the battle of Cressy, 97 Askew, Anne, put to the torture, 411 --
condemned to the flames, ib. Assassins, who, 2 -- their detestable character,
ib. -- undertake to murder prince Edward, ib. -- disappointed and their
emissary slain, 3 Audley, lord, joins the Cornish insurgents, 299 -- taken and
executed, 300 Aumale, duke of, betrays a conspiracy formed against Henry IV.
158 Azincourt, battle of, 183
B
BAINHAM, James, burnt for his religion, 369 Baliol, John, claims the Scottish
throne, 17 -- acknowledges the superiority of Edward, 19 -- renews his oath of
fealty, 20 -- placed on the throne of Scotland, ib. -- is summoned to appear at
Westminster, ib. -- revolts from Edward, 21 -- enters into a treaty with Philp,
ib. -- summoned to appear before the parliament of England, 21 -- is assigned a
council of twelve noblemen, 22 -- makes his peace with Edward, 24 -- resigns
his crown into that prince's hands, ib. -- carried prisoner to London, ib. --
banished to France, and dies in a private station, ib. Baliol, Edward, claims
the crown of Scotland, 83 -- is supported by Edward III. ib. -- gains a
considerable victory, ib. -- crowned at Scone, ib. -- defeated by Archibald
Douglas, ib. -- takes refuge in England, 84 -- reinstated by Edward, 85
Banister, betrays his benefactor, the duke of Buckingham, 268 Bosworth-field,
battle of, 271 Banockburn, battle of, 61 Bards, the Welsh, massacred, 15
Barnet, battle of, 240 Beaufort, Henry, bishop of Winchester, opposes the duke
of Gloucester, 212 -- gains the ascendant, 214 -- is accused of the death of
that nobleman, 215 -- his death, ib. Becket, Thomas, his shrine demolished, 375
-- his name struck out of the breviary, ib. Bedford, duke of, brother to Henry
V. appointed protector of England, 197 -- totally defeats the dauphin, 198 --
retires into England, ib. -- causes Henry VI. to be crowned at Paris, 205 --
burns the maid of Orleans at Rouen, 208 -- his death, 209 Bible translated into
English, 376 Bigod, Roger, refuses the command of an army, 32 Bilney, Thomas,
burnt for supporting the protestant tenets, 369 Bloreheath, action of, 225
Bloody Statute, what, 376 Bohun, Humphry, refuses to take the command of an
army, 32 --, Henry de, killed by Bruce, 61 Boxley, crucifix at, exposed, 374
Bristol made a bishopric, 375 Bruce, Robert, claims the Scottish throne, 17 --
acknowledges Edward's superiority, 19 -- his claim dismissed, 20 -- submits to
Edward, 22 -- secretly favors Wallace, 36 -- resigns the pleasing hopes of
delivering Scotland to his son, 44 Bruce, Robert, the younger, resolves to free
his country from the English yoke, 45 -- makes his escape from England, ib. --
stabs Cummin, 46 -- expels the English forces, ib. -- crowned at Scone, ib. --
defeated by Aymer de Valence, 47 -- flies to the Western islands, 48 -- his
sister shut up in a wooden cage, ib. -- defeats Aymer de Valence, 53 -- gains a
great victory at Banockburn, 61 -- kills Henry de Bohun, ib. --, David, invades
England, 107 -- defeated, and taken prisoner, 108 Buchan, countess of, shut up
in a wooden cage, 48 Bullen, Anna, account of, 353 -- privately married to
Henry VIII. 364 -- favors the reformation, 367 -- confined to her apartment,
378 -- accused of incontinence, 379 -- sent to the Tower, ib. -- her letter to
the king, 381 -- tried by a jury of peers, 384 -- her noble defense, 385 -- her
protestations of innocence, 386 -- her execution, 387 Burdet, Thomas, executed
for a trifling exclamation, 248 Burgundy, duke of, assassinates the duke of
Orleans, 189 -- is himself assassinated by the dauphin of France, ib. -- --,
the young duke of, joins with Henry V. to revenge the death of his father, 189
-- continues his engagements with the duke of Bedford, 197 -- breaks his treaty
with the English, 209 -- several of his subjects murdered, ib. Burley, Sir
Simon, condemned and executed, 137
C
CABOT, Sebastian, discovers the Northern parts of America, 317 Cade, John,
account of, 219 -- heads a rebellion in Kent, ib. -- his demands, ib. -- cuts
to pieces a detachment of the royal army, 220 -- enters London, ib. -- puts
lord Say, the treasurer, to death, ib. -- is abadoned by his followers, 221 --
flies into the Wolds of Kent, ib. -- slain by Alexander Eden, ib. Caen, taken
and plundered by the English, 95 Calais, famous siege of, 102 -- made a mart
for wool, etc. 104 Catharine, princess, married to Henry V. 191 -- -- of Spain,
married to Arthur prince of Wales, 313 -- married to Henry prince of Wales, 314
-- cited before the ecclesiastical court, 356 -- her pathetic entreaties to the
king, ib. -- refuses to appear before the court, 365 -- retires to Ampthil, ib.
Chalons, count of, foiled by Edward, 6 -- his ungenerous behavior, ib.
Charles, the wise, ascends the throne of France, 118 -- leads an army of
banditti into Castile against Peter the Cruel, 118 -- --, dauphin of France,
assassinates the duke of Orleans, 189 -- gains an advantage over the English,
192 -- is driven beyond the Loire, 193 -- his deplorable situation, 197 --
defeated at Vernueil, 198 -- assisted by Joan of Arc, 200 -- crowned at Rheims,
203 -- becomes very successful, 204 -- applies himself to cultivate the arts of
peace, 210 -- invades Normandy, 211 -- drives the English out of France, ib.
Chester made a bishopric, 375 Chivalry, its advantages in England, 123
Clarence, duke of, defeated, 192 -- drowned in a butt of malmsey, 249 Cleves,
Anne of, contracted to Henry VIII. 395 -- her marriage celebrated, 396
Clifford, Sir Robert, joins Warbeck, 294 -- gained over by Henry, 295 --
accuses Sir William Stanley, 296 Cobham, lord. See Oldcastle, Sir John. Combat,
single, ceremonies of, 142 Commons, origin of the house of, 28 Companions, who,
118 Cranmer, Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, some account of, 358 -- supports
the protestant tenets, 368 -- intercedes ineffectually for Anne Bullen, 380 --
informs Henry of Catharine Howard's incontinence, 401 -- the council ordered to
enquire into his conduct, 408 -- restored to favor, 409 -- attends Henry VII
in his last moments, 418 Cressingham, his avaricious conduct, 34 -- persuades
Warrenne to attack Walace, 37 -- is slain in battle, ib. Cressy, battle of, 98
Cromwell, Thomas, account of, 367 -- favors the reformation, 368 -- placed at
the head of a commission for inspecting the monasteries, 372 -- negociates a
marriage for Henry with Anne of Cleves, 396 -- his great preferments, 397 --
condemned for high treason, 398 -- his execution, 399 Cummin of Badenoch,
opposes Wallace, 38 -- made regent of Scotland, 41 -- seconds the interests of
Bruce, 45 -- betrays the secret, ib. -- stabbed by Bruce, 46 -- killed before
the altar, ib.
D
DAVID, brother of Lewellyn, prince of North Wales, takes Sir Roger Clifford
prisoner, 12 -- is obliged to fly to the mountains, 14 -- is executed as a
traitor, 15 Denny, Sir Anthony, informs Henry VIII. of his approaching end, 118
Despenser, Hugh, becomes the favorite of Edward II. 64 -- marries the king's
niece, ib. -- sentenced to exile by the parliament, 65 -- his pride and
rapacity, 67 -- put to an ignominious death, 72 Douglas, Sir William, joins
Wallace, 36 -- submits to the English, ib. -- --, Archibald, attempts to sieze
Edward III. 79 -- defeats Edward Baliol, 83 -- slain in battle, 84 Dudley, one
of Henry's ministers, 312 -- account of, 313 -- examined before the council,
321 -- condemned and executed, 322 Dunbar, battle of, 22
E
EDEN, Alexander, kills John Cade, 221 -- made governor of Dover-castle, ib.
Edward I. engaged in the holy wars, 1 -- arrives at the city of Acon in
Palestine, ib. -- relieves that place, 2 -- obtains many victories, ib. -- is
in danger of being murdered, 3 -- wrests the weapon from the hands of the
assassin, and stabs him, ib. -- receives a wound in his arm with a poisoned
dagger, 4 -- his life in danger, ib -- makes his will, ib. -- is cured by an
English surgeon, ib. -- his recovery ascribed to the piety of his wife
Eleanora, ib. -- concludes a truce with the sultan of Babylon, ib. -- sets sail
for Sicily, 5 -- arrives safely at that place, where he first hears the news of
his father's death, ib -- is greatly afflicted at his loss, ib. -- his answer
to the king of Sicily, who expressed great surprise at his grief, ib. -- passes
over to France, ib. -- receives great honors there, ib. -- gives proofs of his
bravery at a tournament, 6 -- comes off victorious, ib. -- does homage to
Philip king of France, ib. -- sets out for Gascony, ib -- arrives in England,
ib. -- is crowned king of England at Westminster, 7 -- his great popularity,
ib. -- receives homage of the king of Scotland and other princes, ib. -- is
esteemed by all ranks of people, ib. -- his prudent conduct, 8 -- corrects the
abuses which had crept in during his father's reign, ib. -- redresses all
grievances, ib. -- his prejudice to the Jews, ib. -- exercises great severity
again that people, 9 -- resolves to march against Lewellyn, prince of North
Wales, ib. -- levies an army against that prince, and marches into Wales, 10 --
penetrates into Lewellyn's retreat, 11 -- reduces him to the greatest distress,
ib. -- obliges that unfortunate prince to submit, ib. -- imposes hard terms of
accommodation on Lewellyn, ib. -- goes again to war with Lewellyn, 12 --
assembles a considerable force, and marches into Wales, ib. -- part of his army
defeated by the Welsh, 13 -- obtains a complete victory over them, 14 -- orders
the Welsh bards to be massacred, 15 -- leaves his queen, who was pregnant, to
be delivered in the castle of Caernarvon, 16 -- presents the child, Edward, to
the Welsh lords as their appointed prince, ib. -- unites the government of
Wales to that of England, ib -- is made arbitrator in the dispute concerning
the Scottish throne, 17 -- his artful conduct in that affair, ib. -- lays claim
to the crown of Scotland, and advances to the frontiers of that kingdom with a
formidable army, 18 -- convenes the Scotch parliament to meet him in the castle
of Norham, ib. -- produces the proofs of his superior claim to the throne of
Scotland, ib. -- his superiority acknowledged by the Scotch barons, 19 -- puts
John Baliol in possession of the kingdom of Scotland, 20 -- his arbitrary
proceedings with regard to the king of Scotland, ib. -- summonses that prince
to appear before him at Westminster, ib. -- requires Baliol to perform the duty
of a vassal, 21 -- orders him to appear before the parliament at Newcastle, ib.
-- his commands disregarded by Baliol, 22 -- marches with a considerable army
into the kingdom of Scotland, ib -- receives the submission of Robert de Bruce
and his son, ib. -- takes Berwick by assault, ib. -- makes the governor
prisoner, and puts the garrison to the sword, ib. -- lays siege to Dunbar, ib.
-- obliges that castle to surrender, and obtains a complete victory, 23 --
reduces the whole southern parts of the country, ib. -- reinforces his army in
order to subdue the northern parts, ib. -- receives the submission of Baliol,
who resigns his crown, 24 -- reduces the whole Scottish nation to obedience,
ib. -- destroys all their records and monuments of antiquity, ib. -- deprives
them of that ancient stone called Jacob's pillow, ib. -- breaks the great seal
of Baliol, and sends that unhappy prince prisoner to London, ib. -- makes
preparations for a war with France, 26 -- orders his territory of Guienne to be
put in a posture of defense, ib. -- forms a treaty with several neighboring
princes, ib. -- collects an army from the jails, ib. -- his army repulsed by
Charles, brother to the king of France, ib. -- his attempts upon France
defeated, ib. -- gives his daughter Elizabeth in marriage to John earl of
Holland, 27 -- forms another design against France, ib. -- finds it difficult
to raise the necessary supplies, ib. -- comes to an accommodation with Philip of
France, ib. -- submits his dispute with that monarch to the arbitration of the
pope, ib. -- cements his union with Philip by a double marriage, ib. -- marries
his son Edward to Margaret of France, and the prince of Wales to Isabella, ib.
-- recovers Guienne from the French king, ib. -- new models his parliament, 28
-- exacts supplies from his parliament, 29 -- his demands refused, 30 -- his
rigorous proceedings against the clergy, ib. -- obliges them to submit, 31 --
lays a duty of forty shillings a sack upon wool, ib. -- greatly oppresses his
people, ib. -- excites a general disgust among the poor, ib. -- his orders
opposed by Humphry Bohun, and Roger Bigod, 32 -- his speech to that baron, ib.
-- desires to be reconciled to his barons, to the church, and to his people,
ib. -- sets out for Flanders, 33 -- promises to redress the grievances of the
nation when he returns, ib. -- his council, during his absence, obliged by the
people to sign Magna Charta, ib. -- signs it himself in Flanders, ib. --
confirms the liberties of his people on his return, ib. -- another rebellion
formed against him in Scotland, 34 -- returns hastily to England, 37 --
endeavors to recover his popularity, 38 -- restores to the citizens of London
the power of electing their own magistrates, ib. -- quiets the murmurs of his
people, ib. -- marches into the North, at the head of a considerable army, ib.
-- makes a furious attack on the Scots, 39 -- receives a fall from his horse,
ib. -- obtains a complete victory, 40 -- another insurrection formed against
him, 41 -- his army again attacked by the Scots, ib. -- assembles an army, and
enters the frontiers of Scotland, ib. -- equips a fleet against the Scots, 42
-- ravages their country, and takes their castles, ib. -- obtains a complete
victory, ib. -- his severity to that nation, ib -- takes Wallace through the
treachery of his friend, ib. -- sends that unfortunate warrior to London, 43 --
his severity to Wallace, ib. -- another insurrection formed against him in
Scotland, 44 -- determines to reduce the rebels, 47 -- sends an army to oppose
them, 47 -- enters Scotland at the head of a powerful army, 48 -- his lenity to
the poor, ib. -- exposes the sister of Bruce, and the countess of Buchan in
cages, ib. -- is taken ill at Garlisle, 49 -- his death and character, ib. --
his issue, 50 Edward II. succeeds to the throne of England, 53 -- his
character, ib. -- neglects the war with Scotland, ib. -- his pusilanimous
conduct, ib. -- recalls Gavestone, 54 -- takes him into his particular favor,
ib. -- endows him with the whole earldom of Cornwall, ib. -- marries him to his
niece, ib. -- grants him a considerable sum of money, ib. -- excites the
indignation of his barons, 55 -- takes a journey to Paris in order to espouse
the princess Isabella, ib. -- appoints Gavestone guardian of the realm during
his absence, ib. -- is obliged, by his queen and barons, to send his favorite
out of the kingdom, 56 -- appoints Gavestone lord lieutenant of Ireland, ib. --
obtains a dispensation from the pope, and recalls his favorite, ib. -- goes
down to Chester to meet him, ib. -- calls a parliament, ib. -- his partiality
to Gavestone resented by the queen and nobles, 57 -- is obliged to comply with
the demands of his parliament, ib. -- signs a commission, by which he entirely
gives up his authority for the space of six months, ib. -- his favorite
banished by the parliament, 58 -- removes to York, ib. -- recalls Gavestone,
and reinstates him in all his former splendor, ib. -- a confederacy formed
against him, ib. -- his dispirited conduct, ib. -- embarks at Tinmouth with
Gavestone, ib. -- lodges his favorite in the castle of Scarborough, and
returns to York, ib. -- his behavior with respect to the death of Gavestone,
60 -- assembles an army, and marches against the Scots, 61 -- his army totally
defeated, and himself obliged to fly, 62 -- returns with disgrace to England,
63 -- his unhappy situation, ib. -- continues the barons in the government of
the kingdom, 64 -- adopts Hugh Despenser his favorite, ib. -- marries this
young nobleman to his niece, ib. -- makes very considerable settlements upon
him, 65 -- his barons again revolt against him, ib. -- is requested by them to
dismiss his favorite, 65 -- recalls young Despencer and his father, 66 --
raises an army to oppose the barons, and advances to the borders of Wales, ib.
-- obtains a complete victory over the rebel barons, 67 -- takes Lancaster
prisoner, ib. -- orders that nobleman to be beheaded, ib. -- is threatened by
the king of France with a confiscation of all his foreign dominions, 68 --
sends an embassy to that monarch to dissuade him from his purpose, ib. -- his
terms of accommodation refused by the king of Frances, unless he in person did
homage for his dominion, ib -- refuses to comply with the French king's
proposals, ib. -- resigns the dominion of Guienne to his son, ib. -- sends the
young prince to do homage to the king of France, ib. -- requests his queen to
return, which she refuses, 69 -- a strong conspiracy formed against him by his
queen, 70 -- endeavors in vain to raise a force to oppose her, 71 -- is
obliged to leave his capital, ib. -- his distressed situation, ib. -- is
deprived of his favorite, who is inhumanly slain, 72 -- flies for refuge into
Wales, 73 -- is driven from thence by his pursuers, ib. -- embarks for Holland,
ib. -- is driven back by contrary winds, and falls into the hands of his
enemies, ib. -- is cruelly treated by them, ib. -- is conducted to the capital,
amidst the insults of the people, ib. -- is confined in the Tower, ib. -- is
deposed by his parliament, ib. -- is sent from prison to prison, and treated
with the greatest inhumanity, ib. -- is used with the utmost cruelty by his
keepers, 74 -- is put to death in the most shocking manner, 75 -- his issue,
ib. Edward III. ascends the English throne, 77 -- his great abilities, ib. --
heads a considerable army against the Scots, 78 -- is disgusted with Mortimer
his mother's favorite, ib -- is in the utmost danger of being killed, 79 --
his intrepid bravery, ib. -- concludes a peace with Scotland, 80 -- resolves to
destroy the power of Mortimer, 81 -- forms a design of seizing Mortimer, and
the queen, in Nottingham castle, ib. -- gets Mortimer into his power, and
orders him to be hanged, 82 -- discards the queen from all power, and confines
her for life, ib. -- resolves to gain the affection of his people, ib. --
declares war against the Scots, 83 -- places Edward Baliol on the throne of
Scotland, ib. -- raises an army against the Scots, 84 -- prevails on his
parliament to grant him a supply, ib. -- enters Scotland, and lays siege to
Berwick, ib. -- obtains a complete victory over the Scots, ib. -- returns in
triumph to England, 85 -- again repairs to Scotland to quell another
insurrection, ib -- repairs a third time to Scotland, ib. -- lays claim to the
regency of France, 88 -- is opposed by Philip Valois, who is appointed regent
of that kingdom, ib. -- does homage to Philip, ib. -- disputes the crown of
France with Philip, 89 -- declares war against him, ib. -- is assisted, in his
designs against against France, by one James Ardevelt, a brewer of Ghent, ib.
-- receives a supply from his parliament, ib. -- sails over to Flanders, 90 --
asserts his claim to the crown of France, ib. -- receives, and accepts a
challenge from Philip, to fight him in single combat, ib. -- his naval forces
meet with great success, ib. -- concludes a truce with France, ib. -- again
declares war against France, at the instigation of the count de Montfort, 91 --
all his hopes frustrated by the imprisonment of Montsort, ib -- is assisted by
Jane of Flanders, ib. -- sends succors to Jane, 92 -- lands at Morbian, with
an army of twelve thousand men, 94 -- besieges some of the most capital of the
enemies fortifications, ib. -- forms a truce with France, ib -- breaks the
truce, sends the earl of Derby to defend the province of Guienne, ib. -- is
obliged, by Philip, to give up most of his conquests, ib. -- embarks at
Southampton with a considerable sleet for France, ib. -- takes with him his
eldest son, the prince of Wales, surnamed the Black Prince, 95 -- lands at la
Hogue with a numerous army, ib. -- spreads devastation through the whole
country, ib. -- takes the city of Caen, ib -- is vigorously opposed by Philip,
ib. -- narrowly escapes a snare laid for him, 96 -- determines to give the
French battle, ib. -- his prudent disposition of his army, 97 -- his exemplary
behavior before the battle, ib. -- attacks the enemy, 98 -- his remarkable
message to the prince of Wales, 99 -- obtains a complete victory by means of
his son, 101 -- his affectionate reception of his son after the battle, ib. --
lays siege to Calais, 102 -- determines to reduce it by famine, ib. -- takes
Calais after a twelvemonth's siege, 103 -- resolves to punish the obstinate
resistance of the townsmen, ib. -- agrees to spare their lives on certain
conditions, ib. -- makes a cruel determination against them, ib. -- consents to
pardon them at the intercession of the queen, 104 -- orders all the French
inhabitants to leave Calais, and peoples it with English, ib. -- makes it the
market for wool, ib. -- is in danger of losing Calais by the treachery of an
Italian, 105 -- takes a bloody revenge on the French, ib. -- his kingdom
depopulated by a pestilential disease, 106 -- a rebellion formed against him in
Scotland, 107 -- his queen Phillippa, heads an army against the Scots, and
comes off victorious, 108 -- breaks the truce with France, 110 -- sends Edward
the Black Prince into France with a considerable army, ib. -- enters France,
and ravages the country, ib. -- endeavors to bring the dauphin to battle, 115
-- concludes a peace with France, 116 -- sets the king of France at liberty,
ib. -- loses all his conquests in France, 119 -- becomes contemptible at home,
121 -- endeavors to find comfort in the arms of his mistress, ib. -- his grief
for the loss of the prince of Wales, ib. -- banishes his mistress, Alice
Pierce, ib. -- takes her again, ib. -- his fallen situation, 122 -- his death,
ib. -- his institution of the order of the garter, 123 -- his issue, 124 Edward
IV. opposes Henry VI. and claims the crown, 230 -- his great popularity, 231 --
is proclaimed king by the people, ib. -- heads an army of forty thousand men to
oppose Margaret, ib. -- obtains a complete victory, 232 -- is seated on the
throne of England, and his title acknowledged by parliament, 234 -- his
disposition, 235 -- consents to marry Bona of Savoy, ib. -- marries Elizabeth
Widville, ib. -- quarrels with the earl of Warwick, ib. -- a combination formed
against him by Warwick, ib. -- heads a numerous army against the rebels, 236 --
obtains an advantage over Warwick, who flies to France, 237 -- is overpowered
by the strength of the rebels, and obliged to fly the kingdom, ib. -- embarks
on board a small fleet at Lynn, 238 -- lands in Holland, ib. -- assembles a
force and lands in Yorkshire, 239 -- repairs to London, where the inhabitants
open their gates to receive him, ib. -- marches to give Warwick battle, ib. --
obtains a complete victory, ib. -- a rebellion formed against him, headed by
the earl of Pembroke, 242 -- obtains a complete victory, at Tewksbury, and
takes the queen and her son prisoners, 243 -- his barbarous usage of the young
prince, ib. -- his cruel proceedings, 246 -- enters into a war with France, 247
-- has a conference with Lewis, and agrees to return with his army to England,
ib. -- his tyrannical behavior, 248 -- his inconsistent conduct, 49 -- his
death, character, and issue, 250 Edward V. mounts the English throne, 251 -- is
taken by his uncle, the duke of Gloucester, from under the care of the earl
Rivers, 252 -- is conducted by Gloucester to London, 253 -- is conveyed by his
uncle to the Tower, ib. -- his coronation prevented by Gloucester, 254 -- his
death, 264 -- --, the Black Prince, attends his father into Normandy, 95 --
commands the first line at Cressy, 96 -- his astonishing behavior, 99 -- sent
into France at the head of an army, 110 -- penetrates into the heart of France,
ib. -- defeats the French army, 113 -- conducts his royal captive, the French
king, through London, 114 -- defeats the French in Castile, 118 -- attacked by a
consumptive disorder, 119 -- his death and character, 121 Egremont, sir John,
chosen leader of the rebels, 288 -- defeated and flies to the duchess of
Burgundy, 289 Empson, one of Henry's ministers, account of, 312 -- examined
before the council, 321 -- condemned and executed, 322
F
FALKIRK, battle of, 39 Fisher, John, bishop of Rochester, his unmerited
sufferings, 370 -- beheaded for denying the king's supremacy, ib. Fitz-Alan,
archbishop of Canterbury, banished the kingdom, 141 Flammock, Thomas, heads the
Cornish insurgents, 299 -- taken and executed, 300 Flodden-field, battle of,
330 Frontrailles, his intrepid behavior, 326
G
GAM, David, rescues Henry V. 185 -- is slain, ib. -- Gardener, bishop of
Winchester, supports the popish tenets, 368 -- attempts to sieze Catharine
Parr, 413 Garter, order of, instituted, 123 Gascoigne, sir William, his noble
behavior on the bench, 171 -- commits the prince of Wales to prison, 172
Gavestone, Piers, account of, 54 -- recalled from exile, ib. -- his haughty
behavior, 55 -- appointed guardian of the kingdom, ib. -- sent lord as
lieutenant to Ireland, 56 -- recalled, ib. -- left in the castle of
Scarborough, 58 -- submits, and is sent to Doddington castle, 59 -- is
beheaded, 60 Gisors taken by the English, 189 Glendour, Owen, account of, 162
Gloucester, duke of, his character, 126 -- Appears at the head of an army, 135
-- is arrested, and sent to Calais, 140 -- is dispatched in that prison, 141 --
--, made a bishopric, 376 Gordon, lady Catharine, married to Perkin Warbeck,
297 -- taken prisoner, 302 -- kindly treated by Henry, ib.
H
HALLIDOWN-Hill, battle of, 84 Harfleur taken by storm, 181 Hastings, John,
claims the Scottish throne, 17 -- acknowledges Edward's superiority, 19 -- his
claim dismissed, 20 -- --, lord, his answer to the charge of the duke of
Gloucester, 256 -- beheaded in the Tower, 257 Hennebone, besieged by Charles le
Blois, 92 -- relieved by the English, 93 Henry IV. when duke of Hereford,
deprived of his inheritance, 146 -- takes the title of duke of Lancaster, 147
-- lands in Yorkshire, ib. -- is joined by a powerful army, 148 -- his interest
espoused by the duke of York, 149 -- his proud answer to Richard II. 150 --
elected king, 152 -- a rebellion formed against him, 158 -- endeavors to quell
the tumult, 159 -- orders some of the principal rebels to be beheaded, 160 --
concludes a truce with France, 161 -- rebellions formed against him in Scotland
and Wales, 162 -- his impolitic conduct with respect to the duke of
Northumberland, who raises a rebellion against him, 163 -- obtains a complete
victory over the rebels, 165 -- pardons the duke of Northumberland, 166 -- a
second rebellion formed against him, headed by Northumberland, 167 -- quells
the insurrection 168 -- puts to death the archbishop of York, and the earl of
Nottingham, ib. -- sides with the church, 169 -- signs a writ for burning
William Sawtre, an heretic, 170 -- endeavors to acquire popularity, ib. -- is
distressed at the behavior of the prince of Wales, 171 -- is seized with a fit
before the shrine of Edward the Confessor, 173 -- his death and character, 174
-- his issue, ib. Henry V. when prince of Wales, his excesses, 171 -- strikes
one of the judges on the bench, ib. -- is committed to prison, 172 -- takes the
crown from his father's pillow, 173 -- ascends the English throne, 174 -- his
behavior to his former companions, 176 -- favors his fathers friends, ib. --
orders the funeral obsequies of Richard II. to be performed with royal
solemnity, 177 -- his peace disturbed by the clergy, ib. -- endeavors to
convert lord Cobham, 178 -- gives that nobleman up to the fury of his enemies,
ib. -- quells a dangerous tumult, 179 -- determines on a war with France, ib.
-- sends an embassy to Paris, 180 -- his demands refused, 181 -- assembles a
great fleet, and sets sail from Southampton, ib. -- lands at Harfleur, at the
head of a considerable army, ib. -- takes Harfleur, and puts all the garrison
to the sword, ib. -- his army greatly weakened by a contagious distemper, ib.
-- challenges the dauphin of France to single combat, 182 -- is opposed by a
numerous army of the French, ib. -- is obliged to retreat, ib. -- is
intercepted, and obliged to to give the enemy battle, 183 -- his desperate
situation, ib -- his spirited speech to his army, 184 -- attacks the French
army, ib. -- is in danger of losing his life, 185 -- is rescued by David Gam,
ib. -- rewards his deliverer with knighthood, 186 -- obtains a complete
victory, 187 -- arrives in England with his prisoners, 188 -- receives fresh
supplies from his parliament, ib -- lands with an immense army in Normandy, 189
-- enters into a league with the duke of Burgundy, ib. -- obtains considerable
conquests throughout the country, ib. -- forms a remarkable treaty with France,
190 -- marries the princess Catharine of France, 191 -- turns his arms against
the dauphin, ib. -- is obliged to return to England, ib -- is refused the
necessary supplies by his parliament, ib. -- lands with a considerable force at
Calais, 192 -- takes up his residence at Paris, ib. -- his great power in
France, 193 -- his resigned behavior during his illness, 194 -- his death and
character, ib. -- his issue, 195 Henry VI. ascends the crown of England, 196 --
is solemnly invested with legal power by legates from Paris, 197 -- is crowned
king at Paris, 205 -- his disposition, 214 -- marries Margaret of Anjou, ib. --
is despised by his subjects, 216 -- is opposed by the duke of York, ib. --
banishes Suffolk, 218 -- a rebellion formed against him, 219 -- opposes the
rebels, 220 -- his pusilanimous conduct, ib. -- receives an address requesting
him to remove his evil counselors, 221 -- refuses to comply with more than
part of the address, 222 -- has a parley with the duke of York, ib. -- orders
York to be apprehended, 223 -- is seized with a violent distemper, ib. -- is
incapable of holding the reins of government, ib. -- recovers from his
complaint, 224 -- endeavors to reassume his power, ib. -- is opposed by the
duke of York, ib. -- his distressed situation, ib. -- again endeavors to
recover his authority, 225 -- gives the rebels battle, ib. -- gains some
advantages, ib. -- is once more strongly opposed by the rebels, 226 -- is taken
prisoner, 227 -- his cause espoused by the Welsh, 229 -- is treated with the
greatest indignity by Warwick, ib. -- is opposed by young Edward, who claims
the crown, 230 -- flies with his queen and son to Scotland, 232 -- is assisted
by the French king, ib. -- is obliged by his queen once more to try to recover
his power by arms, ib. -- his sleet dispersed by a storm, 133 -- is separated
from his queen, ib. -- is taken prisoner and confined in the Tower, 233 -- is
released, and again placed on the throne, 238 -- is again dethroned, 239 -- is
obliged to submit to be a spectator of the battle between Edward and Warwick,
240 -- his death, 243 Henry VII. ascends the throne of England, 277 -- marries
the princess Elizabeth, 278 -- issues a general pardon, 281 -- an insurrection
formed against him, ib. -- quells the insurrection, 282 -- a rebellion formed
against him in Ireland, 283 -- a pretender to the crown set up in opposition to
him, ib. -- confines his mother in law in a monastery, 284 -- takes young
Warwick from the Tower, and shows him to the people, ib. -- gives the rebels
battle, 286 -- obtains a decisive victory, ib. -- his generous treatment of
Simnel, ib. -- his assistance requested by the distressed Bretons, 288 -- calls
a parliament, ib. -- obtains the necessary supplies, ib. -- his subjects in
Yorkshire rebel, and refuse to pay the tax, ib. -- quells the rebellion, and
takes their leader prisoner, 289 -- -- lands at Calais with a considerable
force, ib. -- makes an advantageous peace with France, 290 -- the quiet of his
kingdom again disturbed by an imposture, who personated the duke of York, 291
-- his subjects revolt to Perkin, 293 -- takes many of the ringleaders, 295 --
his artful conduct with respect to sir William Stanley, 296 -- commits that
nobleman to custody, ib. -- condemns Stanley to lose his head, ib. -- a
rebellion formed against him in Scotland, at the instigation of Perkin, 298 --
his kingdom invaded by the rebels, ib. an insurrection formed against him in
Cornwall, 299 quels the tumult, and hangs many of the insurgents, 300 -- a
second rebellion formed in Cornwall, headed by Perkin, 301 -- his lenity to the
rebels, ib. -- his generous treatment of the wife of Perkin, 302 -- gets Perkin
into his possession, 303 -- grants him his life, ib. -- confines Perkin in the
Tower, 304 -- quells a disturbance in Kent, and hangs Wilford the ringleader,
305 -- causes Perkin and his adherents to be executed, ib. -- beheads young
Warwick, ib. -- disgusts his subjects by these acts of cruelty, 306 -- grants
to the nobility the power of selling their estates, 307 -- regulates the
servants of the nobility, 308 -- enforces the execution of the laws, ib --
abridges the privilege of sanctuaries, 309 -- his remarkable answer to the
pope, 310 -- extends the privilege of the people, ib. -- represses the desire
of civil war, 311 -- endeavors to promote trade and commerce, ib. --
endeavors to implant a just sense of frugality in the minds of his subjects,
312 -- is induced, by avarice, to oppress his people, 313 -- marries the prince
of Wales to the Infanta of Spain, ib -- his treatment of Philip duke of
Castile, 314 -- receives a visit from Philip at Windsor, 315 -- makes an
advantageous treaty of commerce with Philip, ib. -- sees his endeavors, for
the good of his kingdom, crowned with success, ib. -- his death and character,
316 Henry VIII. succeeds his father in the throne, 319 -- his great advantages,
320 -- his disposition, ib. -- has Dudley and Empson taken into custody, 321 --
causes them to be executed, 322 -- enters into a treaty with the pope, ib. --
his headstrong conduct, 323 -- his ill success at sea, 324 -- lands at Calais
with a considerable army, 325 -- his great imprudence, 326 -- obtains a small
victory, 327 -- besieges Tournay, 328 -- concludes a truce with France, and
returns to England, ib -- a complete victory gained by his arms over the Scots
during his absence, 331 -- causes the body of James to be interred, ib. --
neglects the advice of his father's friends, and attaches himself to Wolsey,
332 -- makes Wolsey privy counselor, 333 -- confers on him the office of
chancellor, 336 -- delivers up Tournay to the French, 337 -- has an interview
with the French monarch, 338 -- his great magnificence, ib. -- presents the
French king with a collar of pearls, 339 -- enters as competitor with Francis
at tilt and tournament, 340 -- excites the murmurs of his people, 341 --
oppresses his subjects, 342 -- levies a heavy tax on his subjects, 343 --
reproves Wolsey, 344 -- obtains the title of defender of the Faith, 350 --
begins to think lightly of the pope, 351 -- his passion for Anne Bullen, 353 --
applies to the pope to divorce him from his queen Catharine, 354 -- is cited to
appear with his queen before the pope's legate, 356 -- is enraged against
Wolsey, 358 -- discards that prelate, and takes Cranmer into his favor, 359 --
seizes the effects of Wolsey, ib. -- banishes the cardinal to his country seat,
360 -- orders Wolsey to be arrested for high treason, and to repair to London
to take his trial, 361 -- applies to the universities for their opinion
respecting the validity of his marriage with Catharine, 362 -- his marriage
declared illegal, 363 -- abridges the power of the pope, 364 -- marries Anne
Bullen, ib. -- totally destroys the power of the pope, 366 -- receives the oath
of supremacy from his subjects, ib. -- determines to work a reformation in the
church, 368 -- exercises the utmost cruelty toward the heretics, 369 -- causes
Fisher to be beheaded for denying his supremacy, 370 -- totally abolishes the
religious houses, 373 -- acquires immense riches, ib. -- exposes the deceit of
the Romish relics, 374 -- destroys the shrine of Thomas a Becket, 375 -- erects
six new bishoprics, ib. -- causes the Bible to be translated, 376 -- becomes
tired of Anne Bullen, 377 -- his attachment to Jane Seymour, 378 -- confines
the queen to her apartment, ib. -- sends her to the Tower, 379 -- refuses any
intercession on behalf of the queen, 380 -- receives a letter from her, 381 --
pronounces sentence against her, 385 -- causes her to be beheaded, 387 --
marries lady Jane Seymour, 388 -- takes Cromwell into his particular favor,
391 -- his religious disputation, 392 -- his unbounded cruelty, 394 -- marries
Anne of Cleves, 395 -- is disgusted with the person of the queen, 396 -- is
incensed against Cromwell, 397 -- places his affection on Catharine Howard, 398
-- signs a commission for apprehending Cromwell, ib. -- signs the warrant for
beheading Cromwell, 399 -- declares his marriage with Catharine Howard, 400 --
receives undoubted proofs of the queen's incontinency, 401 -- determines to
throw the odium of her death on the parliament, ib. -- consents to her
execution, and that of several of her relations, 403 -- composes a book of
religion, 404 -- procures on act whereby all spiritual supremacy was declared
to be invested in him, ib. -- publishes a book, ib. -- publishes a second book,
405 -- his tyrannical proceedings, ib. -- marries Catharine Parr, 406 -- goes
to France at the head of thirty thousand men, 407 -- obliges the town of
Boulogne to capitulate, ib. -- returns to England, ib. -- the revenues of the
two universities, etc. bestowed upon him by parliament, ib. -- orders the
council to make enquiry into the conduct of Cranmer, 408 -- takes that prelate
into greater favor than ever, 409 -- his cruelty to Anne Askew, 410 -- is
offended with the queen, 412 -- is reconciled to her, 413 -- prevents her being
taken into custody, ib. -- his false orations to the parliament, 414 -- his
implacable cruelties, ib. -- orders the duke of Norfolk, and his son to be
arrested, 415 -- receives the news of his approaching dissolution with an
appearance of serenity, 418 -- his death and character, ib. Hereford, duke of,
accuses the duke of Norfolk, 142 -- is banished the kingdom, 144 Howard, sir
Edward, his intrepid conduct, 324 -- perishes in the sea, ib. -- -- --,
Catharine, married to Henry VIII. 400 -- Her execution, 403 Humphry, duke of
Gloucester, appointed regent of the kingdom during his brother's absence, 197
-- is opposed by the bishop of Winchester, 212 -- his duchess accused of
witchcraft, 214 -- accused of treason, and imprisoned, 215 -- found dead in his
bed, ib. Huntington, earl of, joins in a conspiracy against Henry IV. 158 --
beheaded at Cirencester, 160
I
JANE of Flanders, her heroic conduct, 91 Jews, many of them put to death, 9
Joan of Arc, account of, 119 -- undertakes to raise the siege of Orleans, 201
-- raises the siege, 203 -- takes the earl of Suffolk prisoner, ib -- conducts
the dauphin to Rheims, ib. -- is taken prisoner, 206 -- tried for witchcraft,
207 -- abjures her former errors, 208 -- is burnt alive at Rouen, ib. John, son
of Edward I. death of, 5 -- --, earl of Holland, marries Elizabeth, daughter of
Edward I. 27 -- --, king of Bohemia, account of his death, 101 -- --, son to
Philip the Fortunate, ascends the throne of France, 108 -- marches against
Edward the Black Prince, 110 -- defeated, and taken prisoner, 113 -- set at
liberty, 116 -- returns to England, 117 -- dies in the Savoy, 118 Joseph,
Michael, heads the Cornish insurgents, 299 -- taken and executed, 300 Isabella
of France, married to Edward II. 55 -- joins in a conspiracy against Gaveston,
ib. -- repairs to Paris, 68 -- refuses to return, 69 -- falls in love with
Mortimer, ib -- lands on the coast of Suffolk, 70 -- is joined by the
malcontents, 71 -- puts the two Spensers to death, 72 -- appointed regent, 73
-- shares her power with Mortimer, 77 -- discarded from all power, and confined
to the castle of Risings, 82
K
KENT, earl of, joins in a conspiracy against Henry IV. 158 -- beheaded at
Cirencester, 160 Kirkpatrick, Sir Thomas, murders Cummin at the altar, 46
L
LAMBERT, John, denies the real presence in the sacrament, 391 -- his
remarkable trial, 393 -- condemned to the flames, 394 Lancaster, earl of, joins
in a conspiracy against Gaveston, 56 -- is pardoned, 60 -- opposes the
Spensers, 64 -- defeated by Sir Andrew Harcla, 67 -- beheaded, ib. Lassels,
accuses Catharine Howard of incontinence, 401 Leo, the tenth, grants a
commission for selling indulgencies, 348 Lewellyn, prince of North Wales,
commanded to do homage for his territories, 10 -- refuses the summons, ib --
retires to the mountains of Snowdon, ib. -- submits to Edward, 11 -- has again
recourse to arms, 12 -- is slain in battle, 14 -- his head sent to London, and
there treated in a very brutal manner, ib. Lollards, who, 178 Lovel, lord,
heads a rebellion, 281 -- escapes to Flanders, 282 -- joins Simnel, 285 Luther,
Martin, account of, 348 -- inveighs against the pope's authority, 349 --
protected by the elector of Saxony, ib* -- burns the pope's bull publicly, ib.
M
MACKREL, prior of Barlings, heads an insurrection in Lincolnshire, 389 --
taken, and put to death, ib. Magna Charta, signed by Edward I. 33 Margaret of
Anjou, account of, 213 -- suspected of being privy to the murder of Gloucester,
215 -- prevails on the king to depose the duke of York, 225 -- becomes the
acting general of the royal army, 227 -- totally defeated, ib. -- flies into
Wales, 228 -- routes the duke of York's army, 229 -- summons the city of
London, 230 -- is obliged to retire, 231 -- flies into Scotland, 232 -- escapes
to France, 234 -- takes sanctuary in the abbey of Beaulieu, 241 -- totally
defeated at Tewksbury, 242 -- taken prisoner, 243 -- ransomed by the king of
France, ib. -- her death, 244 Maudlin, one of Richard's servants, personates
that prince, 159 Maximilian, the emperor, visits Henry VIII. 325 Methuen,
battle of, 47 Monasteries, the lesser, suppressed, 373 -- the greater involved
in the same ruin, ib. More, Sir Thomas, his amiable character, 370 -- beheaded
for denying the king's supremacy, 371 Morbec, Dennis de, takes the French king
prisoner, 113 Mortimer, account of, 69 -- beloved by queen Isabella, ib. --
becomes the ruler of the kingdom, 77 -- opposes young Edward, 78 -- concludes a
peace with Scotland, 80 -- causes the earl of Kent to be seized, and executed,
ib. -- is seized at Nottingham, 81 -- condemned and executed, 82 Mowbray,
Thomas, duke of Norfolk, accepts the duke of Hereford's challenge, 142 -- is
banished, 144 -- dies at Venice, 145
N
NORHAM, a Scottish parliament convened at, 18 Northampton, battle of, 227
O
OLDCASTLE, Sir John, baron of Cobham, supports the doctrines of Wickliff, 178
-- is indicted for heresy, ib. -- makes his escape, ib. -- put to the most
cruel death, 179 Old man of the mountain, who, 2 Order of the garter,
instituted, 123 Orleans, famous siege of, 201 -- --, maid of. See Joan of Arc.
-- --, duke of, assassinated by the duke of Burgundy, 189 Ormesby, his cruelty,
34 -- all his effects seized, 35 Osbeck, the imposture. See Warbeck. Oxford,
made a bishopric, 375
P
PARR, Catherine, married to Henry VIII. 406 -- her artful conduct, 413 Paris,
surrendered to Henry V. 191 Patay, battle of, 203 Pavie, Aymer de, his
treachery, 105 Percy, earl of Northumberland, takes the earl of Douglas, and
others prisoners, 162 -- receives an injurious message from Henry, 163 -- forms
a conspiracy against that prince, ib. -- is pardoned by Henry, 166 -- joins in
a second rebellion, 167 -- flies into Scotland, and is slain there, 168 -- --,
Hotspur, takes the command of his father's troops, 164 -- his prodigious
valor, 165 -- is slain in battle, ib. Perkin Warbeck. See Warbeck. Pestilence,
a dreadful one, 106 Peterborough, made a bishopric, 375 Philip, the Fortunate,
ascends the throne of France, 88 -- receives the homage of Edward III. 89 --
challenges that prince to single combat, 90 -- his behavior at Cressy, 100
Philip, archduke of Castile, arrives in England, 314 -- concludes a treaty of
commerce with Henry, 315 Philippa, queen to Edward III. defeats the Scots, and
takes their king prisoner, 108 Pierce, Alice, married to Edward III. 121
Pierre, Eustace de St. his generous offer, 104 Pinkey-house, battle of, 409
Poictiers, battle of, 112 Pontoise, taken by the English, 189
R
REFORMATION in England, account of the rise, 345 -- begun in England, 366
Relics, great numbers exposed, 374 Richard II. mounts the English throne, 125
-- his subjects inflamed by the levy of a poll-tax, 129 -- takes shelter in the
Tower, 150 -- presents himself before the mob, ib. -- complies with their
request, ib. -- another insurrection formed against him, 131 -- invites Wat
Tyler, the head of the mob, to a conference, ib. -- meets that rebel in
Smithfield, ib -- his intrepid behavior to the mob, 152 -- grants them a
charter, which is revoked by parliament, ib. -- confers considerable gifts on
Robert Vere, earl of Oxford, ib. -- gives his cousin in marriage to this
nobleman, 134 -- an association formed against him by his nobles, ib. -- is
deprived of all authority, 135 -- his nobles take up arms against him, ib. --
is treated with the greatest insolence by Gloucester and his adherents, 136 --
summons a parliament, ib. -- many of his friends put to death, 137 -- declares
himself of age to govern, ib. -- meets with the approbation of his parliament,
138 -- removes the duke of Gloucester, etc. from his council, ib. -- his
popular conduct, ib. -- loses the affection of his people, 139 -- orders
Gloucester to be arrested, and sent to Calais, ib. -- summonses a parliament at
Westminster, ib. -- annuls the commission of fourteen, 141 -- impeaches
Gloucester's party, ib. -- issues a warrant for the bringing over the duke of
Gloucester, ib. -- increases the discontents of his people, 142 -- attends the
combat between the dukes of Norfolk and Hereford, 143 -- prevents the combat,
144 -- banishes the two dukes, ib. -- his moderate behavior to the duke of
Hereford, 145 -- prevents that nobleman's marriage, ib. -- breaks his promises
to the duke, 146 -- passes over into Ireland to revenge the death of the earl
of March, 147 -- an insurrection formed against him in England by the duke of
Lancaster, ib. -- his interest espoused by the duke of York, 148 -- receives
the account of the rebellion, 149 -- returns to England, ib. -- is abandoned by
his army, ib. -- acknowledges himself ready to submit to any terms, 150 -- has
a conference with Hereford, ib. -- is obliged to ride through several towns
amidst the insult of his people, 151 -- is confined prisoner in the Tower, ib
-- signs a deed, by which he renounces his crown, 152 -- is solemnly deposed by
the parliament, ib. -- is confined in the castle of Pomfret, 153 -- his death,
ibid. Richard III. his wicked disposition, 252 -- gets himself appointed
guardian of Edward V. ib. -- conducts the young king to London, 253 -- gets the
king's brother into his possession, ib. -- sends them both to the Tower, ib. --
defers Edward's coronation, 254 -- destroys all the young king's friends, ib.
-- summons a council in the Tower, ib. -- pretends he his bewitched, 256 --
orders lord Hastings to be beheaded, 257 -- his barbarous treatment of Jane
Shore, 358 -- openly aspires to the throne, 259 -- endeavors to prove Edward
and his brother bastards, ib. -- pretends reluctantly to receive the offer of
the crown, 262 -- is seated on the throne, 263 -- orders the young king and his
brother to be smothered in the Tower, 264 -- is crowned at London and York, 265
-- is opposed by Buckingham, 267 -- gets that nobleman into his power, and has
him put to death, 268 -- brings over the parliament to his interest, 269 -- is
disappointed in a scheme against the duke of Richmond, ib. -- his cruel
treatment of his queen, 270 -- is opposed by the earl of Richmond, ib. -- meets
his enemy in Bosworth-field, ib. -- his desperate situation, 273 -- his death,
274 -- his body treated with the greatest marks of detestation, ib. -- state of
the laws, arts, etc. during his reign, 275 -- --, duke of York, prefers his
claim to the crown, 216 -- foments the discontents of the people, 221 --
marches toward London, 222 -- demands a reformation of the government, ib. --
retires to Wigmore, 223 -- appointed protector of the kingdom, ib -- stripped
of his power, 224 -- has recourse to arms, ib. -- defeats the royal army at St
Alban's, ib. -- takes the king prisoner, ib. -- discharged from his office, 225
-- flies to Ireland, 226 -- claims the crown, 227 -- defeated and slain, 229
Robertsmen, who, 312 Rose, red and white, what, 217 Rouen, city of, taken by
the English, 189 Rutland, earl of, proposes a conspiracy against Henry IV. 158
-- his detestable conduct, 161
S
SALIC law, what, 86 Sawtre, William, a follower of Wickliff, burnt for his
religion, 169 Seymour, Jane, married to Henry VIII. 388 -- her death, 390
Shore, Jane, account of, 246 -- accused of witchcraft, 255 -- her punishment,
257 Shrewsbury, battle of, 165 Shrine of Thomas a Becket demolished, 375
Simnel, Richard, account of, 283 -- personates the earl of Warwick, ib. --
proclaimed king of Ireland, ib. -- is crowned with great solemnity, 285 --
lands in Lancashire, ib. -- defeated, and taken prisoner, 286 -- degraded to a
scullion in the king's kitchen, ib. -- Simon, Richard, trains up a person to
personate the young earl of Warwick, 283 Snowdon, mountains of, described, 10
Sum, river of, famous passage over by Edward III. 96 Spencer, lord, joins in
a conspiracy against Henry IV. 158 -- beheaded at Cirencester, 160 Spurs,
battle of, 327 Stanley, lord, suspects the duke of Gloucester's designs, 254 --
narrowly escapes with his life, 256 -- joins the earl of Richmond, 273 Stanley,
sir William, joins Warbeck, 294 -- accused by sir Robert Clifford, 296 --
condemned and beheaded, ib. Statute, the bloody, what, 376 Sterling, battle of,
37 Suffolk, duke of, takes the lead in the ministry, 217 -- beheaded in a long
boat at Dover, 218 Supremacy, oath of, taken by the clergy, 366 Surry, earl of,
his great accomplishments, 414 -- condemned and executed, 416
T
TEROUANE, besieged by Henry VIII. 326 -- relieved by Frontrailles, 327 --
surrenders to the English, 328 Tewksbury-Park, battle of, 242 Tournay, besieged
by Henry VIII. 328 Touton, battle of, 231 Tresilian, Sir Robert, condemned and
executed, 136 Trollop, Sir Andrew, deserts from the duke of York, 225 Troy,
treaty of, 190 Tyler, Wat, rebellion of, 129 -- encamps on Blackheath, 130 --
marches into Smithfield, 131 -- is slain, 132 Tyrrel, Sir James, murders Edward
V. and his brother in the Tower, 264
V
VENDOME, count of, takes the Maid of Orleans prisoner, 206 Vere, Robert, earl
of Oxford, acquires an ascendency over Richard II. 133 -- marries the king's
niece, 134 -- flies to Flanders, 136 Vernueil, battle of, 198
W
WALES, made a principality, 15 Wallace, William, some account of, 34 --
opposes the English government in Scotland, 35 -- his army submits to the
English, 36 -- marches to the northward, ib. -- defeats the earl of Warenne, 37
-- offers to resign his command, 39 -- retires behind the Carron, 40 -- resigns
the regency, 41 -- defeats the English at Roslin, ib. takes shelter in the
mountains, 42 -- is betrayed, ib. -- sent in chains to London, and executed as
a traitor, 43 Warbeck, Perkin, an imposture, who, 291 -- sent to Ireland, and
personates the duke of York, 292 -- invited to the court of France, ib. --
resides at the court of Burgundy, 293 -- attempts to land in Kent, 297 --
marries lady Catharine Gordon, ib. -- protected by James of Scotland, 298 --
retires to the fastnesses of Ireland, 300 -- lands in Cornwall, 301 -- takes
the title of Richard IV. ib. -- marches to Taunton, 302 -- takes sanctuary in
the monastery of Beaulieu, ib. -- surrenders himself to justice, 303 --
committed to the Tower, 304 -- enters into a correspondence with the earl of
Warwick, ib. -- condemned and executed, 305 Warenne, earl of, commands an army
in Scotland, 22 -- defeats the Scots at Dunbar, 23 -- governs that country with
great prudence, 34 -- resigns his office, ib. -- surprises the Scottish army,
36 -- overtakes Wallace near Sterling, ib. Warwick, earl of, escapes to Calais,
226 -- marches to London at the head of an army, ib. -- defeats the king's
army, 227 -- is routed at St. Alban's, 230 -- fixes Edward IV. on the throne,
234 -- affronted by that prince 235 -- joins the party of queen Margaret, 237
-- drives Edward from the throne, ib. -- acquires the title of king-maker, 238
-- defeated and slain, 241 -- --, the young earl of, confined in the Tower, 283
-- personated by Simnel, ib. -- shown publicly at St. Paul's, 284 -- joins with
Warbeck, 304 -- convicted of high treason and beheaded, 305 Welsh, some account
of, 9, 15 Wenlock, lord, killed by the duke of Somerset, 243 Westminster, made
a bishopric, 375 Wickham, William of, made chancellor, 138 Wickliff, begins
the reformation in England, 154 -- is protected by John of Gaunt, ib. -- his
death, 155 Wilford, Ralph, personates the duke of York, 305 -- taken and
executed, ib. Wolsey, cardinal, account of, 332 -- becomes the favorite of
Henry VIII. 334 -- his preferments, 335 -- made legate to the pope, 336 --
loads the people with taxes, 342 -- reproved severely by Henry, 344 -- presents
York palace to the king, ib. -- founds two new colleges at Oxford ib. -- is
commissioned to examine the validity of Henry's marriage, 355 -- his
temporizing conduct, 357 -- his estates sequestered, 359 -- repairs to his
seat, 360 -- arrested for high treason, ib. -- his death, 362 Woodville,
Elizabeth, married to Edward IV. 235
Y
YORK, duke of, his character, 126
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

